November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 5th November , 2019  
The House met at 2:45p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharu b Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri ): Hon. Members you may be seated ? Yes Clerk , next 
order ? 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy , please give the Notice of Motion  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika 
Mheshimiwa mwenza  ameniambia hapa kuwa kuna  sera ya Idara hii ya Michezo  kuwa iko. 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika chini  ya Standing Order  ya number 48 nataka ku itoa hii 
Notice of M otion  nipate kuangalia hiyo  sera wanasema kwa sababu itakuwa si sawasawa iwe 
nitaleta Notice of Motion halafu kuwe na mfuko  amba o itakuwa ni mbili zitagongana. Kwa 
hivyo kupitia K iti chako Mheshi miwa Spika nataka ku withdraw under 48 . 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy . The permission is granted so 
you can withdraw and when you ar e ready you can bring back the M otion.  
STATEMENT  
STATUS OF THE STREET  LIGHTING IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon.  Priscilla  Mumba ? Yes Hon. Mwaka Mwalu dondo the Vice Chair for 
Transport and Infrastructure.  
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ) exited the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu)in the C hair) 
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Responding to Statement on  status of 
the street lighting in the County. Mr. Speaker Sir a request for Statement was made in the 
County Assembly on Tuesday 30th July, 2019 during the 67th Sitting, seeking to know the 
Bills of Q uantities (BQ) of on -going streetlights project in the C ounty. It was alleged that the 
installed streetlights appear faulty and sub -standard.  Mr. Speaker Sir, the Committee o n 
Transport Infrastructure and P ublic W orks wrote to the relevant D epartment who then 
responded as follows;   

November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Mr. Spea ker Sir, the concern  raised by M embers of the County Assembly particularly 
in the last half of the FY 2019/20  the Department decided to engage the private contractors to 
support our in -house team and enhanced service delivery in the street/public lighting in the 
sub-sector.  Consequently, teams were dispatched to various sub C ounties to repair and install 
street/public lighting fixtures . Tremendous improvement was noticed on level of street/public 
lighting in the County.  However the progress was slowed down when quite number of  
street/public lighting points started and continued being off lea ding to the concerns raised by 
Members.  Mr. Speaker Sir, after initial  inspection … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker is there any need for a Member to read if all M embers 
have the copies?  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes. 
 Hon. Bwire:  Can we save time since we all have copies.  
(Applause ) 
 The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mwalimu) : But Hon. Bwire we are not wasting time and 
for Hansard  records  she has to respond and read a Statement, so proceed Hon. Mwaka.  
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , so everyone has a copy he can read 
himself.  
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mw aka proceed from where you were,  
proceed in reading y our Statement?  
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Okay Mr. Speaker Sir , after initial inspection the possible 
reasons for the failures were noted as faulty contractors and timers (C ontrol box switching 
gears) as detailed hereunder: - 
(a) Under capacity of contractors.  
(b) Timers not functioning as required.  
(c) Overloading/unbearable loading at some points.  
Mr. Speaker Sir to remedy the above mentioned concerns the Department has 
implemented the following measures;  
i. Projects still under defects liability period (DLP) (Maintenance) . Con tractors have 
been instruc ted to replace all faulty items;  
ii. Contractors to redo the control boxes to ensure the lights a re ON and OFF at the right 
time;  
iii.      Whenever there  is overloading/unbearable loading, contractors have been asked to 
remove the timers and leave control boxes so that the lights are manual turned ON and 
OFF at the right time ; 
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Mr. Speaker Sir, in regards to the Bill of Quantities of on -going streetlight works is as 
follows:  
a. For street lighting below are specification prescribed for the wo rks; 
i. Copper ballast 150w  
ii. HPS bulbs 150w  
iii. 70-400w ingnitors  
iv. 2 poll 50 Amps Contractors  
v. Photocell timer switches inbuilt power surge protectors or equivalent   
vi. Double pole circuit breakers  
vii. Poly-carbonated/machines finish meter boxes.  
 
b. For high mast lighting be low are specifications prescribed for the works:  
i. 250w hps copper ballast  
ii. 250w hps bulbs  
iii. 70-400w Amps ingnitors  
iv. 2 poll 50 Amps Contractors  
v. Photocell timer switches inbuilt power surge protectors or equivalent  
vi. Circuit breakers  
vii. Double pole circuit breakers  
viii. 1.5mm sq ecc cable  
ix. Meter boxes  
 
 To this end Mr. Speaker Sir, the D epartment will liaise with the MCAs and Sub -
County Administration . Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Than k you Hon. Mwaka for the response s I 
am sure the Member who wrote this S tatement is very much satisfied with the Statement.  Yes 
Hon. Bwire?   
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker indeed we thank for the response that has been brought 
here by the Vice Chair and as the response state that the D epartment will still  liaise with 
offices of the MCAs and the office of the Sub County A dministration . Mr. Speaker there 
were some works t hat were initiated by the same D epartment on the same high mark but as 
we speak the work is incomplete;  so as they are promising to liaise with the offices of the 
MCAs , we urge the Committee to take back the response of the MCA that as we pray that 
they come on time so that they can complete that work that they initiated. Thank you.  
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay noted and I am sure  the Committee 
headed by their Vice C hair will take charge on what  you have raised. Yes Clerk?  
MOTIONS  
PROGRAMMED ROTATION OF EARTHMOVERS AND ELECTRICAL TECHNICIANS IN THE COUNTY  
 Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mr. Speaker Si r, I b eg to move the following 
Motion ; 
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 THAT AWARE that upgrading of County roads and street light ing is a mandate of the 
County g overnment as provided under the Fourth Schedule Part 2, 5 (a) and (b) of the 
Constitution of Kenya , 2010;  
FURTHER AWARE that streetli ghts and access roads provide numerous benefits, 
including but not limited to promoting transport, security, improving safety for riders 
and pedestrians;  
NOTING THAT a wel l scheduled rotation of County e arthmoving equipment and 
Electrical technicians in a specified duration will improve sup ervision and guidance 
from the Ward A dministrators and offices of Members of the County Assembly;  
CONCERNED that lack of a well -establis hed calendar which is known by Ward 
Administrators and Members of the County Assembly  at sub  - County level has 
resulted to laxity and poor approach to priority areas by the individuals providing 
these services;  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that the County government through the 
Department of Transport, Infrastructure and Publ ic Works, that;  
1. Earthmoving equipment and Electrical Technicians to rotate weekly in each 
sub - County through a well sc heduled calendar known by both Ward A dministrators 
and Members of the County Assembly ; 
2. Total number of manpower on ground and contact d etails of team leaders be 
known;  
 
3. Written prior communication by the County Executive Committee Member or 
Chief Officer be made to the sub  - County A dministrator and area Members of the 
County Assembly in case of mechanical failure or any other kind of reas on.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir I beg Hon. Shebe Athman to second my M otion.  
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  I second Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay Hon. Members , I now propose a 
question that the M otion on Programmed rotation of e arthmovers and e lectrical Technicians 
in the County  by Hon . Kitula be debated in this Honourable House.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza 
kukubalia na kuweza kuuliza swal i na vile vil e Wabunge wenzangu kunikubalia Hoja hii 
tuweze kuijadili katika kikao chetu kwa siku ya leo na moja  kwa moja Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti  hoja yangu iko wazi na vile vile ningependa kuwahimiza Waheshimiwa wale 
ambao tumeweza kuchaguliwa kwa kura na vile vile wenz etu ambao wameweza kuteuliwa. 
Leo hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tuna vifaa sisi katika serikali  ya Kaunti ya Mombasa idara 
ya Uchukuzi na Miundo Misingi , vifaa ambavyo tuko navyo  ni road rollers , tuko na muter 
graders , tuko na croller loaders , common dump tru cks lakini la kushangaza leo kaulize 
kiongozi yeyote wa Wo di kama ashawahi kuona hi vi vifaa  katika Wodi  yake utashanga a 
wengi wakikuambia hawajawahi kuona vitu kama hizi.  
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Cha kushangaza kulingana na u chunguzi wangu nimeweza kufanya  ni kwamba 
nimeweza kugu ndua contractors  wanapatiwa kazi za Transport and infrastructure tenders  
wanatumia magari haya haya, wanalipa gharama takriban kwa siku shilling i 80,000 , lakini la 
kushangaza  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti pesa hizi  sidhani kama zinalipwa katika I dara husika 
ya Fedha, na magari haya yamekuwa yakitumiwa na contractors  kufanya shughuli mbali 
mbali za Kaunti pasi hata wenyeji kuweza kufahamu kwamba magari haya ni jukumu la 
kuhudumia wananchi katika sehemu kadha kadha hapa Kaunti ya Mombasa.  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti H oja yangu yasema kwanza sisi kama W abunge hili katika 
Wodi mbali mbali  kutakuwa kuna mgao ya kuhakikisha kwamba vifaa hivi vinaenda katika 
eneo Bunge ; kama leo iko Kisauni  wiki hii itaenda Nyali , wiki ijayo inakwenda Kisauni  wiki 
ingine inakwenda Mvita . Kila  wiki vifaa vyote ambavyo  Idara  wako navyo wana  hakikisha 
wanakw enda navyo kila mahali kwa wiki  ili kuweza kupata huduma mashinani . Vile vile 
watengezaji wa mataa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tumekuwa na wafanyi  kazi hawa wakija kwa 
mwezi mara moja lakini inapiti a baada ya miezi sita wafanyi  kazi wanarudi katika sehemu 
hio.  
 Kulingana n a hoja ya leo Mheshimiwa Mwenye K iti itakuwa rahisi tuweze kupata 
idadi ya wafanyi kazi wote katika Idara  ya taa za barabarani ; kama ni 50 nitasema 50 hao 
wote watakwenda katika  eneo Bunge l a Likoni kuhakikisha kwamba L ikoni inawaka taa wiki 
nzima na vile vile wakiwa na hizo graders  na kuhakikisha kama barabara iko na matuta  
kwamba kuna maporomoko yoyote barabarani roller  inakwenda pale na vile vile grader 
kuhakikisha barabara inapi tika Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Vile vile kama kuna hitilafu yoyote 
manake imekuwa mazoea Idara  kusema kwamba magari hayana mafuta kama kuna hitilafi ya 
ki mitambo katika magari yale. L akini kulin gana na hoja ya leo tutahimiza W aziri ama Chief 
Officer  aweze ku tuandikia barua kama kuna shida ya gari hilo kuja katika Wo di fulani au 
eneo Bunge  fulani aandike barua kabla ya hio wiki kuhakikisha kwamba yule MCA na yule 
Administrator  wanafahamu kwamba gari f ulani haitakuj a kwa sababu ya hitilafu fulani.  
 Kwa hivyo Wa bunge wenzangu ningependa tushirikiane pamoja kuhakikisha kwamba 
magari haya tumeweza kuyafahamu kwamba tunayo katika serikali lakini kufikia sasa 
tutawahimiza na sisi ndio macho yetu kule yanafika mashinani kuhudumia wananchi . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Shebe Athman?  
 Hon. Athman Shebe:   Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. First and for emost let me put 
weight to the M otion which has been brought forward by Hon. Chief Whip . Mr. Speaker, for 
me it  is an irony consider ing the fact that the Department of Transport , Infrastructure and 
Public W orks in terms of budgetary allocation is the second highest in terms of alloc ation of 
budget in this County g overnment of Mombasa. It  is also an irony Hon. Speaker in terms of 
transp ort infrastructure  it is well equipped ; we have rollers, we have graders, we have 
excavators but unfortunately it does  not resonate well at the ground level . 
 Hon. Speaker, most of the Ward in terms of infrastructure W ards drainage are really 
poorly mainta ined; I really welcome the M otion which was  brought forward by Hon. Kitula. 
If we are going to make sure we allocate time and resources and equipment per W ard, Hon. 
Speaker as a revolving budget or rather time table, I think the impact is going to be seen 
everywhere in all the  30 W ards in Mombasa County. I also want to appreciate the fact that 
the transport infrastructure is under  a lot of pressure Hon. Speaker;  concerning the fact that 
most of the development agenda , which really make sens e in the public l ies under the 
Department of T ransport. You can imagine drainage , roads , street lightening and I think as an 
Hon. Member we  have played our part Hon. Speaker ; we have allocated enough money to 
this D epartment . 
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  So it is high time the D epartment should make sure that they are up to the task and if 
it is going to be revolved ; if it is for example Jomvu one week I get these equipment like 
graders Hon. Speaker, rollers I think every corner of Mombasa County is going to improve in 
terms of infrastructure . So I tr uly welcome this M otion and I also beg my Hon. Members to 
give their support thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika na ahsante kadhalika K iranja 
wa Bunge, Kiongo zi wa W engi katika Bunge kuniruhusu niendele e kihesh ima; ulikuwa 
wasaa wako lakini kwa hilo ahsante. Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kuunga mkono hoja hii 
nadhani wakati huu Waheshimiwa wana kila sababu kuregesha majibu mwaf aka na 
kuonyesha yale ama ile aj enda w aliopewa na wana nchi kuja kuwawakilisha.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika hata safari ya maili elfu moja huanza na hatua moja na kwa 
kugatua huduma hizi kwa sababu ni bayana ya kwamba mwanzo wa maendeleo ni sehemu 
kata, ama ni ni  Wodi . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kushush a rasil mali mashinani katika 
Ward level  chini ya G atuzi dogo na kupangilia ratiba ya utenda kazi itakuwa na usahalia 
mkubwa wa idara kwa sababu  yale yanayojiri na ripoti ina vyotoka pale , utenda  kazi ule, 
itaashiria ni ofisi gani matatizo yale yatachukuliwa  kwa sababu t imu iko mashinani. 
Mheshimiwa Spika tunakubaliana ya kwamba mavuno hayadanganyi, mwenye kupanda 
mbegu njema atavuna mavuno mema na sisi kama Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika nadhani kwa 
hoja zetu na M iswada tulikuwa tukileta  na kupitisha katika Bunge hi li ni ishara bayana ya 
kwamba tuna kusudio am a kuna maono mema kwa serikali G atuzi yetu ya kwamba tunaacha 
mbegu njema ya maendeleo.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni changamoto kwa idara zetu tulizo  nazo katika serikali G atuzi 
ya kwamba mbegu hizi ambazo Bunge zinapa nda, wasizitazame kwa jicho la kiuhasidi 
wazipokele e kwa nia  njema, wasiangaliwe imeletwa na nani , imechangiwa na nani katika 
kujadiliwa, isipoku wa waangalie natija ya hoja ile  iliyopita katika Bunge hili ni ipi katika 
serikali yetu.  
 Mheshimiwa Spik a sisi tuko leo na wao tuko nao  lakini baada ya miaka mitan o 
kutakuwa na wengine, lakini je  Mavuno yenye tutakumbukwa nayo itakuwa ni mavuno gani? 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri . Yes Le ader of 
Majority?  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Bwana Spika 
nimesimama kuunga mkono hii hoja na Bwana Spika ni vizuri saa zengine tuelewe kwamba 
kuna hoja ya ku shambulia  na kuna hoja ya kutengeza, kwa sababu Bwana Spika wengi 
hufikiria ukigusa Idara ya Uchukuzi na Miundo Misingi  ni kwamba watu wana shambulia  
lakini si vile ukiangalia hii hoja namshukuru  Mheshimiwa kwa kuleta hii hoja , kwa sababu 
ikitekelezwa watu wataona kazi inafanywa kule chini.  
 Bwana Spika ukiangalia kama mambo ya taa za barabarani  hata kuna wakati wa 
nyuma nilizungumza, tuko na Sub-Counties  sita, kazi rahisi tu ya kufanya ile kazi ionekane 
iko very active , kungekuwa kila Sub-County  kuna t imu yake, kuna gari zake, kuna material  
yake, sasa utakuta hutapata hii shida ya mambo ya taa za barabarani  kwa sababu Bwana 
Spika mimi mwenyewe kwangu mimi ni Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi  lakini nikikuambia kuna 
mwezi mzima waenda sasa kuna taa zimezima mwezi mzima . Sasa saa zengine ukiangalia 
Bwana Spika kama ukiangalia Mheshimiwa mwenzangu al ivyosema the second Department  
inayopewa pesa nyingi  kwa makadirio ya bajeti  ni Miundo Misingi . 
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika leo ningeomba kwamba h uu Mswada  uchukuliwe kwa 
umuhimu kwa utekelezaji ; hatushambulii mtu wala hatuna dhana na Idara  yoyote, ni katika 
kurekebis ha haya mambo yakifanyika  kule chini watu wataona kweli Kaunti sasa wameamka . 
Hivyo basi  Bwana Spika langu ni kwamba na uunga  mkono huu  Mswada  na pia ningeomba  
Waheshimiwa  wengine tuuunge mkono, angalau kuonekane kuna kazi zinafanyika , 
zinafanywa kazi lakini hazijafik ia kile kiwango cha kuonekana kwamba kazi zafanywa . Kwa 
hivyo Bwana Spika mimi  naunga mkono.  
 
(Applause ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hamida?  
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I do support the Motion that has been brought 
by a fel low Member ; it would be very wise to have this team at the ground because some of 
us have put our own private lighting, but if this team would have been there we would have 
found that we d o need lights on our roads and in our estates and I do support stro ngly this 
Motion . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias?  
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . First of all let me congratulate Hon. Kitula for 
coming up with this Motion. Hon. Speaker the Motion is about programmed rotation of the 
heavy machine s that we hav e; the Department of Transport is overwhelmed, it has so many 
engagements let me say so. Hon. Speake r under the devolved system of governance it  is just 
barely seven years and to our surprise the re are some who  are still operating under the 
Municipal system and the main objective of devolution was to bring service s to the local 
mwananchi  at the grassroots level . Even if you are proposing that each and every Sub -County 
to have all its machines o n a rotational basis, actual ly it would have been in every Ward  to 
have the opportunity to  have their own machines , equally the same. When we devolve from 
the County level to sub -County level Hon. Speaker, I think by that we will be  bringing the 
services near to wananchi .  
 Hon. Speaker it has been a routine that whenever we are faced by issues ; maybe you 
want a road to be upgraded or maybe to be  level led, there is so much bureaucracy  and it 
requires someone who has a strong and a heavy heart to pur sue and for those who can not do 
that, you  will find that  your area is so much isolated . So if we have it on a law basis or if we 
have it in a legal way  I think i t will just be moving by itself  Hon. Speaker but I have an issue 
with these Motions  since we ca me to this House we  have passed so many Motions . I can 
recall Hon. Milka br ought here  a Motion  to do with dustbins ; Hon. Hatimy b rought a Motion 
to do with the bus within the Estate , and  Hon. Speaker till today nothing has been 
implemented.  Now my fear or ra ther my concern is we will pass the Motion here 
unanimously and then that will be the end of it ; there will be no implementation, nothing. I 
would suggest Hon. Speaker through your Chair since Implementation Committee somehow 
seems to be sleeping or rather the y do not know what they should do , I being one of them…  
(Laughter)  
 But I would suggest that the issue to do with the follow ups on the Motions that we 
have passed in this House to be undertak en by the Whole House Committee  so that at least 
we may one day even two weeks or rather three weeks we should do the follow ups as a 
Committee because we have got good Motions but no implementation. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalim u): Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speak er to have given me this chance to also 
air my views. Mr. Speaker Sir, first and foremost I want to say thanks to Hon. Samba to have 
identified the real problem I stand to oppose the Motion.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, the reason is not about rotation ; rotation is a n English word, but what 
does that really mean? The Depar tment lacks what we call Policy ; it has ne ver come up with 
a clear Policy , it is in this Hon ourable  House whereby Mr. Speaker a rotational timetable was 
brought and we heard that some vehicles went to Liko ni, services were done in Changamwe 
and then it went to Nyali. So the thing here is implementation…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There is a point of information…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Nzai:  I do not want to be informed Mr. Speaker , let me settle point before I can 
be informed. Mr. Speaker…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwamwiri the Member said that he 
does want to be informed.  
 Hon. Nzai:  I think it is true indeed that the Committee on Implementation…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Nzai the Member is saying that he 
wants to inform the House. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Mheshimiwa ali e na ngojera nyingi kama misemo ya 
kanga ni muafaka akavae viatu kwanza...  
(Interrupti on) 
 Hon. Nzai:  Hon. Speaker this is a House of…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Serjeant, Do you have any reasons as to why 
you are not properly dressed Hon. Nzai?  
(The Serjeant-At-Arms ordered Hon. Kombe Nzai out of the House)  
 Yes Hon.  Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Indeed…  
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 (Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwaka you were supposed to bow, 
Hon. Mwaka please…  
(Hon. Mwaka bowed before the House)  
 Ok, Hon. Nyiro proceed.  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you a gain Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker indeed it is timely Motion 
and being a Member of the Committee of Transport and also being one of the MCA’s who is 
badly affected by the performance of this Department, I really want to thank Hon. Kitula for 
bringing such a Mo tion because it is going to help us , including myself. And again I need to 
point out some few thi ngs and also clarify to the H on. Member  who was lacking shoes 
because he said that there was a timetable that was circulated in this House and indeed it was 
only a tim etable for the time being , it was not anchored in law. And what we are doing is 
anchoring the timetable lawfully so that it is known that it is there in law.  
 Mr. Speaker the Hon. Mover of this Motion pointed out some issues regarding the 
County having very sophisticated equipment  that are able to do a lot, but again very little is 
seen to be happening in our Wards because we do not know whether these equipments are 
somebody’s property or the y are a property of the County government of Mombasa. I also 
happen  to have fallen a victim of circumstances earlier this year when I requested for a lorry 
because I happen to be a producer of murram in this County and so I had requested for a lorry 
so that I can at least fill some holes on my few roads. To my surprise Mr . Speaker I was 
requested to fuel the same lorry and I did fuel for two days after which I was not able to 
continue fuelling the lorry and that was the end of it.   
 Mr. Speaker it is very painful for us, most of us are spending our salaries on buying or 
rather lighting the streets in our areas because sometimes it is becoming very dangerous and 
you also leave in a very pathetic situation, so if we bring this rotational programmes we 
would be able to monitor and be able to guide those who are concerned. Of cou rse Mr. 
Speaker most of the times that th ese works are being performed in our areas we are not 
informed. I remember once when a Village Elder was signing on behalf of the Office of the 
MCA and that Report was brought to the Committee when they were confirmi ng to us that 
indeed when the works are being done we are involved and when we looked into the 
signatures from my area I confirmed that it was the signature and the name of the Village or 
rather a Village Elder not even a Manager from my Office.   
 So Mr. Spe aker some  things must be put clear here becaus e we are really passing on 
big budgets and allocations to this Department but very little seems to be done in the Wards. 
So it is good for us to inform the Department that they need to come up with a clear rotat ional 
program me where equipment  will be sent to  our Wards so that we have reason to be 
monitoring and doing our oversight role s because we would have anchored everything into 
law. Indeed Mr. Speaker this Motion is timely and therefore I stand to support  it and being a 
Member of the Transport Committee we would be able to also guide our Executive Member 
so that we continue to put some sense to him that this is important. And again I also happen 
to be a Member of the Committee on Implementation ; Hon. Samba  attacked the Committee, 
being a serious Member of  that Committee I want to say to this House that we really want to 
do our work and I will also make sure that I charge my Chair so that we will really follow up 
on this issue particularly because i t is of very good essence to our residents. So Mr. Speaker I 
stand to support and commit my support fully to this course. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith?  
 Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa hii naf asi. Mheshimiwa 
Spika nasimama kuunga mkono hii Hoja ambayo imeletwa na Kaka yetu, Mheshimiwa 
Charles Kitula. Shaka ni kama kwa kweli yatatekelezwa? Mheshimiwa  Spika hili Jumba 
limekuwa kila wakati ni mambo ya mataa ya barabarani na kwa vile hivi sasa naon a kuna 
muafaka ambao umekuja, naona hivi sasa tutapona kwa vile ukitembea barabara nyingi hivi 
sasa utapata mataa hakuna. Kwa hivyo wakati tunaongea haya mambo katika Bunge hili, 
Waziri wa Idara husika asione kama anakashifiwa yeye, lakini ni yale ambayo t unaona 
mashinani. Kwa hivyo ni wafanyie kazi wananchi na Mungu atawabariki. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho?  
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi 
ili na mimi  pia niweze kuchangia. Mimi nimesimama  hapa kwa kuunga mkono Hoja hii , Hoja 
ambayo imeletwa na Kiranja wetu inasaidia sana hii Idara ya Uchukuzi na Miundo Msingi 
kwa sababu haya ambayo yameletwa hapa ikiwa yataweza kufuatiliwa  basi nina imani 
kwamba katik a Wodi zetu zote ambazo ziko na shida ya mataa itakua mambo haya kweli 
yatapungua  kwa sababu wananchi ambao twawakilisha hawajui kwamba kuna Idara ya 
Uchukuzi na Miundo Msingi, isipokua wakiona mataa hayawaki katika sehemu zao basi 
watakuja moja kwa moja mpaka kwa ofisi ya Mheshimiwa ama kwa Mheshimiwa nyumbani 
wakimueleza kwamba mataa mbona hayafanyi kazi katika sehemu fulani hawajui kabisa 
kama kuna mambo kama haya.  
 Kwa hivyo namshu kuru sana Kiranja wetu kwa kuleta hii Hoja kwa sababu kuweza 
kusaidia hii Idara kwamba ikifuatilia hii Hoja vile imeletwa basi nina imani kwamba shida 
nyingi katika Wodi zetu kuhusu mataa zitakua zimekuwa sawa.  Kwa sababu hata mimi 
mwenyewe ambaye ni Mheshimiwa kule nyumbani kwangu nina mwezi mzima mataa 
hayawaki mpaka imebidi nitafute fundi mimi mwenyewe kwa pesa zangu za mfukoni ili 
fundi aweze kurekebisha mataa. Lakini nini imani kwamba hii Hoja ishapita na nina imani ya 
kwamba matatizo haya ambayo tuko nayo ya mataa katika Wodi zetu yatakua yametatuliwa. 
Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu. Yes Hon. 
Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono hii Hoja 
kwa sababu ya wazo lililoko  ndani ya hii Hoja ni nzuri itasaidia watu wa Mombasa, 
haimsaid ii Hon. Hatimy wala Hon. Kitula wala Hon. Mwamwiri, inasaidia watu wa 
Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Spika kama Mheshimiwa Nyiro wa Wodi ya Bamburi alivyosema, 
itabidi Kamati ya Miundo Msingi ifanye kikao na Idara kwa sababu ukiangalia kwenye sheria 
utakuta Kifungu 36(2) ya sheria ya County Government Act inawapatia Kamati nguvu 
kufanya mipangilio yao. Kwa hivyo itakuwa si vizuri maana yake wakipata hii na 
wasitekeleze, itakua ni kazi ya bure isipokuwa watu waweza kufanya kikao cha Kamati 
pamoja na Idara yao wak ubaliane kwenye hili jambo ili hii kazi ipate kufanyika. Kifungu 
36(2) iko wazi kabisa kuwa Executive  wana nguvu za kutengeneza mipangilio yao na hili 
wazo ikiwa watakwenda kuliuza nafikiri itawasadia wao pia kuona kuwa in wazo zuri. Kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nasi mama kuunga mkono Hoja hii na kusema kuwa sio kila Hoj a 
mtu akileta ni kupingwa tu, iangaliwe Hoja ambayo inaleta manufaa…  
November 5, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   100 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versio n of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 (Applause)  
 Watu wote wanakubaliana kupitisha Hoja ile, Hoja ambayo haina manufaa mtu 
anaweza kusimama akapinga. Kwa hi vyo nauunga mkono. Ahsante.         
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay  I now call upon the Mover of the 
Motion to respond.  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Shukran kwa Waheshimiwa kuweza kuunga mkono 
Hoja hii na ninaweza kuwaambia ya kwamba nia safi ni n gao tosha. Ahsante.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now stand to put a question 
that the Motion on programme rotation of earth movers and electrical technicians in the 
County  by Hon. Charle s Kitula be adopted in this Hon ourable  House . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members the House stands adjourned until Wednesday, 6th November , 2019 at 
10:00 a.m.  
The House rose at  3:38p.m.  
 