Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 6th November, 2019  
The House met at 11:00a.m.  
 
(The  Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members and visitors you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon. Members we have visitors from the Standing Committee of Guangzhou Municipal 
People’s Congress, from the People’s Republic of China. The delegation consists of;  
 
1. Mr. Chen Xiaoqing - Secretary General, Stand ing Committee of Guangzhou Municipal 
People’s Congress.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
2. Mr. Zheng Hanlin – Member of Standing Committee of Guangzhou Municipal People’s 
Congress, Director General of the Commission for Agricultural and Rural Affairs.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
3. Ms. Zhong Jie  – Member of Standing Committee of Guangzhou Municipal People’s 
Congress, Deputy Director General of the Commission for Urban - Rural Construction 
and Environmental Protection.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
4. Mr. Wu Ruqing - Member of Standing Committee of Guangzhou Municipal  People’s 
Congress, Deputy Director General of the Commission for Education, Science, Culture 
and Health.  
 
(Applause ) 

Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 2 5. Mr. Liang Feng – Director of the Administration Department, General office of the 
Standing Committee of Guangzhou Municipal People’s Congr ess. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
6. Mr. Ding Peng – Office Ass t. Consultant, the Commission for Overseas Chinese and 
Foreign Affairs, Standing Committee of Guangzhou Municipal People’s Congress.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 On behalf of the County Assembly of Mombasa, I w elcome you all t hank you. Yes, C lerk 
next order?  
 
STATEMENT  
CONSTRUCTION OF SHOP OUTLETS IN VOK AREA  
 
 Yes Hon. C harles Kitula, please give the S tatement.  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Thank you Mr. Speaker and first and foremost may I 
take this opportunity to welcome o ur fellow Hon. Members from Guangzhou Municipal People’s 
Congress and on behalf of the ODM p arty here in Mombasa we do say, Karibuni sana . Mr. 
Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing 
whether he is aware of the ongoing construction of shop outlets in VOK area on your way to 
Kisauni Polytechnic almost opposite VOK Social Hall, and whether the ongoing construction has 
met all the legal requirements . Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula . Yes, Hon. Ahmed Salama?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 He is not around ; any M ember from Committee  on L ands? Yes Hon. Mohamed 
Moham ed Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker we need at least three 
weeks to respond . Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . So we wil l give you three weeks to give back 
the feedback . Yes, Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and the visitors from Guangzhou Municipal 
People’s Congress welcome to Mombasa County Assembly. Mr. Speak er as much as the 
Member of the said Committee has asked for three weeks, I do  not know whether it adds up for 
this Ho use to give such period of time just to go here in a Department and collect a S tatement or 
a response to the Statement  as raised by Hon. K itula whether the ongoing construction has met 
all the legal requirements. I think it  is something that can take not less tha n two or three days Mr. 
Speaker.  
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 3  So am not in support of three weeks, the Area R epresentative has asked to know so I 
would wish Mr . Speaker to consider the time frame, three weeks is a lot of time to me . Thank 
you. 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire.  Hon. Kitula I think the Statement 
came from Hon. Kitula, so it seems Hon. Kitula is happy with the three weeks, because he is not 
commenting anything. I think he  is the one supposed to respond.  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mr. Speaker by the virtue of being silent does not mean 
am happy with the answer given by the Chairman of Finance. Mr. Speaker this S tatement was 
raised in the previous sitting last week but one but currently speaking when the Chairman of 
Finance giving the answer before the Assembly that it will take three weeks, it  is not fair to this 
House. So I kindly beg for at least even if he can issue a directiv e by today afternoon I will 
appreciate . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Mohamed Moha med?  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker am surprised to see Hon. 
Bwire repre senting Hon. Kitula as a lawyer;  in fact the Statement was brought by Hon. Kitula 
and the rules are very clear, you  have already given the ruling that three weeks is enough time 
because we need to come up with a document to show this House that whether this thing is in 
order . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Moham ed. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker my interest is one; that the ongoing construction is on the way 
to Kisauni, the Kisauni is my Sub -County , that is my interest number one, interest number two 
for such  constructions to take place all the l egal documents must be in place  so... 
 
(Interruption ) 
  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon. Fadhili the Deputy Speaker?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Mr. Speaker the Hon. Member who is on the 
floor is misleadi ng the House by saying th at the ongoing construction is in Kisauni Sub -County 
and from the Statement the Hon. Charles Kitula clearly stated that, it  is opposite VOK Social 
Hall and I understand VOK Soc ial Hall is in Nyali Sub -County. Mr. Speaker , so the Ho n. 
Member is misleading this House , thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker sometimes we need to be so keen when the  Member is on the 
floor;  I never said  the construction is in Kisauni,  I have just said that t he w ord Kisauni is 
captured, it i s on your way to Kisauni meaning am a ne ighbouring Member of this House.  
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 4  So Kisauni and Nyali are ne ighbours Hon. Speaker and that i s why am also concerned 
and also there is a fact that after Nyali, it  is Kisauni Sub -County so  everything must be in order 
so that it does not happen in Kisauni too and that  is why am asking that the document or rather 
the response will not be taken from the univer se they are just here with our D epartmen t which  is 
a stone  throw away and it can not take that three weeks. My concern is that, that period is too 
long for a response to come to this Hon ourable  House . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire . Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker to have given me  this chance to also comment on this 
Statement;  our visitors from Guangzhou , welcome to Mombasa. Mr. Speaker I think we are i n 
the House of procedures and you  have already ruled on this matter but to add value on that I 
believe Mombasa County has employed  very qualified Engineers and indeed the same E ngineers 
are carrying  out  several activities within the County of Mombasa. So the Member of Lands to 
have borrowed or rather requested for three weeks, I think he is on the right chance and because 
you have a lready permitted that Mr. Speaker, I think this matter has been settled very well . 
Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Hamida Noor?  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance and I welcome the visitors  
from Guangzhou, welcome to Mombasa County. My concern is about where the construction is 
going on, it  is right opposite an institution;  it is a Polytechnic , first and foremost that is very 
dangerous because the students who are going to be in that Polytec hnic for three weeks , I think it 
is a long time. As my fellow Members have just urged and said that it is a throw away distance 
for the Department to which is just here within us.  
  
(Interruption)  
 
I need your protection Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The S peaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you may continue Hon. Hamida ? 
 
Hon. Noor:  So I think for the concerned is about the Polytechnic and the construction 
that is going to be happening there. I urge the Departme nt of Land to look at it keenly, t hank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. First I would like to  echo or stand with Hon. 
Bwire; whenever any business has been brought into this House it is now a matter that concerns 
the County. W e represent the County so even if Hon. Bwire stand s to echo whatever Hon. 
Charles was saying, I think he is in order . Number two, three week s Hon. Speaker it is not 
viable;  three weeks just to get the document in order and as far as we are concerned we kn ow 
very well that the Co unty has  capable employees and whenever any document is required, 
whereby construction has begun that means that every document is in order.  
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 5 So I would just request Member for the Lands Committee because he is not the 
Chairperson, he was just standing for  the Chair, at least one week or three days is enough. Thank 
you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Moses Aran?  
 
Hon. Oindo : Thank you Mr. Speaker. First and foremost let me take this opportunity to 
welcome our visitors from Guangzhou , Chin a and also let me take this opportunity to thank my 
good friend Hon. Kitula for the first time in history of this Second Assembly he has debated in 
English, congratulations my friend.  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
Mr. Speaker Sir I also support my fellow Hon. Members  that three weeks is a lot of time , 
kindly it will be wise  if they can be able to report maybe next week because the construction is 
ongoing  and we cannot wait for the three weeks . So the Committee can sit down let them 
dedicate the time  and sit down so that we can get the report as soon as possible. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for the opportunity awarded. Mr. Speaker Sir 
I want to join my fellow Members to welcome our visitors from Guangzhou Municipality in this 
House , indeed we are very happy for them.  Going forward Mr. Speaker Sir I would like to 
comment on the S tatement that the Member s are trying  to debate on. Mr. Speaker Sir I think it is 
on record in this House that sometimes C hairme n have given permission when a S tatement is 
actually requested for Chairmen to respond back and in most cases the response is always half 
baked because of hurry and maybe trying to satisfy whoever ha s come up with that particular 
Statement Mr. Speake r Sir.  Number two, also I would like to say that issues concerning land; 
land issues are very complex not just like any other issue around especially in Mombasa County 
and we all know that Mr. Speaker Sir . So I think with those two reasons that i have give n I think 
it would be in order if you have given the Member of that Committee who have requested for 
those three weeks so that Speaker Sir. Thank you very much.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you . Maybe for the in terest of the records  Mr. Speaker can the 
Member clarify if he is discussing the land issue or the ongoing  constructions for the purpose of 
records? Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi: Sir, the Statement is very clear , it is talking about ; I seek to know on the 
Chairperson of the Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing whether he is aware of the 
ongoing construction of shop outlets in VOK area.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim.  
 
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 6 Hon. Omondi: The issue i s still touching on the land.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Majority Leader Hamisi Musa?  
 
The Majority Leader (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
chance. Mr. Speaker this is a very sensitive Statement and actually wha t I have just seen for the 
time to be requested three weeks it is not correct because the third week will be on 27th . Actually 
it is a very long time so Mr. Spe aker let us be very smart on these  issues because if it is 
construction going on we should know  the harm of that construction as it might bring a lot of 
problems in the County.  So Mr. Speaker it is good if they can be given just two weeks which will 
be on 20th of November or next week so that they can have good time because three weeks is a 
very lon g time because from 6th to 27th it is a very long time so I would suggest or request to be 
given two weeks because of the findings and everything. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwa limu) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
hii ni hujuma ya hali ya juu ; twazijua sababu gani ambazo tumeweka sisi kama Kamati kuitisha 
wiki tatu . Mheshimiwa Spika itatulazimu kwanza tufike maeneo yale, twaelewa kwamba kuna 
masuala ambayo yako mbele  yetu yanahitaji Kamati ije ijibu ndani ya Bunge hili kama sijakosea 
wiki ijayo tuna masuala ambayo tuko nayo tunaendelea kuyajadili katika Kamati yetu na 
tunatakikana tuje tuyajibu katika Bunge letu ndiposa tukaomba tupewe takriban wiki tatu tuweze 
kuja n a majibu mwafaka Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika hatujasema kama ujenzi ule 
utaweza kuendelea, tutaweza kuketi katika hichi kipindi ambacho tumeweka tunaweza pia kuketi 
na Mheshimiwa aliyeleta tetesi hii hata kesho Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa ni lazima hiyo shughuli 
isimamishwe lakini kuja kujibu ndani ya Bunge letu hili ndipo twasema tutakuja kujibu baada ya 
wiki tatu lakini twaweza  kukaa na Mheshimiwa aliyeleta H oja hii hapa katika wiki hii ama wiki 
ijayo ili tuweze kuyafanyia kazi masuala haya Mheshimiwa S pika.  
Mheshimiwa Spika Kiongozi wa Walio W engi ndani ya Bunge hili amesema ya kuwa 
ipunguzwe wiki moja ; mimi sijaona tofauti kati ya wiki mbili na wiki tatu kwa hio naomba 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu tukubaliane na ile Kam ati yangu au yetu ilivyoomba tuje baada y a wiki 
tatu ijibu masuala haya lakini twaweza tukasimamisha ule ujenzi ikiwa imelazimu ujenzi ule 
usimamishwe. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza tuwak aribishe wageni 
wetu na  watambue kwamba tukiwa katika G atuzi ya Mombasa lugha maha au lugha teule huwa 
ni Kiswahili, king’eng’e ni lugha ya kuazima si ya kwetu na tamaduni yetu ni ya Kiswahili kwa 
hivyo watambue na wajivunie kushuhudi a utamaduni wa G atuzi la Mombasa.  Pili Mhe shimiwa 
Spika kuchangia kwenye H oja hii suala hili lina muda na ujenzi unaendelea na Mheshimiwa 
aliyeuliza hajataka Kamati kwenda maeneo ya ujenzi bali anataka kujua taratibu kama 
zimefuatwa. Kwa hivyo kama ulifuatwa ujenzi ule atakuwa hana shauku wala walakini juu yake 
lakini kwa Mheshimiwa M wanakamati wa Ardhi na ujenzi kusisitiza ya kwamba mpa ka wafike 
maeneo yale hatujui aj enda ni gani ya kufika maeneo yale na hajatumwa.  Masuala ya utawala 
yako bayana hakuna siku ofi si inakuwa wazi p engine atuambie  kama idara ile haina watenda  
kazi. 
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 7 Ninavyojua mimi idara ile iko imara ; ina wafanyi  kazi wa kutosha hata kama ma  
Engineer wako kwa shughuli zengine lakini ofisi zile hazifungwi Mheshimiwa Spika, ma  rekodi 
yako kwa ofisi . Kwa hivyo kuendea j awabu hili Mheshimiwa Spika si suala la  kukaa wiki tatu 
pengine kwa aj enda yao ya kutaka kwenda kwenye eneo la ujenzi kushuhudilia kuona fahamu 
zaidi pengine ndio italazimu lakini ikiwa ni jawabu la hili ni suala la sasa hivi la saa nane 
watakuwa wako kati ka uwezo kama Kamati itakuwa na uwezo wa kulijibu hili kama haina hata 
wakapewa wiki tatu ni muda zaidi ili wabambanye jawabu la  kuleta katika Nyumba hii. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nashangaa Mwanachama wa 
Kamati wa Ardhi kwa sababu leo asubuhi nilikuwa na Mwenyekiti wa Kamati hii na alikuwa 
anajua kama ninaleta Taarifa  hii lakini cha kushangaza hajaingia Bungeni Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  La pili pia vi le vile Naibu wake hajaing ia Bungeni sasa nashangaa Mwana chama 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wanavyo…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Mr. Speaker the Hon. Member who is in the 
floor is n ot properly dressed Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Spea ker the Hon. Member is wearing  jeans an d it 
is not allowed in this Honourable  House. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kitula, is it true that what the Hon. Me mber i s 
saying because am blind here!  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika sheria za Bunge zinaruhusu koti 
ambayo ni suti hii, niko na tai na niko na shati rasmi  na niko na suruali ndefu  nyeusi na niko na 
viatu na soksi . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hasa sijui ameona nini kwangu mimi kusema ya  
kwamba nimekiuka sheria za Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa ya 
kuendelea hivyo . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi nashuku kuna kitu kinaen delea katika hii 
Kamati Mheshimiwa Spika maana Mwenyekiti mwenyewe hayuko katika Bunge hili, naibu 
wake hayuko saa hii Wanachama  wanas ema tumpe wiki tatu manake ni je ngo linajengwa usiku 
na mchana litakuwa limeisha . Kwa hivyo kuna kitu kinaendelea baina ya  hii Kamati aidha ; wao 
wanaweza kuhusika vilivyo ikiwa y ule mjenzi anajenga maduka yale na kunufaika Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Yes Hon. Prischillah?  
 
Hon. Mumba: Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 8 I just want to inform the House  Mr. Speak er with due respect as the C hair of Lands and 
maybe the Vice Chair are not in the House maybe they are sick, maybe some  emergency has 
happened and we still have the Members here in this House so whatever is being discussed I 
think the M embers wil l take not e and give the response  to our Chairs who are not in the House 
today , as we understand there is also human beings anything can happen and may be something 
emergency has come so  they have to take note of that.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Thank you. Y es Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hili ni Bunge na linalindwa na 
kumbukumbu za Bunge hili . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni vizuri kama huyo mwenyewe amepata 
barua kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti au N aibu wake kuwez a kuzungumzia kwamba l eo hata weza kuja 
kuhudhuria kikao hichi , kama ipo barua sawa nitaweza kuchukua maoni yake. Ahsante . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles . Maybe I  can respond on that;  I 
think  I am blind , maybe I think a M ember may come a nd sig n in and sit for two minutes or three  
minutes and he can go out so I do  not see that there is an issue on that. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
But I do  not know that maybe the Serj eant-At-Arms will know that because they are the 
ones who are keeping those records ; anyway the issue which we have discu ssed about the 
statement the H onourable Member asked for three weeks and I think I gave that ruling of three 
weeks because I have been seein g in this House so many issues from M embers we are giving 
them one week,  two week s and the thing keeps on going for more than two months. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
And the M embers do not respond on time. So I think the M embers of Lands you have 
heard the Members whom Hon. Kitula brought the Statem ent and other Members that their  
concern about thi s issue and I am sure wh en you are saying three weeks  does not mean three 
weeks you can even bring it in one week if the report is ready. So try to make sure if the Hon. 
Members are saying it is an urgent issue that you have a report within the three weeks , the earlier 
the b etter for this House. Thank you. Y es Clerk next Order?  
 
STATEMENT  
POOR STATUS OF THE DR AINAGE SYSTEM IN MKO MANI WARD  
 
Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya please give your Statement?  
 
Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir I seek to know fr om the 
Chairperson Committee o n Transport Infrastructure and P ublic works if she is aware of the poor 
status of the Drainage system in Mkomani Ward specifically in the areas such as Maweni, Shauri  
Yako, Mnazi Mmoja and Kisumu Ndogo and what plans does the County have to remedy this 
situation. Just to add Mr. Speaker this is the second time I am bringing this ; if you check the 
Hansard on Thursday 11th April , 2019 I brought this Statement  they replied that they will do 
something and they did nothing so this i s just another on the same issue.  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 9 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Priscilla the Chair for Transport, Infrastructure 
And Public Works please respond to this S tatement?  
 
Hon. Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker can you please  protect me because I 
see there some members that they are ready to attack me. I can see them.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I do not know! I have not seen that but I am sure you will be 
protected by this House if there is anything like attacking you.  
 
Hon. Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Or are you trying to say the Member asking the Statement  is 
what you are trying to say he was trying to attack you?  
 
Hon. Mumba :  No Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : There other things.  
 
Hon. Mumba : There are… and the problem and the frontline is the Leader of Mjaority is 
trying to intimidate me because once you…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Hon. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. M ajority L eader please let  us be in  order. Yes 
continue?  
 
Hon. Mumba : Thank y ou Mr. Speaker for guiding me. Thank you Mr. Speaker I have 
heard about what my colleague has requested and we have indicated that there was a previous 
complain t about this but to my ears I have just seen this Statemen t and I cannot give any 
response for n ow because I need to sit with my Committee then maybe we take site visit and see 
the damage which is there, because as you know Mr. Speaker we had some rain which damaged 
almost every W ard and the drainage systems are almost collapsing in every area.  So I would urge 
this Honorable  House kindly, please give me  time so that I can check on these  problems and also 
I can check on other problems which are there to  also to see me before to bring into this House 
talking about what Hon.  Opeya said that he brought so mething into three weeks and I never saw 
it so it becomes a war in the House. So please Hon. Speaker k indly I beg for time.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think may be if I can correct you, he said he brought the 
issue in Apr il it is not two  or three weeks,  this is the second time that is what the Hon. Member 
has said , so anyway Hon. Priscilla you are asking for one week or when you said time…  
 
Hon. Mumb a: Mr. Speaker one week is also enough but if you can add me more so that I 
can take more problems because I know they are there. This is just a Pandora box fix and open I 
think by next week…  
 
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 
10 (Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : What is that? Candora  box?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Hon. Mumba : You know it is a trend  in my M inistry whenever someone co mes with a 
problem now it becomes another and another and another so if I get one week for…  
 
The Hon. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So there is a problem in your Ministry , is that what 
you are telling us?  
 
Hon. Mumba : No I said it in this House there is a proble m, if somebody brings an issue 
it act s as an open box for every Ward getting the same problem . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So are you saying is it a problem for Members to ask  for a 
Statement?  
 
Hon. Mumba : No it is not a problem but now I fear that if I g et one week I may not get 
only one answer , I just need now to get more time.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So we are giving you two weeks.  
 
Hon. Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Priscilla. Yes Clerk?  Yes Hon. Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I just want to inform my fellow M embers that the 
rains are already here and I do come from this part where the problem is (??) from especially this 
Ward of Mkomani and it is very bad. It is pathetic and m y fellow M ember brought this Statement 
in April and it is almost seven months down the line and giving her another two weeks again I 
think this is an emergency and it has to be looked into because the rains are here. We even had 
rains last night and the drainages  are pathetic my dear fellow M embers and we need to look it 
very seriously. Thank you . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
Hon. Omondi:   Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I just want to borrow a word from my 
colleague Chair who spoke and talked about the Pandora box and I can see it is  being opened 
now. Mr. Speaker S ir I agree with what the Chair said that she should be given two weeks , it is 
okay . 
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 
11 But again when she says that we have had rains and the rains have damaged most  of this 
drainage system in several W ards in the County and likely that most of those drainage system are 
damaged  my question is to the D epartment of Transport and Infrastructure , are they supposed to 
wait until when the rains damages the drainage system,  that is when they  come in? Because Mr. 
Speaker Sir they are supposed to be able to prepare themselves eve n before the rains so that 
when  that calamity comes, they are already prepared for that.  So I disagree  with those words 
when she said that there is mos t likel y that the rains have damaged most of them. So this 
Department sho uld always prepare Mr. Speaker S ir and we have faced a lot of problems in this 
issue on  the rains that have just gone, we  have faced a lot of pr oblems . Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes, thank you Hon. Speaker . I have got two concerns; concern number 
one Hon. Opeya ha s just mention ed that he brought this issue in April , I think…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members I think…so you are in a point of 
information?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes point of order and information at the same time. I have got one 
concern I want to inform Members…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Yes I am o n the floor , kindly protect me Hon. Speaker?  
 
I think we have a loop hole in our S tanding orders because it fails to dictate or to state in 
case a Committee or a C hairperson has fail ed to report back to this House w hat should we do? I 
think there is a  loophole that is why we need to recheck our Standing Orders.  Number two 
disaster Management;  I should inform the House it falls under the Governor’s Office and 
whoever should give us the response about the preparedness of the disaster is the Majority 
Leader not the Chair of Transport. Th ank you Hon. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Indeed I want to make my contribution as a 
Member of the Committee that is under attack ; now and I want to help my Honourable  Chair , 
Mr. Speaker I am very  much aware that the Department of Infrastructure is doing major drainage 
overhaul in the said area. I happen to have visited that area mysel f on my own private tours as a 
Member of T ransport and I am sure Hon. Opeya can confirm that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya?  
Novem ber 6, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor Page 
12 Hon. Opeya:  Mr. Speaker I think the Hon. Member is not familiar with Mkomani. 
Mkomani is a very big W ard; it starts from Rockwall, it goes to English point, it goes up to Nyali 
Beach H otel so it is a big Ward.  He is talking about Show ground area , I am talking about the 
slums where t he voters are, the people who wo ke up in the morning to vote for Joho and me and 
they are ma jority of ODM party. The d rainage has not be en done , what we see is during the rains  
we se e Public Relations  (PR) for facebook or  we do not want PR 's, we want lasting solution. 
Thank you . 
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker I have always said in this House that I am not mad. I know 
what I am saying ; we are doing a major drainage overhaul  in Mkomani and I was there and I can 
take the M ember there and I can take the Member there if h e is not familiar with his own W ard, 
there is a very big drainage system that is being constructed there which after its completion then 
all the small drainage s are going to be connected to this major drainage. So if you are saying that 
I am not aware or I am not familiar with the area I was there and I can take you there. There is a 
major drainage , that is  the maj or one is under construction after which all the small drainage s are 
going to be connected to this major one. That is what I am saying Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . So Hon. Prisc hilla I think we gave you two 
weeks and make sure if you  have the report before that two weeks bring it to this House. Yes 
Clerk , next Order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Thank you Hon. Members this House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 6th of 
November, 2019 at 2 :30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11:42 a.m.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 