November  29, 2023                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        101 
DISCLAIMER:  The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 29th November , 2023  
Third Assembly  - One Hundred and  First  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:40p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The  Temporary  Speaker ( Honourable  Abdirahman Abd ikadir) in the Chair] 
 
PRAY ERS 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdi kadir): Please take your seats . Yes 
Clerk?   
 
STATEMENTS  
REGENERATION PLANS FOR PUBLIC ESTATES WITH A FOCUS ON TUDOR ESTATE  
 
Honourable Members , most of the Chairpersons or, I cannot see t hem unless they have 
given anyone the authority to represent them? Did an yone, yes?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  No. 8 , Statement No . 8. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abd ikadir) : You have a response to 
statement No.  8? 
 
Hon. Makanga:  I have permission from the Chair . 
 
The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdi kadir) : You have a response.  
 
Hon. Makanga : Permission from the Chair.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Abdi rahman Abdi kadir) : We are looking for response. 
Are you responding on behalf of Hon ourable  Bernard Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  I have been given directions on what to say . 
 
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdi kadir) : By? 
 
Hon. Makanga:  The Chair, Hon ourable  Bernard Ogutu, am a Member of Health 
Committee and therefore...  
November  29, 2023                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        101 
DISCLAIMER:  The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 2 [Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman A bdikadir) : And that is a re sponse , please 
proceed.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  So, what I was saying Mr. Speaker is that No.  8... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdi kadir) : You are talking about No.8?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdi kadir) : Let me just exhaust the first 
one and confirm that no one … 
 
[Inte rruption]  
 
Are you standing in for Hon ourable  Amriya?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  No. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdi kadir) : Okay, please just take your 
seat if y ou are not standing in for her. Yes , we go to the response by H onourable  Bernard Ogutu . 
Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Yes Mr. Speaker Sir, the response in relation to the Establishment of 
Waiting Stand outside the Maternity Wing o f Coast General Hospital  has so far been received 
from the Department but the Committee is yet to ha ve a sitting, so we seek your leave for seven  
more days.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdi kadir): Okay, let us just follow due 
process here . Just take  your seat first.  Yes Clerk?  
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF WA ITING STAND OUTSIDE THE MATERNITY WING OF C OAST 
GENERAL HOSPITAL  
 
Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga now you can share the information.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . We seek leave that you grant us seven  more 
days to be  able to  bring forth the respo nse in relation  to the said statement , noting tha t we have 
already received  the response but we were yet to discuss it as a Committee so that we  can give a 
comprehensive Report . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temp orary Speaker (Hon. A bdirahman Abd ikadir): Thank you , I think that  is fair 
enough , seven  days next Wednesday. Next order please ? 
 
 
November  29, 2023                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        101 
DISCLAIMER:  The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 3 DROWNING INCIDENT OF CHILD AND MEASURES TO BE TAKEN TO MITIGATE AGAINST ADVERSE 
EFFECTS OF FLASH FLOODS ON COUNTY FEEDER ROADS  
 
Any Member of Transport Committee?  
 
[Silence] 
 
No Member? I have note d with a lot of concer n that this Committee usually do not take 
the statements serious , this is not the firs t time we are witnessing  this. So, Clerk advise what is 
the next c ourse  of action .  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Okay , next Order please . 
 
SETTLING OF PENDING BILLS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes, Vice Chair Committee on Finance ? 
 
Hon. Noor : Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker , we are still waiting for a response  
from the Finance Department a nd that is when we are going to give our full informat ion on this 
stateme nt that we have gotten in our Committee . Thank you . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdi kadir) : Any timeline?  
 
Hon. Noor : Let us say by next week if they respond it well and we agree on their 
response.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir ): Yes, do you have something to 
add on that? Just take your seat Hon ourable  Hamida ? 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa heshima na taad hima , hii K amati pia ya Fedha 
ndio Kamati nyingin e ambayo itaku a bora ukipeana mwelekeo kama Mwen yekiti wa ki kao hiki 
kwa sababu hawa ndio wengine a mbao maswala yanakuja mengi na hatupati majibu  kwa wakati . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa pengine upeane mwelekeo ni lini na ni vipi hiyo Kamati watafanya 
kuhakikisha wanat ekelez a majukumu yao .  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ulkadir) : Thank you . Yes Hon ourable  
Hamida ? 
 
Hon. Hamida  Noor : Hono urable Speaker as I s aid, these are pending bills , these are  
services rendered t o us by wananchi  and w e want to get  the correct response from the F inance 
Committee an d the Finance Department  including us that if we are satisfied with what they are 
going to give us , we are going to come with a response but if they are not going to give us 
satisfaction  of what they have given us , we will return back a reply to them and tell them to give 
us. This is b ecause we are d ealing with wananchi  and th ese are pending bills of wananchi 
Honourable  Speaker  and my coll eague says that our responses are  not rea lly… 
 
November  29, 2023                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        101 
DISCLAIMER:  The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 4 [Silence] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdi kadir) : Okay , you h ave? 
 
Hon. Noor : Yes, I just want to clarify  that we just want to get  a satisfactory reply from 
the Finance D epartment.  Thank you . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Okay , Honourable  Hamida , 
the Vice Chair , this particular Statement was raised two weeks ago and I  think that when I was 
chairing  this sitting,  I gave you  enough time to come up with the response . Like he said, it is 
unfortunate that we are dragging our  feet o n that matter . Additionally,  the issue of being satisfied 
or dissatis fied is at the discretion of the person who raised the statement , so as a Committee you 
have to relay wherever the response you get fr om the department  and then the person who sought 
the statement will decide wheth er he is satisfied or not so regardless of the response we demand 
a response by Wednesday next week . Yes Clerk?  
 
ENCROACHMENT AND DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC ROADS IN SHANZU  
 
This is a response , Committee on Transport. Same  issue, will move it to next week as  
well. Yes Clerk?  
 
ALLEGED DISCRIMINATION IN RELEASE OF HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER FOR FURTHER STUDIES  
 
Do you have a response ? 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stan d in for the Chairman again who is 
indisposed and we have our feedback from the departm ent but I would still seek your leave Mr. 
Speaker  Sir that we may bring for th ese responses in the next seven days.   
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Do you actually have a 
response from the department, now am concerned. Do you have it with you.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Absolutely , yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Do you have it with you?  
 
Hon. Makanga : No, I do not have it here because am  holding brief for the Chairman and 
I do not have instruction to expedit e. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Ab dikadir) : No am asking whether you 
have it with you here . 
 
Hon. Makanga:  No, I do not have it here.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : So, at the moment you do  not 
have any response.  
 
November  29, 2023                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        101 
DISCLAIMER:  The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 5 Hon. Makanga:  That is why I was seeking your leave as the Chair a nd the Speaker of 
this House.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : It is very  okay . You are 
comp laining of the same  issue when it came to the department of Transport, Depar tment of 
Finance ; now, your own departme nt playing  on the same.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Am standing on behalf of Health Committee with directions.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Okay next week it is. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
BILLS  
 
Yes, hold Clerk, just a second please. Yes , Honourable  Patrick what is the issue?  
 
Hon. Mbel le: Mr. Speaker Sir,  sorry  I have a statement that I wish to bring forward to  
this House.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman A bdikadir) : Next time you ne ed to be 
attentive please.  
 
Hon. Mbel le: I am so rry Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Proceed.  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: I just had something that I was looking at, I apologize . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir):  Proceed . 
 
Hon. Mbel le: Mr. Speaker Sir, Pursuant to Standing order 41 (2) c , I request a statement  
from the Chairperson Committee on Water and Natural Resour ces in climate change resilience as 
follows. Mr. Speaker Sir, Kashani quarry which is located in Bamburi Ward, the Ward that I 
represent has a source of liveliho od that has employed over 400 people from all over the County 
and beyond. Arising from Sporadic  ?? and landslides , the County government has brutal ly close d 
the quarries without consu lting the stakeholders  who work in the area. Mr. Speaker , I as the 
Member of th e County Assembly of the area have made several efforts to engage the County 
Executive  Committee Member of Water and Natural Resources and Climate Change Resilience 
to meeting the stakeholders and finding mutually acceptable agreem ent that will lead to the 
reopening of the quarry . Howeve r, Mr. Speaker Sir, it is regrettably  in my view and knowledge 
that the sai d move has not been taken as serious as it should have. In view of going inform ation,  
I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Water, Natural Resources and Climate 
Change resilience the following : 
1. Whether she is aware of the cl osure of Kashani quarry by  the County government . A 
decision that is continuing to negatively affect  over 400 workers , 
2. Whether what measures the C ounty government has taken or has put in place after the 
closure to ensure safety of the concerned people and when it will review and  reopen the 
quarry.  
November  29, 2023                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        101 
DISCLAIMER:  The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 6 Mr. Speaker Sir, I also wish to know why the Kashani querry was closed without the 
constitutional requirement of public participation and what measures woul d be taken to 
remedy the sit uation ,  
 
3. I wo uld also wish to know whether the Chair person is aware of the current operation 
status of Kashani quarry, 
 
4. Whether the Committee will extend an invitation to the County Executive Co mmittee 
Member  of Water Natural Resources and Climate C hange  Resilience,  to provide a 
comprehensive status update and engage in discussions with the Committee in regarding 
modalities for re -opening of Kash ani quarry, 
 
5. Lastly , but not least  Mr. Speaker Sir , I would wish to know if there are any additional 
appropr iate measures the Committee d eems  necessary to address this critical issue . 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker  Sir. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman A bdikadir) : Yes, Chairperson you have a 
response .  
 
Hon. Nyache : Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningeomba Mhe shimiwa  mwenza aweze 
kutupatia mda wa wiki mbili ama ningeomba Jumba hili tupewe mda wa wiki mbili , ndio tuweze 
kuja na jibu mwafaka  manake am eongea mengi na ni kama labda ali kuwa anataka kujua zaidi ya 
kwamba , labda kuna mambo fulani yam efanyika huko Kashani na mi mi kam a Mwenyekiti najua 
siyajui. Kwa  hivyo naomba mda wa wiki mbili nitaweza kuja na jibu mwafaka, ahs ante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman A bdikadir) : Yes, Honourable  Patrick?  
 
Hon. Mbel le: Mr. Speaker Sir , I highly value and respect my fellow Hon ourable  Member 
and the Chairperson of that Committee , but this is a matter of urgency.  As we are speaking Mr. 
Speake r Sir, that particular area has not been cord oned off using tape or anything , but the re are 
boys, men and women who are still doing the  mining i rrespective of the closure orde r. Apart 
from that Mr. Speaker Sir , there is also another effe ct; that out of the 400 minors that usually gets 
their bread and butter every singl e day  at that pl ace, some of them have  resorted to becoming , 
allow me to say  thieves  because we have heard a case of two boys who at some points  are billing 
to the quarry. They use d to get a few points from the quarry, but since the closure thuggery  and 
theft has been  on the rise and two of the boys that  were pa rt of the quarry at some point , were 
linked to it just last week.  So, it is an issue that Mr. Speaker Sir  I feel it  is of urgency and I really 
wish that this Committee would spare some time next week pr obably from Mond ay, to make a 
site visit and  go and see exactly what I am talking about …because probably from here they 
might not  know the urgency  and the  need and the magnitude of the issue that I am talking about. 
So, I wish Mr. Speaker Sir  that you  make that orde r, that they visit the place as soon as possi ble 
thank you.  
 
[Applaus e] 
 
November  29, 2023                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        101 
DISCLAIMER:  The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 7 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Okay that is well noted, I  think 
this matter in seven days will be sufficient by Wednesday next week  we would require a det ailed 
response on this  matter . Wednesday next week you will have enough time . Some of these 
matters  can be .… 
 
[Interrupt ion] 
 
Hon. Nyache:  Mheshimiw a Spika mpaka twende tukakae na idara tuzungumzie maswala 
haya , ndio niweze kuja na jibu mwafaka . Kwa hivyo naomba hizo  wiki mbili tafadhali.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Ab dirahman Abdulka dir): Honourable  Leila,  according 
to the calendar of the County Assembly we are anticipatin g to go on a recess, so I think by next 
week Wednesday  that will be sufficient time for you to  interact with your CEC and the 
department and enough time even if it is  a site visit. So , Wednesday  next week would be i deal I 
suppose. 
 
Hon. Nyache:  Sawa Mhe shimiwa Spika . 
 
The Temp orary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Thank you.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ikadir) : Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Thank you , Members . This House stands adjourn ed until Tuesday 5th December , 2023 at 
10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:40 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 