November 2 8, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 28th November,  2018  
The House met at 2:37p.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members have your seats , yes Clerk.  
 
MOTION  
 
TRAINING OF MOMBASA COUNTY YOUTH S BY KENYA NAVY ON RESCUE AND DISASTER 
PREPAREDNESS  
 
 Yes Hon. Murfad  Amur.  
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker S ir I rise to pr esent a 
Motion on behalf of my learned friend Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
 
Mr. Speaker s ir I beg to move the following Motion:  
 
WHEREAS the C ounty government is mandate d to provide rescue and disaster 
manag ement services pursuant to the Fourth Schedule of the C onstitution of Kenya;  
 
WHEREAS  the C ounty government has fire briga de services and a  disaster management 
Committee for such purposes as need may arise;  
 
WHEREAS  there is need to increase man power and volunteer services to complement 
efforts of the C ounty government  so as to assist whenever a  situation arises in order to 
safeguard lives and property;  
 
WHEREAS there is need to involve the public in matter s of rescue and disaster 
management so that disaster situation are efficiently and effectively managed;  
 

November 2 8, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 NOW, therefore, be it RESOLVED  by the County Assembly of M ombasa as  follows:  
 
The C ounty government of Mombasa in co operation with Kenya Navy to train youth in 
the County on matters of rescue and disaster preparedness.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is the seconder?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Noor : I  Second the M otion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that the training of 
youth s by Kenya Navy and disaster preparedness be debate in this House . Yes Hon. Amur.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir, the M otion is about partne rship with the K enya 
Navy so that we can empower our youth s. Mr. Speaker, we have a C ommittee on  disaster but 
again on issues of sea in a situation of  boats and wh en we don’t have the specialt y services that 
can be given to our people that is why we are in sisting we partner with Kenya Navy to train our 
youth s to be ready in case of such scenario s happen ing. Mr. Speaker S ir if such an agreement is 
entered today the be neficiary will be our youths;  those who will be trained and may be in f uture 
they can be rec ruited as m ember s of Kenya Navy so this will either create opportunity for our 
youths , again we will keep them ready for such events when they occur . Mr. Speaker it is high 
time that not only that  we should also consider having  rescue teams in sub - Counti es in  a 
scenario  whereby  we have done with fire department  the same should be applied . We should 
have these  teams ba sed on each station so that it  can assist when need arises Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Faith Mwende.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika. N asimama kuunga mkono hoja 
hii kwa sababu nik iangalia ni kama inanigusa mimi;  Mheshimiwa Spika ni ukweli wakati  
kumekuwa na majanga hatuna watu ambao ni wa  kuja kuokoa jamii , ikiwa ni majan ga ya moto 
au mafuriko na  hii itakuwa ni fursa nzuri ya kuweza kutoa elimu kwa vijana wetu ndio waweze  
kujua watakabiliana vipi na mambo h ayo. Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana  na Mheshimiwa 
mwenzangu alivyosema ingekuwa ni bora zaidi kuwe na vijana katika kila  Wodi kwa sababu 
kama ni mafuriko na kama eneo Bunge l a Changamwe liko na Wodi  tano itakuwa vigumu sana 
hiyo t imu kuenda huku na huku,  lakini kila Wodi  iwe na vijana  wa kujitolea kwa sababu ikiwa ni 
mambo ya hatari haiji kila mara huwa ni  ya msimu na pia K aunti iwaangalie kitu kidogo na pia 
kuwapatia vitu vya  kujikinga.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika nikipeana  mfano  kwangu niko na rescue team  yangu ijapokuwa 
haija patiwa mafunzo  lakini inakuwa ni changamoto  kama ni mafuriko ama ni mambo ya kuzima 
moto kitambo gari ya kuzi ma moto ya K aunti ifike huwa inapata ile nyumba karibu ishaisha . 
Kwa hivyo itakuwa bora kama waheshimiwa wana weza pewa  hio fursa ya kuangalia ni vijana 
wagani ambao wan aweza jitolea kwa sababu wengi huwa wanaenda mafunzo  lakini kujitolea  
kufanya ile kazi  ni ngumu mwanzo wapimwe wajulikane kwa kweli wana weza jitolea hata kama 
wataambiwa malipo baadaye , kwangu niko na wale wanajitolea lakini shida ni vile vifaa hawana 
na mafunzo pia yanakosekana . 
November 2 8, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  Kwa hivyo basi  napongeza sana h uu Mswada  kwa vile tunajua ni  Mswada  kama tatu 
ambazo zimekuja kwa hi li Jumba  hili ni mambo ya mikasa  na ukiona hilo jambo limekuja tena ni 
jambo ambalo linafaa kuchukuliwa hatua ya haraka iwezekanavyo , mafuriko si haba hapa Kaunti 
ya Mombasa ukiangalia mambo ya moto majumba yamejengw a kihole la holela ile gari ya moto 
kufika pale pia huwa ni matata . Hivyo basi  ni jambo ambayo inatakikana i tekelezwe  haraka 
iwezekanavyo . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Hamida.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I do support the M otion on the disaster 
management because while it rains it normally does happens that we are always having disasters , 
and if the N avy is going to be helping us to train these youths in every sub-County it will be 
preferable so th at at least we are not going to depend so much on the C ounty government to keep 
on coming and helping us whenever we have a disaster or the situation, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Bernard Ogutu.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Mimi ninaunga mkono hoja hii japokuwa 
ningetamani sana iwe si vijana wa kunitolea  Mheshimiwa Spika ; hawa vi jana wangeangaliwa 
mbinu angaa wafanye kazi kwa bidii ili wapate kitu wapeleke nyumbani ile kazi ni ngumu 
ambayo ikiitwa  ya kujitolea  wanaweza kujitolea  siku mbili ukatoroka. A hsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ramla.   
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Ramla  Said : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi pia naunga mkono huu 
Mswada kwa sababu ni muhimu sana ; tulipatikana  na kisa kimoja mwaka  jana binam u  wangu 
alipotea kwenye bahari  na vijana wenye ujuzi huo walichukua siku tatu kumtafuta ndugu yetu 
na akapatikana . Kwa hivyo hawa vijana kitu naweza waomba ni kufunzwa zaidi na kupewa kazi 
waweze kudumu kwenye maisha , hivyo basi  naunga mkono huu Mswada up ewe nguvu ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Now I call the mover of the Motion to respond . 
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to tell this 
Assembly if these volunteers come out and volunteer and be trained even as an A ssembly as 
Mombasa County we  will think o f them on priority issues when employment issues arise . Mr. 
Speaker Sir  I have seen a window for them to be employed  since  we need them , we are in need 
of them as we ha ve a shortage in fire fighting depa rtment , in the other department in the diving 
rescue team .  Mr. Speaker  we have a rescue team but it  is only having  maybe one person or two 
that cannot help us but I can a ssure the Members if the young men and the young ladies 
volunteer  an opportuni ty will opens doors . I can tell this House they will be the  first people to be 
considered when such opportunities are going to be availed so that the first priority we will give 
them so that in return they can enjoy the fruits of their hardship Mr. Speaker, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Amur Murfad . Hon. Members I 
now st and to put a question that the Motion on Training of the youths by Kenya Navy on disaster 
preparedness be adopted in this Hono urable H ouse. 
November 2 8, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          101 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 (Question put and agreed  to) 
 
 Yes Clerk.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members the re being no other business the House stands adjourned until Thursday 
28th November , 2018 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at  2:50p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 