September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 14th September , 2016  
The House met at 9.08am. 
(The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members  have your seats. Members I 
stand under Standing Order 31 (2)  so Sergeant at Arms ring the quorum bell because it has 
now become a trend Hon.  Members just roam around the Assembly .  
(Sergeant At arms r ung the quorum bell ) 
       Sergeant ring the quorum bell for the second time . 
(Sergeant At Arms r ung the quorum bell for the second time ) 
       Yes Clerk lets proceed . 
PAPER  
       Yes Hon.  Duncan Onyango .  
       Hon. Onyango : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the report of unused 
tractor was laid and the on ly part remaining is to move a Motion of the adoption of the report.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you , yes Clerk proceed . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to give a Notice of Motion .  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you when are you ready for this motion?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  In the afternoon Mr. Speaker .  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Permission granted , yes Clerk .  
MOTION  
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 
 SUBMISSION OF QUARTELY REPORTS B Y COUNTY GOVERNMENT 
DEPARTMENTS  
       Mr. Speaker Sir , THAT AWARE that the Kenya Constitution,  2010 which is the 
supreme law in matters of governance and administration vide Article 185 vests the 
legislativ e and oversight autho rity in a County to the County Assembly.  
       FURTHER AWARE that the County Executive vide Article 183(3) of the  same 
constitution compels the County Executive  Committee to provide the County Assembly with 
full and regular rep orts on matter s related to the County.  
       Mr. Speaker , CONCERNED  that to date the foregoing constitutional requirement has not 
been constantly complied.  
       Mr. Speaker I therefore urge the County Assembly to RESOLVE that;  
       County government De partments and the County Assembly Service Board from now 
henceforth to submit regular quarterly reports on their operations and budget perfomance to 
the County Assembly.  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved)  
Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 
 
  Yes Hon.  Duncan . 
       Hon. Onyango : Thank you Mr. Speake r I stand to move a Motion for the adoption of a 
report on unused tractor.  
       Mr. Speaker that this House adopts the report on unused tractor laid on Wednesday 14th  
September, 2016. I therefore move and ask Hon.  Suleiman Boma to second the Motion.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon.  Boma . 
       Hon. Boma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I rise here to second the motion .  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): I do now propo se a question that the 
Motion on  adoption of the report be debated in this House . 
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3 
 (Question proposed and agreed to ) 
       Yes Hon.  Duncan . 
       Hon. Onyango : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ; kulingana na ripoti ambayo tulileta 
kulikuwa na upungufu kwa upande wa wafanyi  kazi lakini kufikia jana tuliweza kuwasiliana 
na Waziri wafanyi  kazi hawa wako katika steji ya mwisho kuweza kuajiriwa na serikali  ya 
Kaunti ili waweze kufanya kazi.  
       Kwa hivyo ningependa kuomba Jumba hili tupitishe tukiwa na matumaini ya kwamba 
tutafanya kazi kuwasaidia wananchi katika hali yao. A hsanteni sana.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): I see that the House satisfied with the report 
and the sent iment s from Hon.  Duncan  the Chairman , now that there's no objection from 
any...yes Hon.  Leader of Majority Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani . 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir I rise here to support 
that Motion because we know and also in my Ward we ha ve a sector for farming so I thi nk it 
is a very good Motion  and I really support so that we can support farmers in our areas so I 
stand to support. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon.  Wangudi . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi n asimama kupinga mswada 
huu.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kwa maoni yangu hatuhitaji trekta la kulima kwa sababu 
hatuna mashamba ya kutosha ya kulima . 
       Mimi ningeomba hivi Mheshimiwa Spika hilo trekta tuliuze na tunanunua gari la makaa 
na greda ya k utengeneza barabara ama tipa la kubeba takataka .  
       Kwa hivyo mimi napinga mswada huu hao wanaotakikana kuajiriwa wasiajiriwe na hilo 
trekta tulipige bei. A hsante sana.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon.  Wangudi, yes Hon.  Opeya . 
       Hon. Opeya:  Mr. Speaker me I support the Motion . Mr. Speaker in Mwakirunge we 
have lands even in areas of Jomvu we have land of farmers so we can increase the chance of 
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4 
 Mombasa to provide its own food instead of relying  on other Counties . So Mr. Speaker in 
fact we should increase more tractors. Thank you.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ningependa kuongezea tu  ndugu yangu 
amesema tununue matrekta zaidi lakini tuwe na fikra kuwa kwanza tuandike vijana madereva 
kwa sababu isije k esho dereva akawa mgonjwa akawa trekta linalala . 
       Kwa hiyo la muhimu na la msingi ni kuwe na madereva wa kutosha ; kuna dereva mmoja 
ama wengine yule a kiwa mgonjwa  yule amesafiri la muhimu na la msingi nafasi za kazi 
zitangazwe kwa watu watakaopeleka matinga yale i li tuwe na watu wa kutosha japo 
hatujanunua matinga tinga mengine baadae lakini kuwe na madereva sio tununue matinga 
yakae kwanza halafu madereva wayangoje ila ni madereva wayangoje yaingie. A hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon.  Onje  
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naipinga ; vile 
tunavyojua vile tunavyofanya kazi mimi sijawahi kusikia hata siku moja sisi kama Kaunti ya 
Mombasa tuko na shamba mahali fulani , ikiwa shamba ni la mtu binafsi ni wao wenyewe  
wajipange jinsi vile watanunua matinga tinga …  
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika hatuwezi kupata hasara kila siku ukienda hata pale kwenye Yard yetu 
hata yale magari ya taka unaona vile yamejaa pale yameharibika hata kutengeneza vipuri  
Kshs. 10,000 pekee yake zinaf anya magari yamelala . 
       Kwa hivyo hizo hasara tena mimi kwangu sioni kama zitafaa ; kwanza nitauliza 
Mheshimiwa Spika hicho kilimo tutakachof anya hayo mazao yataenda wapi? Yatapelekwa 
wapi? Na ni nani atayachukua? Mheshimiwa Spika tusifanye kitu ambacho kitafan ya sisi....  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): There's a point of Information, yes Hon.  
Amur Murfad .  
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 
        Hon. Amur : Mheshimiwa Spika ni masikitiko makubwa msemaji ambaye yuko katika 
floor haelewi kwamba tuko na soko kubwa hapa la Kongowea ...  
(Interruption)  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Onje.  
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa Spika soko tuko nalo la Kongowea sikatai lakini 
ukiuliza mwenzangu aliyeongea hata kushika jembe hajui  
(Laughter ) 
       Hata kwenda shambani hajui? Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika....  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Mheshi miwa Spika sijui nimuite mwenzangu my learned friend  au sijui 
nini? Kwa  sababu kuna dhana  moja na ndugu zetu kwamba watu wa Pwani  si watu wa 
kulima , si kweli nataka nimuulize ndugu yangu au aniambie mtama na ufuta unatoka maeneo 
gani? Kama  sisi watu wa  Pwani  si wakulima ufuta mwingi unatoka sehemu ya Pwani  na 
akitaka per diem  nitampa ni mpeleke kwa mashamba hayo akaone. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika Pwani  watu wanalima 
sijakataa kuwa watu hawalimi l akini hapa Mombasa Kaunti hatuna mashamba ya kulima ; si 
eti kuwa tunanunua matinga tinga kwenda kulima shamba la ekari 10 au 20 kwa serikali ya 
Kaunti itatuteletea nini?  
       Mashamba mengi sana ni ya watu binafsi na mwenye yuko  na shamba kubwa sana ni 
ekari tano , sasa Mheshimiwa Spika eka tano tumpe mtu tinga tinga tumlipie pesa na 
insurance yote kila mwisho wa mwezi na....  
(Interruption)  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes there's a point of order . 
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6 
        Leader of Minority (Ms.) Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa 
ningependa kumjulis ha Mheshimiwa Onje sisi hatufanyi hapa kwa niaba yetu sisi, sisi tuko 
hapa kuwakilisha watu . 
       Kwa hiyo ni lazima tuelewe tukizungumza twazungumzia watu na hatujizungumzii sisi ; 
mimi naweza nikawa si mkulima lakini nina mtu ambaye ni mkulima ana shamba lake la  eka 
kumi , kwa hiyo ni bora tumhakikishie kuwa tumemsaidia mpaka akaweza kulima mazao 
ambayo yatamsaidia yeye na sisi kama wajasiria mali  wa Mombasa tuweze kununua mazao 
kuondoa umaskini . Kwa hiyo na msitikia msemaji alioko kwenye floor .  
       Hon. Onje:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika unajua leo ndio nimepata mambo yanaelekea sawa 
kwenye hili Jumba ; hatuwezi tukanunulia watu matinga tinga waende wakalime kwa 
mashamba yao , ikiwa wanataka hivyo tunajua kuna sekta ya kilimo waende huko...  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon.  Onje we are not buying any tractors, 
the tractor is already on the ground and I will not say that I am bias ed but it’s just an advice 
to the Hon.  Members the tractor was budgeted and has already been bought by the County so 
the issue was utilizing  the tractor and I wil l say that you are opposing or Membe rs are 
opposing on the wrong po dium . 
       It will be better if you would oppose when we were budgeting  for this tractor so Hon.  
Members lets all be on the same track even if you will be opposing but oppose with grounds 
and those who are in support, support with good points. Thank you.  
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri bado mimi ndio niko kwenye 
floor… 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Amur : Point of clarification Mr. Speaker , if the Hon.  Member is  saying if the 
farmers need to buy the tractors then there's no need for us to buy the fire brigade , the 
ambulances each and everything they should be buy on their own … 
(Applause ) 
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7 
        But the County is to support the people so if he can afford to buy a fire brigade  in case of 
fire then he should try to buy its fire fighter car but the County buy things to support its 
people Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon.  Onje . 
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi wenzangu 
sipigani nao ; vile kuna baadhi ya vitu vyengine wanavyosema kama kuzima moto  hizo ni 
haki zetu lakini hakuna trekta mahali litafanya kazi hilo ndilo suala langu . 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Point of order Hon.  Tom Ogalo . 
       Hon. Ogalo:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Spika . Mheshimiwa Onje naona anakaa tu  
Junda , hazunguki Mombasa Kaunti . 
       Mombasa Kaunti kuna maeka mengi ukienda Mwangala, Mwakirunge kuna mashamba 
anaonekana yeye anakaa pale kwake hatembei Mombasa Kaunti.  
(Applause ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes it was Hon.  Onje  on the floor and you 
have 30 seconds to wind up . 
       Hon. Onje:  Mheshimiwa Spika nikimaliza yale ambayo yanafanyika hata kule kwa 
Mheshimiwa Tom Ogalo (Tinga) nimeenda kule ni timbo mpaka yeye ana mtambo wa mawe 
sijaona ukulima unaendelea na kwangu ni mchanga ndio maana napinga hii . Ahsante.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon.  Karume . 
       Hon. Karume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir I did n ot get well the 
content of the Motion but if it is about utilization of the tractor I indeed su pport the Motion…  
(Applause ) 
       Because the tractor is already there  and if it is not utilized I beg it should be utilized 
accordingly Mr. Speaker . 
       I would like t o propose an amendment to this Motion to think out of the box and focus on 
technological farming , investing on more tractors because most of us we realize that most of 
our lands have been utilized in construction of houses so or in the housing sectors so we find 
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8 
 that the farming land is scarce by then we know we can develop green houses modern 
technologic al farming therefore I would request this Hon.  House to consider even the 
Committee on Agriculture to conduct some sort of benchmarking to the country like Israel …  
(Applause ) 
to get to know how modern farming is done there so that we can  get to bring the technology 
in our County. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon.  Karume I can see that 
Hon.  Duncan is very happy …  
(Applause ) 
       Yes Hon.  Nyamvula and I think she should be the last speaker to contribute on  this 
motion .  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity  to 
contribute to this Motion.  
       Mr. Speaker first of all I want to con cur with my colleague s and the report has been 
discussed in this Hon.  House . 
       Looking at the agricultu ral sector urbanized city Mr. Speaker I call upon the County 
Executive In charge of Agriculture we should concentrate with agricultural products ; we have 
big lands for farming but a lot of agricultural products which come to Mombasa we need to 
invest in the finish ed products , what is the finish ed products?  
       My suggestion  is to look at the agriculture products , we can give an example of one item 
which we can concentrate and package it and we can see it . 
       Mr. Speaker Kongowea market gets a lot of products ; now in there we sometimes as 
farmers we have what we  call a glut for instance  when we see tomatoes and they get rotten 
and I would like to see when we have the glut we are able to finish the product for instance  in 
the drying of mango ( Achari ). 
       Right now the women are dealing with that but the way it is done it is not the way , not in  
the most hygienic and professional  way so mine will be to invest on a finish ed product. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
September 14 , 2016              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  9 
        The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Now thank you ; now that the Motion has 
been well d ebated in this House I stand to put a question that the House  to adopt the report on 
unused tractor . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
MOTION  
       Yes any Member from Health Committee ? The motion to be moved to the next House 
Business Committee and the Hon.  Members I will give this opportunity to the Leader of 
Majority he has a message for the Hon.  Members and by use of Standing Order Number 1 
that it’s unprocedural but by using the Standing order it is somehow  procedural so Hon.  
Hamisi Musa Mwidani . 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker thanks for 
giving me this chance to give an information ; we have a function outside our building and it 
is going to be pre sided  over by His Excellency the Governor . 
       So I ju st request all the Members so that we can join the function for the nutrition 
programme or Lishe Bora, my request is that we all join His Excellency the Governor after 
we have adjourn ed our Assembly. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon.  Mwidani I thought you 
wanted to adjourn the businesses of today but we will proceed, yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
       The House stands adjourned until today in the afternoon at 2.30 pm. 
The House rose at 9.45am . 
    
 