December 5, 2023                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 5th Dece mber, 2023  
Third Assembly – One hund red and second  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  10:13a.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Temporary  Speaker ( Honourable  Abdi rahman Abdulkadir ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Members , have your seats . 
Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
            THE MOMBASA COUNTY HEALTH SERVICES BILL , 2023  
 
The County Assembly is in receipt of a legislative proposal on the Mombasa County  
Health Services Bill, 2023.  Honourable  Members , pursuant to Standing order 110  (3)(a) and 
Section 21 of the County Government  Act, 2012 , the legislative proposal of the Mombasa 
County Health Services B ill, 2023 is hereby referred  to the Committee on Finance , Budget and 
Appropriations for consideration since it is a draft money  Bill. Honourable  Members , this 
legislative proposal shall be proceeded with only in accordance with the recommendations of the 
Committee on Finance , Budget and Appropriation s after taking into account the views of the 
relevant stakeholders and examining the manner in which the legislative prop osal affects the 
current and future budgets.  Thank you, yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE  OF MOTION  
 
AMENDMENT OF THE STANDING ORDERS TO FACILITATE  COUNTY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEMBERS  
(CEC M) PARTICIPATION IN PLENARY SITTINGS  
 
Yes, Honourable  Joshua on behalf of the Majority Leader , please issue the notice of 
Motion?  
 
Hon. Ong’ao :  Mr. Speaker  Sir, I beg to issue a notice of the following Motion;  
 
December 5, 2023                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 2 AWARE THAT,  the County Executive Committee Members (CECMs) are responsible for the 
direction and coordination of the affairs of their respective departments under the guidance of 
His Excellency the Governor, as stipulated in  Article 179(2)(b)  of the Constitution of Kenya ; 
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT, the current Standing orders of this e steemed County Assembly do 
not allow the County Executive Committee Members (CECMs) to participate in the plenary 
sittings, thereby limited their ability to address the inquiries and concerns raised by the 
Members of the County Assembly regarding their departments;  
 
NOT ING WITH APPRECIATION , the recent amend ments made at the national level to the 
Standing Orders of the National Assembly and the Senate, which enable the Cabinet 
Secretaries to attend and respond to questions in the plenary sessions upon invit ation, as per 
Article 153(4) of the Constitution of Kenya;  
 
COGNIZANT OF, the constitutional and legal obligations of the County Executive Committee 
Members (CECMs) to account for their actions and decisions to the County Assembly, as 
enshrined in Article 185(3) of the Constitution of Kenya and Section 8 of the County 
Governments Act, 2012;  
 
CONCERNED THAT, the lack of participation of the County Executive Committee Members 
(CECMs) in the plenary sittings hampers the effective communication and collaboration 
between the County Executive and the County Assembly, which adversely affects the overall 
governance structure and impedes the public service delivery in the County;  
 
APPRECIATING THE BENEFITS,  of allowing the County Executive Committee Members 
(CECMs) to participate in the plenary sittings, such as enhanc ing the transparency and 
accountability of the County Executive, fostering the self -responsibility and commitm ent of 
the County Executive Members (CECMs) to their respective departments, and facilitating the 
timely and comprehensive responses to the issues raised by the Members of the County 
Assembly;  
 
REGRETING THE DELAYS , in the implementation of the projects and programs  within the 
County, which necessitate the direct interaction and engagement between the two arms of the 
County government to expedite th e public service delivery and address the needs and 
aspirations of the people of Mombasa County;  
 
ALARMED BY,  the potential ramifications of the absence of the County Executive Committee 
Members (CECMs) during the plenary sittings, such as the possible delays or incomplete 
responses to the questions and statements from the Members of the County Assembly, which 
may jeopardize  the efficiency and effectiveness of the legislative process and oversight 
function of the County Assembly;  
 
DEEPLY CONCERNED , that the  absence of the County Executive Committee Members 
(CECMs) during the plenary sittings may also lead to a lack of clarity and consensus on the 
policies and priorities of the County government which may result to conflicts and 
misunderstand ings between the County Executive and the County Assembly, and ultimately 
undermine the public trust and confidence in the County government;  
 
December 5, 2023                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 3 I, therefore, urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
 
1. THAT  the Committee on Rules and Procedures undertakes an expeditious review and 
recommend amendment of the relevant Standing orders to the County Assembly, to provide 
for the participation of the County Executive Committee Members (CECMs) in the plenary 
sittings of the County Assembly upon invitation, in order to address the matters pertaining to 
their respective departments;  
 
2. THAT  the County Executive Committee Members (CECMs) attending the plenary sittings 
adhere strictly to the rules and procedures of the County Assembly, and uphold the highest 
standards of accountability, integrity, and professionalism in their interactions with the 
Members of the County Assembly.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Thank you. Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 5th December , 
2023 at 2.30pm. Thank you.  
 
The House rose at 10 :22a.m. 
 