November 29, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified vers ion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 29th November,  2018  
The House met at 2:37p.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
(Low Consultations)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Member s have your s eats. Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon.  Member s I acknowledge the presence of Hon.  Member s from Kiambu  County 
Assembly ; they are here with us from Comm ittee on Trade, am missing their names with me but 
they can bow before the Hon ourable  House.  
 
(Hon. Member s from County Assembly of Kiambu bowed) 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Thank you and wel come to Mombasa County Assembly . Yes, next order.  
 
MESSAGES  
 
 Yes Hon . Murfad Am ur. 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir last week I had brought a statement. .. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur you are out of order because we are 
still in order number 4, we are not yet at statement.  
 

November 29, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified vers ion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Murfad  Amur : Then the Clerk said statemen t instead of saying messages. I was 
very much alert Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay Clerk proceed next order.  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
 Yes Hon Moha med Hatimy.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I seek lea ve of this Assembly I tabled 
a Motion yesterday  and I want to amend it, under Standing order 46(2).  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy as per the Standing orde r you 
need permissio n from the Speaker and because of the technicalities that we  are experiencing 
today you will bring the amendments in our next sitting , hopefully next week Tuesday.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
RESPONSE TO THE STAT EMENT ON FLOOD SPILL ING OVER THE SEWERAG E WATER AT JOMVU MODEL 
COUNTY HOSPITAL  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chairperson Committee on Health, response 
to the statement on flood spilling over the sewerage water  at Jomvu Model County Hospital . Yes 
Murfad Amur.  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker am a Member  of the Committee and we would like to 
be given another week so that a comprehensive report can  be brought in this House, you know 
this report needs to come from different departments ; from the water department, that is 
MAWASCO  and the entire health department so we are combining the report so that we can 
bring a comprehensive report nex t week Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes what is it Hon . Faith Mwende.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mwende:  Hon. Speaker  if I can re member  very well the Hon . Member s last 
Thursday requested the House to give him one week so I fail to understand why they don't have 
the response today.  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker with all due respect to my colleague the report i s 
ready but you see the entire Committee of Health had been summoned to the Senate and it had 
not been signed we cannot bring a report which has not been signed that  is why we are asking for 
Tuesday so that we can table that report. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There are some more reactions to your 
statement . Yes Hon . Renson Thoya.  
November 29, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified vers ion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru ni vizuri kutambua kuwa ukiona mwenzako 
ananyolewa we we chako kitie maji ; wiki jana tu aliesimama kutoa rambirambi hizi na mimi 
naziita rambirambi, tunataka madawa na ikiwezekana kama sio sasa ni sasa hivi na ripoti hii 
ambayo ilikuwa tuletewe siku zote, nisongeze hapa nis ikike vizuri.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon Thoya just move forward to this table over 
here please.  
 
(Hon. Thoya mov ed to the Clerk's Table due to power failure)  
  
 And this will apply to all Hon . Member s so that we may be captured well in t he Hansard 
you have to move forward.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Kama nilivyotangulia kusema ni vyema ukiona mwenzako ana nyolewa na 
we nawe tia kichwa chako maji. Aliyetoka kutetea hii hoja ya mambo matibabu ilikuwa tu  juzi... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya we are in order number 8.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Sawa sawa ni order number  8 mimi nasema kitu ambayo iko hapa nafikiri 
the best thing that  tunataka Mheshimiwa Spika, hii Kamati  hapa na laiti ingekuwa inapitia saa 
zote pale Jomvu kuona kile kinatakikana hapo, juzi tulikuwa hapo na Mheshimiwa Kibwana 
tukasem a… 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Address the Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Sawa sawa Mheshimiwa Spika lakini nasema ipo dharura na hiyo dharura 
tunaitaka kama si sasa ni sasa hivi ; pale ilipofika tena si mambo ya kufichana fichana, ni utoe 
muelekeo wa kwamba lile tatizo pale linatatuliwa kwa sababu kwa sasa hivi hiyo hospitali haitoi 
huduma, je wale watu wa Jomvu wanaenda wapi na kama iko mahali ambapo ana weza pata hiyo 
dawa kwa dharura mutuambie maana sasa hivi huduma haitoki pale.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : But the Hon. Member  is asking for one week.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Tutakuwa tukiwapatia wiki moja mpaka lini watu wanaangamia na kufa 
kule, ama hawa ambao watakufa  hapa weekend tumletee yeye hapa Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athman Shebe.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana Bwana Mwenyekiti kunipa hii fursa ya kuweza 
kuchachawiza katika hoja hii. Mheshimiwa Mwenza aliyetangulia amesema ukiona cha 
mwenzako chako kitie maji. Mimi Mwenyekiti ndio  nanyolewa kwa sababu hii Wodi  
naiwakilisha mi mi ni ya Jomvu kuu na hi hospita l inazungumzwa hapa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
mimi na weza sema  ngonjera kwa hii Kamati  ya matibabu imezidi ... 
November 29, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified vers ion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 (Applause)  
 
 Hili s uala Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sio la leo si  la jana wala si  la juzi; vipi leo katika 
hospital i ya pekee ya Jomvu Kuu ambayo inatoa huduma ya afya mpaka leo watu wangu hawajui 
watatibiwa namna gani. Imekuwa ikiletwa Bungeni  hapa kila mara, imekuwa mithili ya  mpira 
wa kona vile Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, wapigwa huku mara taarifa  iko tay ari ma ra bado, mara 
hakujatiwa sahihi ! Tunazungumzia  maisha ya wananchi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, kama hili 
Bunge au hii Kam ati imeshi ndwa kuwajibika tafadhali kuna  Waheshimiwa wenza ambao 
wanaweza kufanya hii kazi . Kwa hivyo nakuomba Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tu mia nguvu zako 
za ki mamlaka hili Bunge il iokupatia kuhakikisha haya maswala yanaweza kushu ghulikiwa 
haraka iwezekanavyo, ahsante sana.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Prischillah what is it, move forward.  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika . Nimesimama hapa kufahamisha 
Jumba kwa sababu nimeo na Mheshimiwa mwenza ambaye ni Mwenyekiti amep ata cheche kali 
na kama ninavyo jua saa nyengine sisi vi ongozi ambao ni Wenyekiti wa Kamati  mbali mbali 
unaweza kuta kuwa ripoti ile ambayo kuwa an aitaka kuita rajia kuileta katika Jumba hili  inakuwa  
pengine ile ripoti haijatoka k wenye wizara husika vile inavyo takikana . Sasa unategemea 
Mheshimiwa awe atatoa ripoti gani ambayo ni ya uwongo hapa, ikiwa tumeambiwa ni Jumanne, 
niko hapa kusimama kidete kumtetea huyu Mheshimiwa  mwenzangu, Mwenyekiti mwenza ili 
mumpe fursa kwa  ajili Juman ne haiko mbali Mheshimiwa Spika  tuweze kungojea tupate ripoti 
muafaka ili hata yeye mwenyewe kama Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti aweze kuwa katika hili Jumba  
na aweze kujitetea kiuf asaha ili tuweze kumuelewa kuna nini katika hi i shida ambayo imeleta 
utatizi namna hii . Kwa hivyo n imesimama hapa kama Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa barabara na 
nafikiri mnajua kama mimi ile mishale huipata na ninaahidi kumtetea ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Mheshimiwa  Spika nimesimama hapa  na sitaki kufahamishwa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Point of order . 
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon orable , there is no point of  order on 
point of order unless  you are up on a point of information . Okay proceed Hon. Hatimy.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Under  Standing order 28.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon. Moha med Hatimy the Standing Order  
is clear itself the Speaker may decline to propose a question and because of the issue that is on 
the floor I am declining to propose a  question…  
 
(Applause)  
November 29, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified vers ion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Yes Hon. Mwam wiri? 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mwenyekiti. Mhesh imiwa Mwenyek iti kwa mujibu 
wa serikali gatuzi yetu ya Mombasa nina imani ina taasisi mu afaka katika kila Idara , kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa ningeomba kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa al iyetoka hapa ya kwamba baadhi ya jopo 
kazi la Idara hii wameitwa Senate kujibu maswali haijamaanisha ya kwamba taasisi nzima 
imebeba ofisi zao na makasha kasha yao wakaenda nayo Nairobi , wapo walioachi wa majukumu 
haya ya kuendesha ili wakaazi wa Mombasa wa pate huduma kama walipa kodi  wengine 
wanavyostahili. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti haijawa sababu kwa tume ama baadhi ya 
wawakilishi katika Idara kuitwa Nairobi kwa wao wawe watapata utepetevu  wa kutowajibikia 
kuleta masuala nyeti yanayoh usu wananchi wa Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti suala la afya 
ni suala nyeti na ndio maana likashushwa ama likagatuliwa ili liwe chini karibu zaidi na 
wananchi. Hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa kwa uwezo wa mamlaka yako na suala nyeti lili loko mbele 
yako naomba mapendekezo  muafaka ili shida ambayo inakumba ndugu zetu kule Jomvu isianze 
kutapaka a kufika katika maeneo mengine kwa zile dawa chache waliz o nazo kulisha na kukosa 
kupata  dawa zingine na huduma zingine na matibabu mengine Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. 
Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Samba . Hon. Faith you have already 
reacted on this issue.  
 
 Hon. Samba : Thank you Mr. Speaker for at least giving me an opportunity. Mr. Speaker 
I am the one who requested for the statement about drugs in the hospitals…  
 
(Inte rruption)  
 
 Hon. Samba you are out of order…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Samba : Put me in order…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Samba you a re out of order because we are 
on order 8 and you are introducing order no.  7, so you are out of order ! Just have your se at.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Samba : Mr. Speaker through your permission, maybe through your permission I 
am the one who requested…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
November 29, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified vers ion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : You are out of order Hon. Tobias Samba ! 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Thoya : Point of info rmation Mr. Speaker . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Samba : I do not want to be informed . 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Member s we are giving this Committee 
until next week Tuesday for them to bring or table the report in this Honourable House , failure to 
which an Ad Hoc Committee will work upon this issue that is on the floor of the House. Thank 
you. Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON OF CO MMITTEE ON IMPLEMENT ATION ON STATUS OF 
MOTIONS PASSED SINCE  THE INCEPTION OF THE  SECOND ASSEMBLY  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume . 
 
 Hon. Kalume : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir I am standing in regards to a 
statement requested by Hon. Mohamed Hatimy on Motions passed in this House since inception 
of the Second  Assembly on Thursday 4th October , 2018 during the 79th sitting. Mr. Speaker Sir ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Kalume just move forwa rd. Hon. Kalume 
you ha ve to bow when you are passing. .. 
 
(Laughter)  
 
(Hon. Kalume bowed before the House)  
 
 Hon. Kalume : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir I am standing in regards to a 
statement requested by Hon. Moh amed Hatimy on Motions passed in this House since inception 
of the Second Assembly on Thursday 4th October , 2018 during the 79th sitting. Mr. Speaker Sir, 
since inception of the Second  Assembly the House has considered 76th Motions in total.  Mr. 
Speaker Sir, out of these Motions 70 were adopted, seven  withdrawn and two defeated. Mr. 
Speaker Sir, copies of the Motion trackers have been served to Member s for further reference. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
November 29, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          102 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified vers ion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 ADJOURNMENT  
 
The House rose at 3:0 5p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 