September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 15th September , 2016  
The House met at 2. 42pm. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Members have your seats, Clerk? 
PAPER  
       Hon. Khamisi Mwidani , Leader of M ajority . 
       Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani : Thank you M adam Chair for giving me this 
opportunity . 
       Hon. C hair I would like to request this H ouse to give me more time , in fact I have just 
received this Order P aper 10 minutes a go then I realized there was a P aper for me to report, but I 
can’t deny but give me time so that I can try to check with the Clerk whether there is any R eport 
of this nature so that  I can report it next week Hon. Chair, thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you M ajority Leader  I give you seven 
days because Members are waiting for this R eport, I give you seven days if  you can give us the 
Report kindly next Thursday 2:30 pm, thank you.  
       Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani : Thank you Madam S peaker.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Clerk ? 
PAPER  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo, C hairperson  Committee  Energy, Trade and Industry.  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Thank you Madam Speaker, on behalf of the C ommittee of Trade 
Energy and Industry co -operation I will lay  the Report on re-allocations of stalls at Kongowea 
market.  
(Hon. Ibrahim Kondo read  the Report ) 
       Madam S peaker , Members present were ; 
 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo    Chairman  
       Hon. Fatuma Mote                                   Vice Chair   
       Hon Abubakar R Kibwana    Member  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  2        Hon. Ahmed Ibrahim    Member  
       Hon. Amir Thoya                Member  
       Hon. Kibwana S Baya    Member  
       Hon. Zainab S Ali  
       Hon. Suleiman Boma  
       Hon. Saad Faraj  
       Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  
       Hon. Maimuna S Mwawasi  
       Hon. Lucy C Chireri  
 
       IN AT TENDANCE  
 
       Hon. Hamisi Mwaguya - Executive Member Trade & Investment, Energy and Industries  
       Mr. AbdulWahab  Mbarak - Chief Officer Tra de & Investment, Energy and Industries  
 
       COMMITTEE STAFF  
       Ms. Halima Aden - Principal Asst. Clerk II  
 
       Executive summary  
       This is a report of the findings of the committee of Energy, Trade, Industries and 
Cooperative Development……….  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Madam S peaker . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon. Mary, Hon. K ondo let’s give Hon. 
Mary , let’s hear her . Yes Hon. Mary .    
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Madam Speaker, as the H on. Chair of Trade I t hink he’s 
supposed to read the P aper and he has not  laid the Paper. 
       I can just hear him reading I don’t know whether it is the Notice of Motion or it is the 
Motion, I think he should lay the P aper first.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you Hon. Mary,  Hon. Ko ndo lay that 
Paper.  
(Paper laid)  
       Thank you . 
       Hon. Ibr ahim Kondo : Yeah thank you Hon. Speaker .  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  3        Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : I think there is confusion  because this P aper 
has come  back … 
(Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula)  consult ed with the C lerk) 
       Hon. Members , am just consulting . Hon. Kondo I think there is, Hon. Members  not Hon . 
Kondo because after consultation with the C lerk it is a mistake that yes the report has b een 
tabled, yes Hon. Hatimy.  
       Hon. Moha med Hatimy : Thank you M adam  Speaker, I remember this was a question and 
it is just Hon. Ibrahim Kondo  to give us an answer, the way we are moving is not right  so please 
give him a chance to read us the R eport as  the answer of the question , thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you, go ahead Hon. Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Thank you Madam Speaker, just to continue E xecutive  summary;   
(Hon. Ibrahim Kondo continued reading the Repo rt) 
       Executive summary  
       This is a  report of the findings of the C ommittee of Energy , Trade, Industries and 
Cooperative Development…  
       Following a statement raised by a M ember of the County Assembly and ruling of the 
Speaker which directed that the C ommittee to table a report on the Reallocation of Stalls at 
Kongowea Market . 
1. Introduction  
       Kongowea wholesale market is located on the mainland north in Kongowea W ard of Nyali 
Constituency and lies on 12 acres plot . 
       The Market was b uilt in 1986 and bec ame fully operational in the year 1989.  
       The Market is managed by the County Government of Mombasa through the department of 
Trade, Energy and Industries . 
       Here follow the findings of the site visit:  
2. Observations and Findings  
2.1 The market has designated areas for wholesale and retail.  
  
2.2 The new trading building was started in 2008 under the Economic Stimulus program with 
an objective to jumpstart the country's economy.  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  4 2.3 The County Government of Mombasa through the department brok ered agreement 
between the two partie s and finally the stalled bui lding was fully handed over to C ounty 
Government of Mombasa for onward consideration.  
 
3. Conclusions  
 
3.1 The Committee observed that the stalled building was earmarked to carry additional 
trading  capacity of 1,500 which was agreed by all stakeholders.  
 
4. Recommendations  
4.1 The Committee observed that there was need to reorganize the Kongowea market and 
bring in sanity and also to beef up security.  
4.2 The County Government of Mombasa in consultation with  National Government, 
Kongowea Central Committee, Office of the  Area Member of parliament and M ember of 
County Assembly have agree on the below listed criteria for the allocation of Kongowea 
Market;  
i. First priority should be given to the vendor s of Kongowea  market mostly those 
who were displaced by the original construction of the new market.  
ii. Traders who are living with disability  
iii. Marginalized groups within the C ounty  
iv. Local and indigenous people  
 
Thank you M adam Speaker . 
(Hon. Ibrahim Kondo ended reading the  Report)  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Anyone to second the report, yes Hon. 
Minority L eader . 
       Leader of Minority Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Mwawasi : I stand here to second the Report.  
PAPER  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Tom Ogalo Chairperson C ommitte e on 
Labour and Social W elfare . 
       Hon. Ogalo : Madam Speaker I beg to present a R eport on delay by County A ssembly in 
payment of W ard office rent, airtime for MCAs and lunch allowances for staff.  
       Temporary Sp eaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Ogalo please go ahead . 
       Hon. Ogalo : Madam S peaker,  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  5 (Hon. Ogalo, Chairman Committee on Labour and Social Welfare read the Report)  
 Report by Labour and Social Affairs Committee,  
       MEMBERS:  
       Hon. Tom Ogalo     Chairman  
      Hon. Jabess Oduor    Vice Chair  
      Hon. Abubakar Kibwana              Member   
      Hon. Mohamed Madundo          Member  
      Hon Kizito Ope ya    Member  
      Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda    Member  
      Hon. Lucy Chireri                Member   
      Hon.  Mary Akinyi                           Member  
      Hon. Maimuna Mwamassa             Member  
      Hon.   Murfad Amur                       Member  
      Hon.   Nasser Suleiman     Member  
(Laughter ) 
       COMMITTEE STAFF                
 Mr.  Salim Juma C ounty Assembly Clerk……..  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : There is an intervention. Yes Hon . Hatimy?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika … (Inaudible ). 
       Hon. Ogalo:  This is a Report…  
       Tempora ry Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon. Ogalo please be seated.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: I think this is an Ad hoc Committee, sorry it’s a C ommittee but 
we need to lay this Report now Madam S peaker.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  It has been laid.  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  6        Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy : We need to discuss this R eport .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes we are getting there just hold on, please 
Hon. Members, yes H on. Ndanda?  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda : Thank you Madam S peaker I just want to add on what H on. 
Hatimy has said once a R eport is laid then we should also be given time so that we can discuss it 
as a M otion but not to be read in the H ouse as a procedure Madam S peaker. Thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamv ula):  Hon. Members I think if you look at the 
Order paper  it gives us an opportunity to discuss , the P aper has been laid,  then immediately after 
that there is a repetition of the same number seven and number eig ht. 
       Then you can see there is a Notic e of M otion and imm ediately after that there is a M otion , 
immediately there is a Statement and then a M otion will come in when we will have an 
opportunity to discuss this . 
       So if you allow me we just proceed as per th e Order paper,  the R eport  has bee n laid on the 
table now , so now Clerk?  
PAPER  
       Hon. Ogalo:  Madam Speaker I beg to lay R eport on annual report on Mombasa County 
Service Board.  
(Paper laid ) 
       Clerk?  
MOTION  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Tom Ogal o? 
       Hon. Ogalo:  Hon. Speaker I beg to put a Notice of M otion on adoption  of the status of delay 
by the County Assembly in payment of W ard office, airtime for MCAs  and lunch allowances for 
staff. Madam S peaker I seek le ave for this Notice of M otion.  
       Tempor ary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  You are already on a Notice of Motion . 
       Hon. Ogal o: I beg leave so  that it can be discussed as a M otion.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon. Ogalo we have already allocated time 
for discussion w hen we get to number eleven , your M otion will be discussed, so please resume 
and then we will move on.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon . Saad?  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  7        Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Madam Speaker for this opportunity. Madam Speaker the O rder 
paper cl early indicates that after the Notice of Motion we will have a M otion and the procedur e 
is very clear Madam Speaker that the mover of the M otion has to seek leave so that it is 
deliberated upon that is the procedure .Thank you.  
       Temporary Spe aker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : That’s the procedure H on. Saad; if it was 
not on the O rder paper  but for this one it is on the O rder paper,  it is ind icated, could we please 
move on?  Hon. Ogalo could you please read the Notice of the Motion completely on the O rder 
paper.  
       Hon.  Ogal o: Madam Speaker, Notice of M otion on the R eport , Notice of M otion on 
adoption of the status of delay by the  County Assembly in payment of W ard office, airtime for 
MCAs and lunch allowances for staff.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Thank you Hon . Ogalo. Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon. Zainab S Ali imposition of taxes on handcart hawkers, any M essage. Yes Hon . Kondo?  
       Hon. Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa niaba ya M heshimiwa Zainab ni kwamba,  
kutokana na biashar a inayofanywa na wan aosukuma mikokoteni ama  rukwama imekuwa donda 
sugu kwao ... 
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Kondo has Hon . Zainab given you, are 
you r eading on behalf of Zainab Ali?  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Yes. 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  I am privy to this statement, so  has she 
asked you to read the S tatement.  
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo: Bi Spika nikiendelea na mikokoteni na marukwama wakisumbuliwa 
na askari wetu na kupitia kwa rai aliyokuwa n ayo mama  ni kwamba anaomba wawe wakitoz wa 
ushuru kama wale wengine wa kila siku wanalipishwa ili waweze kuendelesha biashara zao kwa 
njia inayostahili . 
       Kwa hivyo hii ikiwa ninamwakilisha hapa na alivyonieleza vizuri kwa kinywa chake kuna 
wengine amb ao hawajiwezi kimaisha kwa  hivyo wangeliomba kupitia kwa Nyumba hii na 
serikali yetu ya K aunti ili waweze kupewa nafasi ya kuendelesha biashara zao.  Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  8        Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you Hon . Kondo I will refe r this 
Statemen t for further investigation to C ommittee on Trade and E nergy I  will give you two 
weeks.  
       Hon.  Ibrahim  Kondo : Thank you Hon . Speaker.  
(Consultations ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Correction I have been corrected,  Hon. 
Members I have correction ; this S tatement wil l have to be redirected to the Committee on 
Finance,  Hon. Zainab’s statement item number ten , imposition of taxes on hand carts,  it is in 
relation to taxes . Clerk?  
MOTION  
       Hon. Ogalo?  
       Hon. Ogalo:  Madam Speaker I beg that this House adopts the R eport on , adoption of the 
statu s of delay by the County A ssembly in payment of W ard office, airtime for MCAs and lunch 
allowances for staff  laid on the table on Thursday 15th September , 2016 . 
       Temporar y Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you, Now I need a seconder, will as 
many as of the opinion that this H ouse adopts the report, Hon Ogalo please continue .  
       Hon. Ogalo:  Hon Speaker Members of Committee ...   
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speak er (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon Faraj . 
       Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker I think everyone in this Hou se has this R eport and am sure 
everybody has gone through it, what we need it now is to deli berate on the contents of this 
Report but going word to word wi ll take us the whole day and we have already gone through this 
Report and i think M embers are in agreement with me, thank you.  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Madam Speaker I rise to second Hon . Saad . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon. Mary Aki nyi. 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Madam S peaker i don't think it will take us long, I propose that the 
Chairman to continue reading this R eport because it  is a Motion, thank you Madam S peaker . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : We have two diffe rent opinions ; Members it 
is a very detailed P aper  you can peruse and i will have to put a question that.. . 
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  9        Hon. Wangudi:  Madam S peaker am just reminding you the prayer of Mary Akinyi is not 
seconded .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Now i put a question H on. Members of this 
House ; will as ma ny as of the opinion that this R eport should be deliberated with M embers just 
going through themselves.. . 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Applause ) 
       Yes Hon . Mary ... 
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Akinyi : Thank you M adam Speaker since the ay es have it am seconding the 
Motion . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Now that the Report has been seconded the 
Motion has been seconded ; Members we can start deliberating, yes Hon . Ogalo.  
       Hon. Og alo: Mheshimiwa Spika, naomba kwamba Wanachama waniunge mkono kwa hii 
Ripoti  kwa sababu kuna hawa wafanya kazi  wanalalamika sana kwa mambo ya 'lunch ' yao hata 
wanasema sisi tunafu ata mambo yetu mambo yao haziletwi, sasa ningeomba wanachama  waunge 
mkono ili  hawa wafanya kazi  wapangiwe mambo yao, a hsante sana . 
        Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Saad . 
        Hon. Faraj:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii, hili ni swali ambalo  kwamba 
ningeulizwa kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa E nock Mwadziwe  na kabla kuuliza swali hili tulikua 
tumekaa kikao kutaka kutathmini na kujua tunaweza kuifanya vipi hili swali ili tuweze kupata 
jawabu linalostahili . 
        Ripoti sio mbaya walakin kulikua na suala muh imu ambalo kwamba  liliombwa kutokana 
na R ipoti hii  ambalo limekosekana ; nayo ni kuon yesha malipo ya mwezi baada ya mwezi kwa 
masu ala ya haya ya airtime  na vile  vile ya chakula.  
       Kwa sababu kila ana yepokea Bi S pika huwa kuna  stakabadhi ambazo kwamba kila 
Mheshimiwa anatia sahihi na tulikua  tukitaraji a pia itakua katika Ripoti  ama iunganishwe kama 
appendix  ili tuweze kujua . 
       Lakini lengo haswa ilikua ni kupata sahihi zetu zile ziko katika karatasi ; zile sahihi za 
wafanyi  kazi wakipokea pesa zao za lunch  za kila mwezi . 
       Hilo ni jambo muhimu zaidi  na kidonda sugu lakini katika R ipoti hii Bi Spika  hawakuweza 
kutengeza mimi naona ikamilishwe hii Ripoti ipatikane hizo appendixes  ziwekwe pamoja tuweze 
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  10 kuhakikisha kwamba mwezi baada mwezi kila mmoja ametia sahihi kuwa amepokea pesa zake 
za airtime . Ahsante . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon. Wangudi.  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Bi Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii na mimi niweze kucha ngia Mswada 
ambao umeletwa kwa Bunge hili ikiwa ni Mswada wa kuleta R ipoti na K amati yetu ya Leba.  
       Bi Spika  mimi naunga Ripoti hii mkono ; Ripoti hii naunga mkono nikiz ingatia kua kuona 
ofisi zinaenda inavyotaki kana kwa sababu hiyo ningependa kuunga Ripoti hii mkono . 
       Kwa upande wa airtime  ninaunga R ipoti hii mkono kama wenzangu wameeleza ingeku a 
bora zaidi stakabadhi hizo zitaweza ku wekwa katika hii R ipoti na kukam ilisha R ipoti hii na 
tukiangalia kuna mahali imetajwa kuwa kunazo stakabadhi ambazo zinaunganishwa na hii 
Ripoti.  
       Nashuku stakabadhi hizo ni hizo, isipokua Bi Spika kutokana na orodha ya airtime na lunch  
ya wafanya kazi  wetu wa Bunge  naomba stakabadhi hizo zipatikane na ziunganishwe katika 
stakabadhi  hii iwapo tutaipitisha tuipitishe ikiwa na marekebisho, naomba kuunga mkono na 
marekebisho.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes. 
       Hon. (Ms.)  Asha Hussein:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia naunga mkono mswada huu ila 
marekebisho yawekwe the attached list  ametuandikia tu hapa see at tached list but it is not there .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon Kon do. 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Bwana Spika mimi pia nimesimama kuunga mkono na 
wazo walilotoa wenzangu ni wazo ambalo litatusaidia sisi Bi Spika  kujua tunapoende lea kulipwa 
pesa zetu za rununu.  
       Bi Spika tukiongea namna hiyo ni kwamba kila ki pindi cha mwezi unapopita tunaambiwa 
tumebakisha kudai mwezi mmoja kwa hivyo ingekua muhimu  tupate nakal a ya kuon yesha miezi 
ile m iengin e yote iliyopita vitu zililipwa na nakala na sahihi. Ah sante Bwana Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvul a):Yes Hon . Mary Akinyi . 
        Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante sana Bi Spika , ningependa kuunga mkono hii Ripoti kwa 
sababu tumeiangalia sisi kama W anakamati na tukap ata hapa kuwa hata wale W aheshimiwa 
wenzangu ambao walikua wanasema kuwa hatukushikanisha thib itisho ya zile pesa ambazo 
zinadaiwa.  
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  11        Lakini ukiwa unaangalia hapa kwa recommendation  unapata kuwa tulijadiliana na tukasema 
punde tu pesa zinapopatikana pesa za airtime  zitalipwa, ma ofisi italipwa masalio yote ya mapeni 
yakupata lunch  yale ambayo hayajalipwa pia yatalipwa . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika hata ninavyosimama unaona kwamba  kama file zote za madeni 
zimeingia hapa sasa hivi ambapo mambo yote ambayo yamezungumzwa hapa yako hapa kwa 
hizi file; madeni yote ambayo yanadaiwa hapa na kwa hivi sasa na taka kuwaambia wenzangu 
tuanze kudurusu hizi files ambazo ziko mbele yangu hapa hata naona kama....  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Saad is up . 
       Hon.  Faraj : Bi Spika kwa mara ya kwanza katika historia ya Nyumba hi i leo nimepata 
mshtuko na mshtuko ambao kwamba tumeupata tumeona mafaili yameingia na sisi kama 
Waheshimiwa hatujaomba mafaili yeyote yaje . 
       Kitu tulichoomba ni stakabadhi ambazo kwamba zitafuatana na ripoti kuonyesha si si tumetia 
sahihi mwezi wa M ei tumepokea elfu mbili na kumi na nne, mwezi wa sita, mwezi wa saba 
tumetia sahihi binafsi . 
       Kila mmoja ametia sahihi katika karatasi moja kwa sababu Bi Spika karatasi huwa ni moja 
pale tunalipwa pesa ikiwa unalipwa M iezi miwili itawekwa pale tunalipw a m ara mbili 
inaonyeshwa na tunatia  sahihi katika karatasi ile . 
       Lakini sasa mshtuko kama huu Bi Spika naona kidogo itatutatiza mpaka sisi kitu 
tunachoomba ni  tukubaliane mafaili yaregee watupatie karatasi tuwe tutaweka pamoja na hizi 
tujue kila mmoj a ametia sahihi pahali lakini kutuletea mafaili naona inatutatiza zaidi ...  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Wangudi . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Bi Spika . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Are you up on a Standing Orde r? 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Yes am up on a Standing Order. Bi Spika ninajua ya kwamb a wewe ndio 
uko na mamlaka kwa K iti chako cha heshima na Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba sheria za Jumba 
hili zifuatwe Nyumba hii . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika hairuhusiwi stakabadhi amb azo hazijaidhinishwa kuja ndani ya Nyumba 
hii...  
(Applause ) 
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  12        Stakabadhi hizi Mheshimiwa Spika ziko hapa kinyume na sheria, na sheria hairuhusu wala  
hatuko tayari kufanya udadisi R ipoti, tumeomba Kamati ituwekee zile listi ambazo sisi tuliweka 
sahihi  pekee yake ... 
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ni kinyume cha sheria na naomba faili hizi ziregeshwe zinapoishi na 
iwapo zitahitajika Kamati itazichukua zifanye nazo kazi bali sio Bunge hili ndani ya Jumba hili 
Bi Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Kondo . 
       Hon. Kondo:  Ahsante Bi Spika. Bi  Spika inasikitisha sana wakati umeitisha stakabadhi za 
airtime  naona mezani ni faili za ofisi za Wodi,  sasa sielewi kupitia kwa Karani  aliyeitisha faili 
hizi za  maofisi ya Wodi sijui wale  Waheshimiwa wengine wasiokuwa na Wodi kupitia kwa 
Mwenyekiti watuonyeshe wao airtime yao iko wapi . 
       Kwa sababu naona h izi zote hapa ni faili za Wodi,  sasa wenzangu ambao ni Wateule;  kina 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy wamewekwa kando na ndio maana faili zao ziko  tofauti na hizi , 
ningeliomba hizi faili zirudi tuneletewe nakala zinazostahili .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon . Mary is on the floor , yes. 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika hili Jumba ni Jumba la 
kuheshimika na hizi stakabadhi ambazo tuko nazo hapa ukiwa unaanza kuangalia namba 7 
ukurasa wa  10 imepeana hali kwa mukhtasari ama k wa kifupi vile mapeni yamelipwa kuanzia 
kodi za maofisi , airtime na hata pesa za lunch  zilikuwa zimeandikwa hapo . 
       Ni Jumba hili hili saa hizi hizi ndio W aheshimiwa wamesema kuwa hii Ripoti inataka 
marekebisho kuwa waletewe stakabad hi zile zimeunganishwa kwa hii R ipoti ndiposa Bi Spika 
kwa sababu....  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Mary let’s give Hon . Saad a chance, 
yes Hon . Saad . 
       Hon. Faraj : Bi Spika nimefurahi sana kwa uamuzi wako ; tuko hapa kuelimishana, tuko 
hapa kupatiana mwelekeo . 
       Sio sisi ambao kwam ba tumeomba R ipoti yenyewe ndio imeomba tufanye hivyo ukiangali a 
kwa mfano katika ukarasa wa 9 kwenye payment of airtime  ukurasa wa 10 ukiangalia kwenye ile 
table  utaona kuwa imeandikwa muda  ambao kwamba remarks  kuanzia juu mpaka chini kila 
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  13 nikifungua mimi attached list  sioni nikasonga upande ule wa pili kama nitaona nyengine 
nikiangalia payment voucher  ambazo zimelipwa nyengine pia ni attached list . 
       Ukurasa w a 8 mpaka chini ni paid see attached list  kwa hiyo ni R ipoti imetuomba sisi na 
tukiangalia hatupati ndio maana Bi Spika tupate hiyo attached list  ili tupat e uhakikisho , ili tuwe 
na uhakika. A hsante.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Mary . 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante Bi Spika sijui mimi ndio sielewi kwa sababu nikiangalia hii 
hapa attached list  hii hapa .  
(Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi showed Me mbers the attached list)  
       Bi Spika ukiangali a hapa ni hii listi imekuwa attached  na mapeni yametumika ukiangalia 
unaangalia...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Mary please say which page is that?  
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Akinyi : It is from page 7 Madam Sp eaker, to page 10.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Continue Hon . Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Bi Spika si jui wanataka listi ya aina gani  na listi ndio hii hapa 
tumeshikanisha hapa wakasema wanataka sta kabadhi zibebwe ziletwe zimebebwa na zimeletwa 
hapa vile walikuwa wanataka hapa.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika kubebwa kwa stakabadhi zote watu walikuwa wanataja hapa ziko kwa 
sababu hawakutosheka na hizi listi zenye ziko hapa ndio kwa sababu mafaili yakabebwa 
yakaletwa hapa . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika sisi kama Kamati tulipokaa katika Kama ti hii tulijadiliana vizuri na 
Ripoti tukaleta R ipoti nzuri...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon.Mary there's an intervention , Hon. 
Asha Hussein . 
        Hon.  (Mrs.) Asha Mohamed : Ahsante Bi Spika , tuliomba kujisom ea makaratasi yenyewe 
na katika recommendation  hakuna mahali tumeomba stakabadhi na ripoti hii hakuna mahali 
kumeombwa stakabadhi . 
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  14        Kwa hivyo Bi Spika ningeomba Mheshimiwa mwenzang u aweze kuyakubali tunayohitaji ili 
tusonge mbele ...  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Mary . 
       Hon. Mary:  Ahsante Bi Spika.  Bi Spika ni kuwa narudi kukaa nikisema tu kutokana na 
recommendation  yenye iko katika ukurasa wa  11 ambayo  imesema punde tu pesa 
zitakapopatikana ofisi zitalipwa, airtime  zitalipwa na hata pesa za wafanyi  kazi za lunch  pia 
zitalipwa . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika Mungu si Athumani pesa zinaweza kupatikana hata kesho na kodi za 
ofisi zikalipwa, lunch  ikalipwa na hata  airtime  ikapatikana kesho. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon. Tom Ogalo . 
       Hon. Ogalo:  Ahsante sana Bi Spika nashukuru wenzangu kuniunga mkono ripoti nafikiri 
maombi ambao wanaomba ni sawa ...  
(Applau se) 
       Kwa sababu gani?  
(Applause ) 
       Wanataka waone pale wameweka saini kwa hizi faili ambazo zimewekwa kwa Bunge letu , 
hizi faili haziwezi kuongea katika Bunge letu ...  
(Laughter ) 
       Ningeomba  Bi Spika tuache haya mambo ya faili , naomba kwam ba hata mimi sijui hizo faili 
ziwe hapa ...  
(Applause ) 
       Wakati nilisema hata hizo faili tuone saini zionyesh we sasa naomba wiki moja nije na ripoti 
hii tena. ..  
(Applause ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you Hon . Ogalo this rep ort Hon . 
Members has been deliberated enough and now the Report to be returned to the C ommitte e of 
Labour for us to have the R eport back next week . 
       I also want to mention to the Clerk who has prepared not only this R eport but particular 
issue we sho uld ensure that they prepare a Report according to what M embers wanted . 
September  15, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  15        It was interesting for the Chairman to say that he has N otice that his signature is missing , 
thank you. Clerk ? 
MOTION  
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank you Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker I seek leave to seek 
permiss ion in this House to amend the Motion because the Motion is not.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes proceed Hon . Hatimy .  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Madam Speaker I think th e Order paper is not in order so we 
amend so that we can table this Motion tomorrow.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Okay what i will do then is that next 
Tuesday we table after the amendment , so Tuesday at 2.30 pm. 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hati my: Thank you Madam Speaker.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Thank you Hon . Members this House stand s adjourned until Tuesday at 2.30 pm. Thank you.  
The House rose at 3.39pm.  
 
 
 