December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 6th December , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – One Hundred and Fourth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  10:27a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Have  your seats.  
 
STATEMENT S 
REGENERATION PLANS FOR PUBLIC ESTATES , WITH A FOCUS ON TUDOR ESTATE  
 
Honourable  Amriya Boy . Chairperson , Committee on Lands, Urban Planning and 
Housing.  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker . First and foremost,  I wish to  congratulate  
the Chair  for the well-orchestrated , competent , comprehensive and well organised football 
league and I wish I could say that in person , congratulations to you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you.  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Secondly Mr. Speaker , I am ready with the  response on behalf of 
the Committee  on Lands, Urban Planning and Housing. Mr. Speaker , we received the response 
on 5th December , 2023, on the re-development of old County housing estates within the County 
of Mombasa , under a joint venture partnership between the County governmen t of Mombasa and 
private developers’  regeneration plans for Tudor estate. I think all Members have the 
corresponden ce and it reads as follows:   
 
The above subject matters refer . Reference is made to your letter dated 16th November , 
2023 of ref . CAM/CAC/COCORR/VOL.VI/59 requesting for a statement on the progress 
and details of regeneration project for Tudor estate.   
 
We write to inform you that the aforementioned project was awarded to Ms. Aden 
contractors. However, the joint venture agreement betw een the County government of 
Mombasa and developer has not yet been crystallized due to a number of reasons:  
 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 1. We are in  the process of planning for the developer, Housing Committee on Land and 
Urban Development (County Assembly) and the Taskforce Committee to engage in 
stakeholder meeting ; 
 
2. The input of the Committee on a number of issues such as relocation plan/package, 
timeline on notice to vacate, landlord/ tenant rights etc is essential to enable the 
department to negotiate appropriately with the developer on behalf of the existing 
tenants ; 
 
3. The joint venture agreement (JVA) has not yet been sig ned since t he terms and 
conditions can only be agreed upon once the stakeholder engagement meeting has been 
accomplished ; 
 
4. Finally, t he cost of the project can only be determined once the designs have been 
finalized and agreed upon.  
 
So, essentially  this corresponden ce stipulates t hat at this moment we can only ascertain  
that name o f the contractor which is Ms. Aden  contractor s and any other detail on costs  or even 
the design s or even the rights of the tenants  will be ascertain ed after the stakeholders meeting . 
Thank  you very much . 
  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Amriya . 
Honourable  Bhal oo from Tudor , do you have anything to say?  
 
Hon. Bhaloo:  Good morning,  Mr. Speaker Sir . Well, I am satisfied but not fully satisfied , 
well we  will wait for the other half to be delivered once it’s done that  is when I will say that I am 
satisfied, thank you Sir. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Clerk?  
 
SETTLING OF PENDING BILLS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Honourable  Kibwana Baya Chairperson, Committee on Budget and Appropriations . 
 
[Silence]  
 
Any Member from that Committee?  I understand Hon ourable  Abdirahman is a Member, 
Honourable  Majority Leader is a Member . Yes, Honourable  Abdirahman any response?  
 
Hon. A bdirahman Abdulka dir: Honourable  Speaker, yes indeed I am a Member  of the 
Committee . However,  I am the same individual who raised that statement  so it wou ld be very 
unfair if you  direct me to give a response on that same matter. I am equally waiting for a 
statement for response on that matter Mr. Speaker . Perhaps you could give the chance to  
Majority Leader who is a Member of the Committee. I do  not have a response Mr. Speaker , 
thank you.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): So, you are the one who brought this 
statement?  
 
Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Okay yes, Hon ourable  Majority Leader?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. 
Speaker , Honourable  Abdirahman is aware that we  are still pursuing the matter and at this 
moment  we cannot deliver the response because  we are not done with the inquiry . So, I ask him 
and the Hon ourable  House to be a little bit patien t before we give the response . Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deput y Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Now that the House is aware the 
Honourable  Member who brought the issue is from the same Committee. I would like the 
Committee to sit and bring back a comprehensive report to this Hon ourable  House , knowing that 
the ma tter or  the issue touches a lot of people from the County of Mombasa and it’ s a concern 
that has been brought to this Honourable  House by several Members. So , Majority Leader please 
take charge and make sure you respond b ack to this Hon ourable  House in the next sitting.  
 
The Leader of  Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Most obliged , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Makanga?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Mr. Speaker maybe you give clarity because next sitting is today in the 
afternoon and this issue has been in this House and Committee has been given more than enough 
time to respond. This is an issue of public interest because very many contractors and suppliers 
now are dying out of depression , becaus e of this issue of  pending bills. So, I think from  your seat 
Mr. Speaker you need to give clear direction with clear timeline , so that the Committee take full 
responsibility . Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani): Thank you Hon ourable  Makanga . The 
Chair is aware by saying next s itting  I meant today in the afternoon,  and if I want ed to push it 
further,  I could have said the next session . So, I would like the Majority Leader and the mover of 
this statement to sit as a Committee and brin g a comprehensive response to this House , in as to 
why the Membe r is not aware and that they are from the same Committee. So , I have asked the 
Majority Leader to take charge . Yes Clerk?  
 
ENCROACHMENT AND DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC ROAD IN SHANZU  
 
Yes, Honourable  Mohamed Ulher, Chairperson  Committee  on Transport and 
Infrastructure?  
 
[Silence]  
 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 Any Member from that Committee? Hon ourable  Manuari , are you a Member of 
Transport Committee ? 
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ndio mimi ni Mwana Kamati  hii 
lakini sisi kama Kamati ya Uchukuzi tuna matatizo maana Mwenyekiti hatumuoni na msaidizi 
wake pia hatu jui yuko wapi ... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Kwa hivyo kuchakachua neno lolote inakuwa ishu . Kwa hivyo mimi ningeomba tu 
Mheshimiwa Spika utupe nafasi tutafutane na huyu Mwenyekiti wetu kwa sababu tulisikia 
anaumwa na mpaka sasa hivi hatujui amefikia kiwango gani kuumwa kwake na huyu msaidizi 
wake pia tume sikia amejifungua hatujui sasa sisi twaomba utuongezee nafasi tuwatafute hawa 
watu waw ili ili tu endeleze hi li suala. Ahs ante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Silence ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Bwana Spika kama sijakosea  Naibu wa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati hiyo ni 
Mheshimiwa Mwaka Mwalundonda . Nataka huyu Mheshimiwa ambaye amesema kwamba 
Naibu Mwenyekiti amejifungua afafanue amejifungua nini maana kulingana na Mheshimiwa 
Mwaka sidhani kama anaweza jifungua  ile kujifungua n inafikiria ! Kwa hivyo  anaweza 
kutuelezea tafadhali.  
  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): The Majori ty Lea der is up ! Yes, what is  
it Majority Leader?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Mheshimiwa Spika nimkumbushe 
tu Mheshimiwa Madialo  ambaye pia  ni Mchungaji ya kwamba imedhihiri ndani ya Biblia 
kwamba mama Sarah kwa umri aliokuwa nao wa zaidi ya miaka 70 bado Mungu alim pa ruzuku 
na akaweza kujifungua...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Kwa hi yo hakuna miujiza katika hili  na kwa mama zetu Mheshimiwa Spika Mungu 
amewabarik i kwa hiyo atakapokuwa kwa umri wowote bado anaweza akajifungua. Kwa hivyo 
acha tusadiki kwa sasa maneno ya Mheshimiwa ya kwamba Naibu Mwenyekiti amejifungua.  
  
[Laughter ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Allen Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nimesimama kwa sababu uoga wangu ifikie 
mahali utoe maamuzi kabla si jasema ninachotaka kusema Mheshimiwa Spika ni kwamba suala 
hili limekuja hapa ni muda sasa na pengine Kamati husika haioni uzito wake kwa sababu 
ninav yo kwambia hii barabara ni ile ya cabro  na inaendelea kuharibika na huyu ni w ale kizungu 
tunawaita grabber  alinyakua sehemu  na akachimba barabara il iyotengenezwa na pesa za Kaunti .  
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 Sasa barabara inaendelea kuharibika Kam ati nasikia mwengine anaj ifungua , nasikia 
mwengine hapatikani Mheshimiwa Spika maelekezo yako naamini yatakuwa mwafaka  na 
yataleta natija katika hasara ambayo tunaendelea kupata kama Kaunti.  Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable Members , thank you 
Honourable  Katana. Hon ourable  Members , in the absence of the Chair and the Vice Chair the 
Members can sit and between themselv es can decide who chairs that meeting . So, I instruct the 
Committee to sit and make a f ollow up on this issue putting i n consideratio n that these are 
County resources, County funds are being wasted and also bring back the response to this 
Honourable  House as soon as possible.  Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
AMENDMENT OF THE STANDING ORDER TO FACILITATE COUNTY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
MEMBERS PARTICIPATION IN PLENARY SITTING  
 
Yes, Majority Leader?  
 
The Lead er of Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. 
Spea ker, I beg to move the following Motion;  
 
AWARE THAT,  the County Executive Committee Members (CECMs) are responsible for 
the direction and coordination of the affair s of their respective departments under the guidance 
of His Excellency the Governor, as stipulated in  Article 179(2)(b) of the Constitution of Kenya;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT, the current Standing Orders of this esteemed County 
Assembly do not allow the County Executive Committe e Members (CECMs) to participate in the 
plenary sittings, thereby limit ing their ability to address the inquiries and concerns raised by the 
Members of the County Assembly regarding their departments;  
 
NOT ING WITH APPRECIATION,  the recent amendments made at the national level to 
the Standing Orders of the National Assembly and the Senate, which enable the Cabinet 
Secretaries to attend and respond to questions in the plenary sessions upon invitation, as per 
Article 153(4) of the Constitution of Kenya;  
 
COGNIZ ANT OF, the constitutional and legal obligations of the County Executive  
Committee Members (CECMs) to account for their actions and decisions to the County 
Assembly, as enshrined in Article 185(3) of the Constitution of Kenya and Section 8  of the 
County Governments Act, 2012;  
 
CONCERNED THAT, the lack of participation of the County Executive Committee 
Members (CECMs) in the plenary sittings hampers the effective communication and 
collaboration between the County Executive and the County Assembly, which adver sely affects 
the overall governance structure and impedes the public se rvice delivery in the County;  
 
APPRECIATING THE BENEFITS,  of allowing the County Executive Committee 
Members (CECMs) to participate in the plenary sittings, such as enha ncing the transparency 
and accountability of the County Executive, fostering the self -responsibility and Committee of 
the County Executive Members (CECMs) to their respective departments, and facilitating the 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 timely and comprehensive responses to the issues raised by the M embers of the County 
Assembly;  
 
REGRE TING THE DELAYS , in the implement ation  of the projects and programmes 
within the County, which necessitate the direct interaction and engagement between the two 
arms of the County government to expedite the public service delivery and address the needs and 
aspirations of the people of Mombasa County;  
 
ALARMED BY,  the potential ramifications of the absence of the County Executive 
Committee Members (CECMs) during the plenary sittings, such as the possible delays or 
incomplet e responses to the questions and statements from the Members of the County  Assembly, 
which may jeopardize the efficiency and effectiveness of the legislative process and oversight 
function of the County Assembly;  
 
DEEPLY CONCERNED , that the  absence of the County Executive Committee Members 
(CECMs) during the plenary sittings may also lead to a lack of clarity and consensus on the 
policies and priorities of the County  government which may res ult in the conflicts and 
misunderstandings  between the County  Execut ive and the County Assembly, and ultimately 
undermine the public tr ust and confidence in the County government;  
I, therefore, urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
 
1. THAT  the Committee on Rules and Procedures undertakes an expeditious review and 
recommend amendment of the relevant Standing Orders to the County Assembly, to 
provide for the participation of the County Executive Committee Members (CECMs) in 
the plenary sittings of the County Assembly upon invitation, in order to address the 
matters pertaining to  their respective departments;  
 
2. THAT  the County Executive Committee Membe rs (CECMs) attending the plenary sittings 
adhere strictly to the rules and procedures of the County Assembly, and uphold the 
highest standards of accountability, integrity, and professionalism in their interactions 
with the Members of the County Assembly.  
 
May I, ask Hon ourable  Hamisi Athman Nyota to second the Motion.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Nyota?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I second the Motion.  
 
The Depu ty Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akara ni): Thank you. Hon ourable  Members , I 
propose a question  to the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri on  Amendment of 
the Standing Order to facilitate County Executive Committee Members Participation in  the 
Plenary Sittin g be debated in this House . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
Yes, the Majority Leader?  
 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mheshimiwa Spika awali ya yote kwanza ni kutambua sisi kwamba ni muigo wa Bunge la 
Kitaifa katika uendeshaji wa shughuli zetu  kwa sababu majuku mu yanayoendeshwa na u bunge 
katika Bunge  la kitaifa ni sawia na yale ambayo sisi tumepewa dhama na na wananchi kw a 
mujibu wa K atiba yetu ya Kenya. Mhesh imiwa Spika , tukitambua ya kwamba uwakilishi wa 
utawala katika Bunge mara nyingi huwa uko chini ya Wenye  Kiti wa Kamati mbalimbali , 
nitambue binafsi na kupongeza Wenye Viti katika Bunge hili kwa weledi wao na uongozi wao 
na uwezo mkubwa waliokuwa wakifanya katika kuleta majibu yanayo  stahiki kwa Bunge hili 
kwa minajil i ya faida ya wananchi wetu wa  Mombasa.   
Mheshimiwa Spika , ni masikitiko ya kwamba Waheshimiwa hawa na Wenye  Viti hawa 
wamekuwa wakipata wakati mgumu kufuatilia  taarifa am bazo zinaf aa kujibiwa katika Bunge hili 
kwa wakati unaofaaa kwa sababu moja ya kutopatikana kwa Mawaziri .  Pili, kwa majukumu 
ambayo  Mawaziri  wako nayo na kutolichukulia umuhimu Bunge hili  ili Mheshimiwa Spika 
twende sawia iwapo  itakuwa  imetokea dharura ya swali ambalo linahitajia m chango wa Bunge 
zima kwa jumla chini ya Kiti chako tuweze kuidhin isha katika mapendekezo haya kwenye 
Kanuni zetu za Kudumu ya kwamba Waziri  muhusika  aweze kufika binafsi pasi na kumtegemea 
Mwenyekiti  wake ili aweze kujibu yanayojiri katika mji wetu wa M ombasa . Na vilevile kupeana 
fursa kwa Waheshimiwa am bao hawakai katika Kamati ile kuweza  kuchangia juu ya mjadala 
utakao kuwa mbele ya Kiti chako Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa ufanisi zaidi , ufafanuzi zaidi  na 
ufasaha zaidi .  
Lakini zaidi ya yote iweze kujenga uwazi na uwajibikaji katika utekelezaji wa majukumu 
ya serikali hii yetu  ya Mombasa ambayo sisi kama Bunge ni kitengo sawia na u tawala katika 
serikali hii. Mheshimiwa Spika hatuna nia mbaya katika hili wala hatu na ubinafsi wa mtu yeyote 
katika up ande ule wa pili , tunacho  kitaka baada ya miaka mitano sisi tutahukumiwa sawia na 
yale yaliyotendwa na utawala kwa wananchi.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kwetu sisi 
tukiliboresha hili sasa , tukili weka jambo hili wazi  sasa itakuwa ni faida kwetu  na tutakuwa tu na 
majibu muafaka wakati wowote itakapobidi kuweza kusukuma gurudumo hili la u tawala na 
serika li yetu ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa . Kwa hayo mengi ni wasihi tu Waheshimiwa ya kwamba 
tuweze kuungana kwa sababu baadhi ya Kaunti ambazo ni majirani zetu  tayari washaweza  fanya 
mabadiliko ya mapendekezo haya kwa Kanuni zao za Kudumu na tumeshuhudilia n dugu zetu 
hapa Kilifi , ni juzi tu wamekuwa na mjadala tete ambao umelazimu Kamati ya Bunge zima 
kuweza kuliendesha na wale wahusika waliweza  kufika mbele ya Bunge  na kuweza kujibu na 
imejenga imani kwa wananchi wa Kaunti ile Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa sababu wameweza 
kulifuatilia jambo lile wazi bayana na wameweza kujua ukweli uko wapi .  
Tofauti M heshimiwa Spika na baadhi ya Kaunti ambazo ikiwa miongon i mwetu hatuna 
hili, inapotokea dharura ya mkwaruzano ama msukuman o kwa kutafuta ufasaha mwisho wa siku 
itakuwa labda Bunge lina lengo fiche kwa mtu fulani ambayo ni  tofauti ni ile hali ya kujaribu 
kutekeleza majukumu yetu kama ilivyo katika K atiba . Kwa hayo mengi Mheshimiwa  Spika 
niwaombe waheshimiwa wenza tu weze  kuunga mkono hoja hi i ya kupatia f ursa kamati hii 
husika iweze kuzingatia ama iweze kuzingati a mapendekezo haya ya kwam ba mab wana hawa 
waweze kufika mbele ya Bunge inapokuwa na  haja kuweza kujibu maswali moja kwa moja , 
ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Majority  Leader . Yes, 
Honourable Abdirahman?  
[Applause ] 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 8 Hon. Abdirahman Abd ulkadir : Thank you Mr. Speaker for spotting me. Mr. Speaker,  I 
do not have much to add on this particular Motion. It is a much  summarized, very precise and I 
stand to support it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Hamisi Nyota?  
  
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First,  I 
would like to appreciate my elder brother and the Majority Leader Hon ourable  Athman 
Mwamwiri for coming up with such  a Motion which amendments must be done o n our Standing 
Orders so that we can invite the CECs to the chambers for the progress of our County.  
Honourable  Speaker , I would like to comment on two things ; first of all , I fully support this 
Motion 100  per cent .   I would also like to say that in this Hon ourable  House we have different 
professions and, in that matter,  it will be pruden t with the matters which are being addressed by 
this Motion that if the CECs will appear before the House , pertaining to different matters . 
Because we come from different Wards with different dyn amics and we are representing our 
people at the grassroots level , so to be prudent that all those questions which have been asked 
and go back at our Wards reg arding the County projects , County projects .  
It will be prudent Hon ourable  Speaker if the CECs will appear before us in this House so 
that we can air out the same concer ns so that we get direct answer s from the concerned CECs 
from each Department . It will  be easy for us to respo nd back when we go back to our Ward, we 
can respond back to our people regarding to different issues they be pertaining in our Wards 
regarding to this progress of the County . So, Mr. Speaker the fact we have vested different 
professions we have accountants we have engineers and many professions.  Honourable  Speaker , 
it will be good if we can share as the County belongs to all us and it is good faith to mak e the 
County progress higher. So , it will be good if the CECs will appear before us those questions or 
those co ncerns which maybe the Members whom they do  not belong to certain departments they  
will have a chance to air out their views and to air out their questions and may be get adequate 
response and answers so that they can help us progress this County of ours Mr. Speaker . I fully  
support this Motion thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Hamid?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hamid : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii. 
Ningelipenda kuingozea hoja hii nakubaliana na h oja hii mia kwa mia kwa sababu hawa watu 
ama ndu gu zetu walikuwa appointed  through this Assembly  hatuna nafasi nyengine  ya kuwaona  
na hatuna nafasi nyengine ya kupata haya majawabu tunayoyapata kutoka mashinani . Kwa hivyo 
nafikiria hii ni hoja muhimu na itafanya kazi kwa urahisi ya Assembly  na ya Executive . Ahsante 
sana.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Bernard 
Ogutu?  
 
[Applause ] 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 9 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . Kwanza kabis a nimpongeze Kiongozi 
wa Wengi Bungeni  kwa kuja na hoja hii. Ni hoja ambayo ni muhimu sana na mara nyin gi 
statement  zinaletwa ndani ya Bunge hili hapa lakini maja wabu ambayo tunapata Mheshimiwa 
Spika huwa wakati wengine hayatufurahishi. Kwa hivyo pindi  wale wahusika watakapo kuja 
hapa ndani  tutakuwa na  first-hand  information  na tutapata majibu y a kisawasawa kwa maswali 
yale ambayo  tutakuwa tumeweka ama kwa zile shida ambazo zi nakumba watu wetu kule 
nyanjani. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga mkono kwa mara ya kwanza mia fil mia. 
Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante sana.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo : Ahsante Bwana Spika . Ningependa kumpongeza ndugu yangu mdogo , 
Kiongozi wa Wengi kwa kuleta hoja hii ; nami pia naunga mkono na nikiunga mkon o 
ningependelea pia iende samba mba na proceedings  kwa mabano ya Bunge hili ili ikapate 
kuonekan a moja kw a moja kupitia kwa njia hiyo ndiposa  wananchi pia mbali na hao Mawaziri  
kutujulisha mambo ambayo wanatekeleza k atika Wizara  zao bila sisi kuweza kwenda ku jielezea 
wananchi wataona moja kwa moj a na nakumb uka nilitengeneza hoja ya kuomba Bunge hili ya 
kwamba tukapate kuwa na matangazo moja kwa moja pengine kwa mitandao na  naamini 
ilipofika ile Kamat i husika tukaelezewa kwamba Bodi  ya Bunge la Kaunti  tayari ilikuwa 
imeweka mikakati katika bajeti ya mwaka huu ya kwamba vyombo vyote vinahitajika 
kusababisha kwamba jam bo hilo likapat e kutekelezwa likatekelezwe.  Kwa hivyo ningependa 
ofisi yako Bwana Spika wakapate kuharakisha ja mbo hili ili hao Mawaziri  wanapokuja pia 
mambo  yale yalikuwa wakitueleza yaoneka ne moja kwa moja.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Allen 
Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni kushukuru kwa nafasi hii na tena kwa mara ya 
kwanza pia nitakuwa kama Mheshimiwa Ogutu  kwa kusema ya kwamba nitamuunga mkono 
Kiongozi wa Wengi mia fil mia kwa swala hili ambalo limekuja . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nikukumbushe kwamba Jumba hili mimi ni mara ya  kwanza kuingia , lakini bila swala la maana 
kama hili  inanishangaza ni  kivipi Jumba hili linapata heshima yake . Kwa sababu kwa mara 
nyingi Jumba hili Mheshimiwa Spika  nikisema Jumba  ni Jumba tu lakini wa liomo ndani ni 
Waheshimiwa  tumepata kudharauliwa hata na kupewa majina kama vile rubberstamp  kwa 
sababu hatuna nguvu kikamilifu ya kufanya kazi yetu . Lakini endapo swala hili , Waheshimiwa 
wenzangu pamoja tukimuunga mkono Ki ongozi wa Wengi na ipite kwa hakika kutakuwa na 
heshima kubwa ya ut enda kazi kwa hawa Mawaziri  na nina hakika h ata kiongozi Mwenyekiti wa  
ile inaitwa Implementation  Committee  Kiswahili nimesahau kidogo Mheshimiwa Spika, atapata 
kazi rahisi maana Mawaziri  watajukumika kwa kuwa sisi tutakuwa tumepata nguvu  ya kuja  
hojiana nao moja kwa moja . Mheshimiwa Spika  ningetamani sana hata ingeweza kupita leo, na 
tuwaite Mawaziri  wengine kikao cha mchana Mheshimiwa Spika, ingekuwa ni afadhali zaidi, 
kwa sababu kuna kaz i nyingi ambazo zinahitaji tuje  tujibiwe hapa na kwa hayo maen eo mengi 
Mheshimiwa Spika, jambo hili naliunga mko no. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Leila 
Nyache?  
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 10 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika, nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hoja hii iliyokuja na Kiongozi wa Wengi Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri . Kwa kweli ni 
hoja ya maana sana na pia namshukuru kwa kuweza kutupongeza sisi kama Wenye Viti wa 
Kamati ya kwamba tunawajibika na tunafanya k azi yetu vizuri .  Lakini shida ni hawa ndugu zetu 
kutoka Executive ; unakuta hata statement  yenyewe pia Mheshim iwa Spika  kujibika inakuwa ni 
matatizo kwa sababu watu wale hatuko karibu sana na wao ama tunawatafuta hatuwapati . Kwa 
hivyo tukiwaleta karibu na sisi kwa kweli kazi zetu kwa wananchi zitaweza kuwa rahisi kwa 
sababu kazi yetu ni yao  na lazima tushirikiane na wao, hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia 
naunga mkono hoja hii mia fil mia. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fad hili Makarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Mbelle 
Patrick?  
 
Hon. Mbele:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand to strongly opp ose and I repeat strongly oppose 
any thought or ideas of anyone who want s to oppose this Motion … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
And the reason for my thoughts is that, I think so many of the CECs have been hiding 
behind Chairpersons just to camouflage and find a means and ways of getting away from many 
questions  that we ask . But this now will give a platform and means for us to interact  with them 
head -on and be able to ask them very tough  questio ns that our people ask.  We sometimes have to 
become CECs on the ground, become t he MCAs become the Governor, become the MP just 
because we can not be able to access the very critical people that we made sure that they become 
CECs in this House . So, I support this Motion 100  per cent  and wish to congratulate the Leader 
of Majority  for this thoughtful Motion. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Mbel le. Yes , 
Honourable  Amriya Boy Ju ma Boy?  
 
Hon. Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity. I also want to support 
this Motion . Seeing that when you look  at the constitution Article 183 on the function s of County 
Executive Member, or County Executive Committee, it is clear that their mandate involve s 
around implementation of County legislation, making of plans, policy, budget and  when we look 
at our functions at County Assembly in about Article 19 0-191 it talk s about legislation, 
representation and oversight . So, it’s clear that we mus t work coherently so that we are able to 
have the necessary information to represent  our people ; let us say if we  do not have any 
information for instance myself  am just in two Committees, am in Committee on Health and may 
be in Lands . I have no information in what soever, what  is happening in Agriculture, what is 
happening in Environment, what is happening in the rest of the Committee s.  So, how am I 
supposed to oversight ? How am I supposed to re present? So, it is very crucial for us to have the 
necessary  information  for us to p artake our mandates in appropriate way s so that at least we can 
be able to foster the agenda of the government of the day because I am a representative of both 
the people and the government of the day. If our people will have more information than myself 
it means that am lacking in my responsibilities ; so, we should just welcome this move in the 
positive attitude it accords since we will get the necessary information for us  to represent both 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 11 our people  and the government . When just  a media person tends to call me today  and ask me, 
what is the budget of El-nino, what happened?  I have no idea what has happened and what is 
happening . So, if we have this CECs coming every now and then giving information , I will be 
abreast with the current issues so am in full support so that am not in the dark ; I can be able at 
any t ime on my feet to respond to a ny question from the media, from the public, I will be more 
than ready to respond to any queries because we have this information at our fingerti ps. So, 
lastly,  I wish to say  that am in full support I  can say even if am woke n up at midnight I would 
say Amriy a I am supporting that the CECs come and furnish  us with the  relevan t necessary 
information that we require on our roles . Thank you very much.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Mote 
Fatma?  
 
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii . 
Kwanza kabisa namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu muumba wa mbingu na ardhi pasi na kizuizi siku 
hii ya leo, vile vi le sina budi kumpatia Mheshimiwa Ogutu kongole maana yake katika wale 
watu wakimpinga nilikuwa nikim uunga Mhesh imiwa Nyundo mimi ni  mmoja wao, kwa vile 
Mheshimiwa alishinda goli moja  nampatia kongole. Mheshimiwa Sp ika, nimesimama hapa 
kuunga mkono  Mswada  ulioletwa na Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri. Mheshimiwa Spika nazungumza 
kwa huzuni maana yake nilikuwa nikipita huko chini mimi mwenyewe niko katika Kamati  ya 
Fedha mara nasikia MRS, mara sijui ukwaju gani ambapo nikiuliza Mheshimiwa Spika, sipati 
jibu na vile vile ukiangalia pia Mawaziri  wetu huwa hawaonekani . Sema vile Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi nakaa sehemu za Nyali nafanya kuwaona kule Pronto wakijivinjari ; kwa hivyo Mswada 
ulioletwa ni mzuri sana , kila mtu achukue jukumu lake, hakuna haja watu kuenda kukaa 
Signature  wala Pronto . Mheshimiwa Spika , lazima tuju e mambo ya MRS ni kitu gani, ya ani 
mpaka waje watuelezee ili  tukiulizwa vitu mashinani , tuweze  kuelewa. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Hossana?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I rise to support the Motion  brought to this 
House by Leader of  Majority Hon ourable  Athman Rama Mwam wiri, a Member of County 
Assembly  from Likoni . Mr. Speaker Sir , I arise to support the said  Motion that inten ds to bring 
on board the CECs into this Assembly to be able t o respond to issue s of public interest and 
concer n as stipulated in the law. Mr. Speaker , citing from a similar  Article that has been shared 
by Hono urable Amriya the only Senior Counsel  in this Assembly … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Article 183 which Mr. Speaker outlines the  functions of County Executive C ommittees.    
- Article 183 (2) A County Executive C ommittee may prepare proposed legislation for 
consideration by the County Assembly ;  
- (3) The County Executive C ommittee shall , and it is important we note the use of word 
shall which states  that provide the County A ssembly with full and regular repo rts on 
matters relating to the C ounty.   
So, there are three  words here Mr . Speaker that have been used that we must note ; we as 
an A ssembly ha ve been given powers by the law, that the C ECM’s must appear before us , they 
shall provide the County Assembly with full and regular reports .  
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 12 Mr. Speaker , as previous speakers have said, we are dealing with very funny human 
beings who after taking oath they always disappear and they become demigods ! Mr. Speaker , 
even reaching them , getting them to answer question s always hide behind the Committees where 
when you se ek a statement here then they just go and s it with their Committe es and we are not 
saying that they Committees are com promised;  but the information that is given back to this 
House  Mr. Speaker  is not satisfactory and therefore we need them to come before this Assembly 
so that they are able to respond to our questions and they also feel what we feel when the people 
at the ground ask us these questions.  Further Mr. Speaker, S ection 9 of the County Government 
Act has outlined also the roles of th e Members of the Cou nty Assembly , and amongst them is 
that we can examine witnesses, we can examine documen ts, we can call people to this Assembly 
to give witness or evidence on matters of public concern or public interest including them taking 
oath even as they give their evidence. Therefore , Mr. Speaker this is time that we go forth to pass 
this Motion a nd we call them here to ask  questions and if they fail to respond  we are going to tell 
them how things should be done. So, Mr. Speaker I stand to support this Motion 110  per cent  for 
it to pa ss. As Honourable  Member  from Shanzu  Honourable Allen Katan a has earlier said ; if 
possible,  we pass t he Motion and  it takes immediate effect  today so that before we go for recess,  
we wou ld have atleast called one of them.  Thank you , Mr. Speaker, I stand to support.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Honourable Members , I now 
call Hon ourable  Mwaura then to be followed by the mover of the Motion to respond. Yes , 
Honourable  Mwaura?  
 
 Hon. Mwaura:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa hakika sina mengi ya kuonge za ila ni 
kuungana na wenzangu kumpongeza Mheshimiwa wa Kiongozi  wa Wengi kwa sababu ya kuleta 
Mswada huu wakati kama huu . Mheshimiwa Spika awali tulikuwa na maswali  ambayo  
hayakuweza kujibiwa na Wenye  Viti katika Kamati kadha mahali hapa  na mimi ni mmoja wa 
Mwenyekiti ambao mara kwa mara nimesikitika na yale majibu nimeyapokea kutoka kwa 
Executive  na mara kwa mara imebidi niyarudishe niseme haya mimi binafsi hayaniridhishi na 
ninaamini nikiyapeleka  katika Bunge hay ataweza kuri dhisha Waheshimiwa . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika M swada huu ninauunga mkono asilimia 100 ya kwamba tunawahitaji waje 
hapa ili waweze  kujibu majibu yanayoridhisha. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , the Le ader of Majority 
please respond.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mheshimiwa Spika niwashukuru Waheshimiwa wenza kwa kuweza kusimama kidete kupinga 
kauli za wale wenye k upinga H oja hii. Mheshimiwa Spika, Hoja iko bayana na  maudhui yake 
yako bayana kwa sababu m wisho wa siku ni sisi wawakilish i Wadi pamoja na Bwana Gavana 
ambao tutarudi mashinani kujibu maswali katika kujitete a kwa  nafasi nyengine tena . Lakini 
jukumu kubwa la uendeshaji Mheshimiwa Spika liko katika Mawaziri ambao wao hawataweza 
kusimama mbele ya wananch i kujibu chochote mbali na sisi .  Kwa hivyo kwa niaba ya wananchi 
wetu Mheshimiwa S pika tumepewa mamlaka chini ya I bara 195  ya Katiba hii ya Jamhuri ya 
Kenya ya kwamba tu nao uwezo wa kum uita yeyote kuto a ushahidi, tunao uwezo wa kuitisha 
ushahidi wa makaratasi na chochote kati ka Bunge hili lakini pia tumepewa mamlaka ya kwamba 
Bunge hili linaweza kutengeza Tume ikaenda ughaibuni kuhoji am a kutafuta ushahidi wowote 
Bunge li tahitajia.  
 
December 6, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        104 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 13 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kwa haw a Mawaziri ambao wako tu nyuma ya Bunge hili 
kufika hapa n a kujibu ni jambo ambalo halina sababu ya kigegezi ikiwa Katiba imetupatia 
mamlaka ya kutum a Tume kwenda ughaibuni kwenda katika swala la ushahidi lakini zaidi ya 
hayo Mheshimiwa Spika mamlaka ya Bunge hili ni sawi a na Mahakama Kuu na sheria lazima 
zifuatwe kwa mtu atakae beza Bunge hili na Kamati zake lazima sheria ziweze kuf uatwa 
ikiwemo  kutozwa  faini, ikiwemo kupeleka mapendekezo ya yeye kufunguliwa mashtaka ya 
uhaini na ikilazimu kufungwa katika hali y a kuitetea na kuipa tia hadhi Gatuzi letu la Mombasa 
na wananchi wetu watukufu waliotupatia mamlaka hayo. Kwa hayo mengi nawashukuru 
Waheshimiwa na iwe bayana , Hoja hii yetu  sote Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna mm oja wetu ama 
Mwenyekiti yeyote mwenye tofa uti na Waziri upande wa pili lakini Waziri yeyote atak ae beza 
Mwenyekiti na Kamati, yeye ni adui wa Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Haijalishi ni Kamati gani lakini kwa Waziri yeyote mwenye kubeza mw akilishi ama 
Kamati ya Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika wakati umefika wa kuweza kumpatia mahali pake 
anapostahili. Asante Mheshimiwa Spika na Mwenyezi Mungu abariki Bunge hili.  
 
[Applause ] 
[Consulta tion] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Order! Order Members! Order! Order 
Senior Counsel Order! Honourable Members I now stand to put a question that  the Motion by 
Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri  on Amendm ent of Standing Order  to facilitate County Executive 
Committee Members Participation in the Plenary Sitting  be adopted by this Honourable House 
in the same terms as moved.  
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
[Applause ] 
 
 Honourable Members the Motion on Amendment of Standing Orders to facilitate County 
Execu tive Committee Members Participation in the Plenary Sitting  is adopted by the House.  
 
ADJOUR NMENT  
 
 Honourable Members , the House stands adjourned until Wednesday, 6th December , 2023 
at 2:3 0p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11:21 a.m. 