December 5 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 5th December , 2018  
The House met at 9:23a.m. 
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members  you may be seated, yes Clerk?  
 
PETITIONS  
 
INTERVENTION FROM TH E DETERIORATING STATE O F TRUCK AND UNIT DRI VERS IN MOMBASA  
 
 Hon.  Members  pursuant to S tanding order 202 (1) and 202 (2) we have received a 
Petition seeking for urgent intervention from the deteriorating state of truck and un it drivers in 
Mombasa and Hon.  Members  the petiti on itself touches almost three Co mmittees;  the C ommittee 
of Transport, I nfrastructure and Public W orks, C ommittee on Labour and Social Welfare and 
Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs. D ue to that Hon.  Mem bers we will proceed to form an 
Ad hoc Committee that will look up on on this petition and as per S tanding orders Hon.  Members  
we have got only 60 days to report back to this Honourable  House on the findings and I hereby 
appoint the Chairs of the three diff erent C ommittees and C hairs to c ome with one M ember from  
each C ommittee of L abour, T ransport, L egal affairs plus the Deputy S peaker of the C ounty 
Assembly of Mombasa will be among the A d hoc Committee Members . Thank you Hon.  
Members . Yes next order.  
 
MOTI ON 
 
APPLICATION FOR MEMBE RSHIP AND ADMISSION TO THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY 
ASSOCIATION  
 
 Hon.  Hatimy Mohamed . 
  
 Hon.  Hatimy Mohamed: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir; I beg to move the 
following Motion ... 
 

December 5 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 (Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Hatimy be audible, please . 
 
 Hon.  Hatimy Mohamed:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr Speaker I beg to move the 
following Motion : 
 
THAT AWARE that there exists a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) 
which is an Association of Parliaments of  Commonwealth Countries worldwide;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that the CPA recruits new A ssemblies which are competent to enact 
state, provincial or territorial legislations;  
 
NOTING THAT the Association provides its Members  opportunities to participate in a 
wide and expanding range of activities and programmes, and that Members  are also 
entitled to exchange of knowledge and information on practices and procedures in other 
Parliaments and Legislatures, as well as other benefits including sending delegates to 
annual con ferences upon payment of the Members hip subscription;  
 
This Assembly RESOLVES to apply for Members hip in the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association as follows;  
 
THAT: - 
 
1. The Members hip be effective immediately upon the approval of the application 
by the Gen eral Assembly of the Commonw ealth Parliamentary Association;  
 
2. This Hon.  Assembly agrees to abide by the provisions of the Constitution of the 
Commonw ealth Parliamentary Association;  
 
3. The required Members hip fee be paid to the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association; and , 
 
4. This resolution be  communicated to S ecretariat of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association, immediately following its passage. I beg to move Mr. Speaker 
thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : The seconder.  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : I request Hon.  Tobias to second.  
 
 Hon.  Samba : I beg to second Hon.  Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members  I now propose a question that the 
Motion  on, Application for Members hip and Admission to the Common Wealth Parliamentary 
Associat ion, be discussed in this House as moved. Yes Hon.  Hatimy.  
 
December 5 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika hii H oja 
naona sikua ina mambo mengi isipokuwa ni kitu ambacho tunataka kuwa Mwanachama  wa hii 
Association . Kama tunavyojua Mheshim iwa Spika Common Wealth Parliamentary Association 
ni Mwanachama  wa nchi za Common Wealth na nafikiri twaweza kukumbuka 2010 Kenya ili 
fanya mapokezi ya kongamano  hilo hapa Nairobi na kwa hivi sasa Mheshimiwa Spika kwenye 
kikao cha 49th iliyofanyika Gaboron e, Botswana  Spika wetu Mheshimiwa Muturi aliweza 
kuchaguliwa kuwa Mwenyekiti wa Afrika kwa hii Association . Mheshimiwa Spika hii 
Association  itatufanyia sisi kupata mambo mengi … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Hatimy because of th e Hansard records 
come clear , the Speaker of the Assembly…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika wa Bunge la Taifa  aliweza kuchaguliwa 
kuwa Mwenyekiti wa Afrika kwenye kongomano la 49 lil ilofanyika Gabo rone, nchini Botswana  
July, 2018. Kw a hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika jambo  hili litatunufaisha sisi kama W aheshimiwa na 
pia wafanyi kazi wetu pia wapate ku participate  wapate elimu ile inayotakikana Mheshimiwa 
Spika ambapo sisi twategemea hawa wafanyi kazi wetu wao ndio watupe ushauri sisi ni jambo 
gani kufanya Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo ikiwa tutawanyi ma elimu watakuwa hawana jambo 
lolote la kuweza kutufundisha au kutuambia au kutushauri sisi, hivyo basi  naomba itakuwa ni 
jambo zuri Mheshimiwa Spika sisi tuweze kuungana na hii Common Wealth Associa tion ili 
tuweze na sisi kuendelea mbele. Kwa hivyo naomba wanachama  wenzangu wapitishe hii H oja ili 
Clerk apate kuwasiliana nao na tuweze kuwa Mwanachama  wa hii Association. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Hamida . 
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Noor : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. It is a very 
good idea for this Common Wealth Parliament ary Association because we will have more 
knowledge to go and learn so that we can perform our duties much better and get to know  what 
the other Parliaments are doing. I think this is a very good idea and I support the Motion . Thank 
you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes the Majority Leader . 
 
 Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Nimesimama hapa pia 
kuunga mkono hii hoja ya Mheshimiwa Hatimy. Bwana Spika  hii Association  itakua ni Bunge  
lote kuanzia  Waheshimiwa  mpaka  wafanya kazi . Kwa hivyo ni jambo moja la maana sana 
tukiwa hatutaweza kulifikiria kwa sababu litasaid ia watu wetu na unaambiwa kila siku j aribu 
kufanya jambo ambalo unajua litakunufaisha wewe na mwengineo atakae  kuja. K wa hivyo hata 
tutakapo ondoka tukiwa tuko kwenye association  hii itasaidia hata wale watakaokuwa 
wamekuja,  hivyo basi  Bwana Spika mimi naona hii hata si hoja itakuwa na mushki l, ni pale tu 
wakati ikiwa safari zikiwa zimetokea tujue ni  lazima kwamba ni Bunge na wafanyi kazi 
watasafiri  kwa sababu katika association  huwezi kuchukua watu watatu wa wakilishe kila kitu.  
December 5 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Ni lazima  timu yote  iwe inaweza kuenda, kwa hivyo Bwana Spika ni  hoja moja nzuri na 
ni ya maana na najua watu w engi sana wataipatia faida yake;  japokuwa sisi wengine ni wazee 
tuko karibu na kuenda  nyumbani lakini ni vyema kuwate ngezea watakao kuja, kwa hivyo Bwana  
Spika, nasimama kuunga mkono . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Leila Nyache.  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.)  Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii 
kuchangia mjadala huu uliokuja na Mheshimiwa Hatimy. Mheshimiwa Spika kama tunavyojua 
elimu huwa haina mwisho, na hii elimu ya Common wealth ni heri tujiunge nayo kwa sababu na 
sisi pia tuweze kuwa na uwelewaji zaidi wa hii elimu na pia tusiwe wachoyo kuunga mkono hii 
hoja kwa sababu wenzetu kama hawa wafanyi kazi  pia wako katika huu mjadala kwa hivyo mimi 
ningeomba Nyumba hii tu unge mko no tuweze kusonga mbele. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Tobias Samba.  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  First of all the Motion  that has be en brought I 
think it is timely; the  Motion  of the for mation of participa tion of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association. Hon.  Speaker if you go back to history I think it was first held in 
1989 and pre viously it was known as Empire Parliamentary A ssociation and it has around 180 
branches and Africans being one of its Member s and Kenya not excluded. I t is timely Mr. 
Speaker and the organization advocates for it supports good governance  and democracy and 
human rights;  these are the things that we need to learn as we represent, as we do our role of 
representation and learning does not stop from where we are. W e need also to engage with other 
stakeholders and we need also by attending such like forums we w ill be having exchange 
programs and with time because we have Commonwealth Parliamentary A ssociation and at the 
same time we h ave its branches, Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians and also 
Commonwealth Youth P arliament. We need also to extend so tha t the representation of women, 
Commonwealth Women P arliamentarian advocate s for higher number s of women representation 
in both P arliament . At the same time we have Commonwealth Youth P arliament that also 
advocates for y outhful representation in both H ouses , so Hon.  Speaker it is timely only that when 
we will be havin g such invitations I think the C lerk should be neutral so that all Memb ers attend. 
We normally have difficulties when it comes to convincing the administ ration so that even the 
staff attend such like forums ; it should be open for us all and for e very Member to attend such 
forums.  Hon.  Speaker i beg to support the Motion , thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Junior K yaka. 
 
 Hon.  Wambua : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningetaka kuunga mkono H oja hi i 
ambayo  ni ya muhimu sana imeletwa na M heshimiwa Hatimy ; ni muhimu sana kutembeleana  na 
kutangamana katika mambo kama  haya ili tuweze kuso ma zaidi jinsi tunavyoendeleza M abunge 
yetu, naomba kuiunga mkono.  
 
December 5 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          104 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Members  I think it i s now time 
to call upon the mover of the Motion  to respond putting in consideration the Members  want to 
travel with the A ssociation . Hon.  Hatimy, yes.  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante M heshimiwa kama jana nilivyozungumza hapa 
kusema kuwa kila siku inaonekana k una maendeleo makubwa ndani ya B unge letu kuwa watu 
wanapima ile hoja na wa kaizungumzia vilivy o. Kwa hivyo M heshimiwa Spika mimi sina mengi 
ya kusema isipokuwa ni kuwahakikishia Wanachama  kuwa nimefanya utafiti na hata K atiba 
yake pia niko nayo ni kuwa ni jambo ambalo litaweza kutusaidia sisi sana kwa sababu kwa 
exchange programs  ikiwa tutaweza kuingia itakuwa kwenye nchi za C ommonwealth watu 
wanaenda wanasoma na wana angalia wakija hapa wanaweka ile  elimu  yao vile inavyotakikana . 
Kwa hivyo nashukuru  Wanachama  kwa kuifahamu na kusema wanaiunga mkono na nasema 
ahsante kwa Wanachama  na tuendelee na moy o huu ulioweza kufanya Kaunti  001 iwe iko ju u 
zaidi. A hsante.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Hatimy before I put a question I think you 
have considered the fees in the budget, they are considered. Hon.  Members  I now stand to put a 
question that the Motion  on application for Members hip and admission to Commonwealth 
Parliamentary A ssociation as moved by Hon.  Hatimy be passed in this Honourable  House . 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
 Yes C lerk. 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon.  Members  there being no o ther business the House stands adjourned until today at 
2:30p .m. 
 
The House rose at 9:45 a.m. 
 
 