November 12, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          105 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday , 13th November, 2019  
The House met at 10:33 a.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Ah arub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members and visitors you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM T HE CHAIR  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon. Members,  I wish to take this opportunity to remind you of our constitutional as 
Members of the County Assembly . We have to legislate on various issues affecting the residents 
of Mombasa County,  I therefore urge you to bring Motions, Bills, Committee reports and any  
other relevant business to this vibrant House and to offer solutions to the problems of Mombas a 
people who have elected us here. So with those short remarks Hon. Members please let  us try 
and bring business to the House , thank you. Yes, Clerk next order?  
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON HEA LTH  SERVICES  HON. KIBWANA SWALEH ON 
PRO VISION OF MOBILE CLI NICS IN MAG OGONI WARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya , Chairperson Committee on  Health, please respond to 
the Statement.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Ho n. Speaker for this opportunity . Hon. Speaker  I 
stand here on behalf of the Committee of Health Service s, to say that we wrote a letter on 7th 
November on the is sue that was raised in this Hon ourable  House, but up to date  we have  not got  
any response from the Department of Health Service . Hon. Speaker , I think we will just give a 
reminder on the same issue and if they do  not reply back I think normally we do s ummon. So I 
wish to ask my colleague s who raised this question  to give me another week up to nex t week so 
that we give this Hon ourable  House a good response of this issue . Thank you. 

November 12, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          105 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor Page 2  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ali Shomari?  
 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii, 
nimemsi kia Mhe shimiwa mwenza ambaye ni Mwenye  Kiti wa Afya  lakini ningependa 
kumwambia kwamba Magogoni tumekaa kwa mda mrefu sana bila kuwa na Hospitali ama 
mobile clinics . Kwa hivyo tungemuomba Bwana Mwenyekiti kwa roho ya hurum a, atuangalie 
kwa jicho la huru ma, Magogoni tunaumia kwa hivyo atufanyie bidii na tukikumbuka kwamba 
first budget  ya 2018/2019 ilikuwa imewekwa kwamba Magogoni kutawekwa mobile clinic  
mpaka sasa tumeenda bajeti ya pili hatujaona mobile clinic . Kwa hivyo namuomba Mheshim iwa 
Mwenza atufanyie mkazo  tuweze kupata hio mobile clinic . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ali Shomari . Yes, Hon. Amur Murfad?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Ahsante Bwana Spika . Bwana Spi ka nasimama kutoa kongole kwa 
watu wa  Idara ya Wazima moto  Kaunti ya  Mombasa ; jana ku litokea moto mkubwa sana lakini  
watu wetu waliweza kuukabili kisawasawa wakisaidiana na watu wa KPA na vijana wa Huduma 
kwa Jamii, National Youth Service na kulikuwa hakukupatikana maafa yoyote , wagonjwa wote 
walipata kunusurika na  wakapambana nao kisawa sawa. Nataka nitoe kongole kwa Serikali ya 
Kaunti ya Mombasa kwa kuon yesha kwamba wamejizatiti katika kutenda n a kutumikia 
wananchi wa Mombasa . Ni Kongole kwa Kaunti ya Mombasa hasa wa Idara  ya Wazima moto  
Mheshimiwa Spik a. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Murfad. So Hon. Kibwana Swaleh you said 
we give you one week? So we are giving you one week, I hope by next week we  will have your 
response.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Hon. Speaker I think it is our duty  to push the Executive to give 
the response  because the issue that has been raised, it  is a touching issue .  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . So we are giving you one week, so Clerks next 
week make sure we have it in the O rder paper the response from Hon. Kibwana. Yes, Clerk next 
order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Wednesday 13th November , 2019 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10:40 a.m. 
 
 
 