September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 21st September , 2016  
The House met at 2. 35pm. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I stand under  Standing O rder 31, (2) and i order the 
Sergeant At Arms to ring the bell...  
(Sergeant At Arms rung quorum bell)  
       Sergeant At A rms ple ase ring the second bell, Chief W hip we shall be forced to adjourn if 
there will be no quorum after the second bell…..  
(Sergeant At Arms rung quorum bell for the second time)  
       Yes Clerk ascertain i f there is quorum?  
(Clerk confirmed quorum)  
PAPER  
       Yes Leader of M ajority.  
       Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I take this opportunity to lay 
the R eport on  lack of representation  of the County A ssembly  in various C ounty activ ities.  Please 
may I table the R eport.  
(Paper laid)  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Leader of M ajority . 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker  I wish t o give a  Notice of M otion that 
this House adopts the R eport on  lack of representation of the County A ssembl y in various 
County activities l aid on the T able on Wednesday 21st September , 2016.  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       Yes L eader of Majority .  
       Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani : Mr. Speaker now let me t ake this opportunity to move a 
Motion that this House adopts  the Report on  lack of representation of the County Assembly in 
various C ounty activities laid  on the T able on Wed nesday 21st September 2016.  Let me take this 
opportunity to request  Hon. Chief Whip to second the M otion . 
       Chief Whip Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim : I second the M otion . 
(Question proposed)  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I do n ow propose a question tha t the M otion on  lack 
of representation of the County Assembly in various C ounty activities be  debated in this House . 
(Question proposed and a greed  to) 
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2        Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani : Now Mr. Speaker  let me read the R eport on lack  of 
representation of the County A ssembly in ASK  show, Mombasa.. . 
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Leader of M ajority with all due respect I think you 
have to rectify the Report because the Report before me is a R eport on non representation of the 
Count y Assembly in ASK show Mombasa.  
       And the issue at hand wa s representation of the County Assembly in various C ounty 
activities and not to be precise the ASK show.  
       The person who raised this issue was much concerned on let's say football activ ities, and 
other various activities so yo u let your office rectify this R eport.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker i think when he said various he 
mentioned about  the ASK show ; why we did not have a stand that 's why we started on the 
investigation on the matter of ASK show although various means many areas . 
       If you can allow me because this is the tabling we thought we should stick on the issue why 
we did not participate on the ASK show, and we just came w ith that R eport on why we d id not 
participate in the ASK show . 
       Please Mr. S peaker if you will allow me , if you allow m e so that I continue with this R eport 
and there is so m uch I know I f I had struggled with various R eports I know in this House I’ll be 
coming with so many R eports and am ready  to come with other Reports.  
       This was  mentioned why we did not participate in the ASK show , I think this is why Mr. 
Speaker I have just come with one of the reason s of the various issues which were raised , Mr. 
Speaker if you can al low me. .. 
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : As for your prayers you have clearl y stated that they 
are various Reports that are coming to the H ouse so you can pr oceed but be informed that the 
House will need to get other R eports as soon as possible.  
       Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani : Thank you Mr. Speaker, now let me take this 
opportunity to  present the Report...   
(Leader of Majority H on. Mwidani read report  on non -representation of County Assembly in 
ASK Show M ombasa A ugust 2016 ) 
 
MEMBERS  
Hon. Ha misi Mwidani  Vice Chairman  
Hon. Maimuna Salim   Member  
Mr. Salim Juma   Secretary  
Ms. Patricia Nzioka   Member  - CASB  
 
  
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3        1. Introduction  
       This is a R eport of the findings of the County Assembly Service Board (CASB) following a 
statement raised b y Hon . Patrick Siminyu on non -representation of the County Assembly in the 
ASK  Show Mombasa.   
       1.1 Appointme nt of a T askforce  
       On 2nd August, 2016 County Assembly Servic e Board resolved to nominate a T askforce to 
spearhead the preparations of  the same. The t eam comprised of the following M embers:  
Ms Patricia  Nzioka   Chairperson  
Ms. Zakia Abdi   Vice chairperson  
Ms. Mariam Menza    Member  
Mr. Yusuf Abubakar   Member  
Mr. Hassan Mwarizo   Member  
Mr. Hafsa Kirao   Member  
Mr. Hassan Mwachimako  Mem ber 
 
1.2 Site Visit  
The T askforce undertook a site visit to Mkomani Show Ground on 8th August 2016 and met with 
Ms. Jennifer Wanzau , Branch Accountant and Mr. Amos Kirui Branch Co -ordinator to asse ss 
the status of the County Assembly stand with respect to:  
Electrical Connection , renovation of the Speaker's l aunch, Wall painting, General cleanliness 
and any other issue related to the stand . 
2. Observations and Findings  
2.1 The taskforce was informed that the Assembly owed Ksh s 700,000 to ASK for the rent arrears 
of the year 2014 & 2015 . The debt had to be settled in  order to be allocated a stand this year.   
2.2 It was brought to our attention, the usual stand was allocated  to Independent Electoral and 
Boundaries Commission (IEBC). The ASK management was wil ling to re -allocate the Assembly 
to any other available stand.  
2.3 The T askforce was also informed that the current year should be paid upfront before being 
allocated a stand . 
2.4 The management handed the T askforce an opportunity to identify another stan d that was 
used by Kenya Methodist University and we were supposed to clear the outstanding debt before 
allocation.  
2.5 The co -ordinator informed the team that communication on confirmation of exhibitors 
participation for the County Assembly was done throu gh the Department of Agriculture .  
2.6 The entry passes for the year 2016 were acquired through an LSO .  
3. Conclusion  
3.1 The T askforce found out that the Assembly had a  debt of Ksh s 700,000 to settle with the ASK      
Management before any further prep arations of the stand which its payment was Ksh s 250,000.  
 
 
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4        4. Recommendations  
4.1 There is need to clear the outstanding debt of Ksh s 933,500 to ASK, Mombasa. This would 
enable the Assembly participate in any other exhibitions effectively.   
4.2 Th e Assembly needs to allocate adequate funds for trade shows and exhibitions from the 
initial Ksh  500,000.  
4.3 Communication from the ASK management pertaining the stand should be done through the 
County Assembly Clerk and not the County Executive Member fo r Agriculture.  
 
(Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani ended reading the Report)  
       Thank you Mr. Speaker that is the R eport of non-representation of the County A ssembly in 
the ASK show Mombasa.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Now your  Motion add som e value to your Motion 
for at least M embers to u nderstand more because it is a M otion Hon.  Leader of M ajority . 
       Leader of Majority Hon. Hamisi Mwidani : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think it is something 
very straight forward . 
       You know you cannot d o anything without having cash and the problem of this issue is 
because we did not have enough cash . 
       So Mr. Speaker I would urge this H ouse the time of preparing the budget we should also 
consider this issue very seriously because actually what made  us not to succeed in this we didn’t 
have enough cash on the side of the budget . 
       So I would urge the H ouse to think of the allocation of the issue of the stand in the ASK 
show becaus e it is a very big failure to be seen that the show is there we did  not participate . 
       So Mr. Speaker I would like to emphasize to the M embers to think about it in the f uture  so 
that we don’t get any failure to participate in such event , thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Amur. 
       Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Sp eaker, just to add to what our Majority L eader has said it is a 
fact that failing to plan is planning to fail in the A ssembly because anything that we are supposed 
to do must be budgeted and if we have not budgeted there is no way that we can access that 
money . 
       It is not only the show Mr. Speaker, several in vitations have arrived in this A ssembly but the 
MCAs do not attend even in Nairobi they have been requesting us to go to participate in their 
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 Nairobi show but due t o the luck of money and this is a major problem, we do not do it at the 
budget state and then we want to do things . 
       Unless we agree during the budget Mr. Speaker , that  we capture all our issues before the 
budget is passed other than that issues of p articipating in various activities will be a no way zone , 
thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Simi nyu. 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr.  Speaker, it is high time as a H ouse we have to allocate wa ys 
in which we can part icipate in  each and every event that requires our participation.  
       Mr. Speaker the Mombasa show was a very important event and we have done a lot and yet 
citizens have no information of whatever we are doing . 
       When we participate in such activi ties Mr. Speaker it is going to ensure that the public 
understands and know what as an Assembly we have achieved so far since its inception . 
       Mr. Speaker I beg this H ouse when the coming budget comes let us put necessary 
allocations so that we can pa rticipate in each and every event not only in Mombasa ; it was the 
other day we had a conference somewhere around Meru  and other small C ounties had their 
stands but us as Mombasa C ounty we could not have one as  the  A ssembly . 
       Mr. Speaker we need to improve on that so that we can have a good relationship with the 
citizens because citizens are being told lies about whatever we are doing, It is  an opportunity to  
tell them the truth  about  the  Assembly , thank you.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalim u): Yes Hon. Opeya.  
       Hon.  Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker, that the executive had a stand there at the show 
ground , all the dep artments were represented  so it must have been confusing  for them to have a 
stand and us  not to have a stand . 
       We are serving part of the same government unless maybe they a re two governments in  
Mombasa C ounty ...! 
       It is in order for the Finance S ecretary to pay for our stand, we have our M embers there to 
go and interact with the public and expl ain to them what we are doing a  lot of  propaganda out 
there is  because we are not there to interact with the public in events like these where 200,000 t o 
300,000 people are at the Show ground . 
       That would have been a good way for them to come  to our stand  and  unders tand what  we  
are doing , thank you very much.    
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6        Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika; kwanza ningeshukuru Kiongozi wa 
Walio Wengi katika hili Bunge letu kutuletea hii Ripoti ambayo  ni Ripoti nzuri sana .  
       Mheshimiwa S pika la kunishangaza ni hili deni ambalo tuko nalo ambayo liko karibu 
milioni moja kwa ajili ya stand  yetu ambayo imeandikwa kwa recommendation . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika jambo la kuongezea kabisa ni vyema tuweze ku fanya matayarishi yetu  
ya  kibanda chetu tu ndani ya Show mapema kwa sababu hata mwaka huu pia hata tiketi za 
kuingia Show pia zilikuwa kizungumkuti ambayo tulipewa hata dakika za mwisho hata 
hujajipanga unataka kwenda Show vipi unataka kuenda na watu wak o vipi ili mtu aka weze 
kujipanga . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika nashukuru kwa ajili ya hii R ipoti lakini naomba mwaka ujao  
tuweze kujipanga mapema na tuf uatilizie haya ambayo tumeletewa katika recommendation kuwa 
mwaka ujao Clerk wetu wa County A ssemb ly aweze kuangalia haya mambo ya tusiachie tena 
executive . 
       Kwa sababu kwa njia ya executive  tunaona kama tuna ama tunafinywa kwa sababu kama ni 
mambo na ukulima yote yanaingia hapa kwa County A ssembly  na ni sisi pia tunaenda kuangalia 
yale mambo amb ayo yametengenezwa na kiwanda ambayo imesimamiwa na ukulima  na ni wale 
wale watu tunawawakilisha hapa ndio pia wanaenda katika hivi viban da vyote.  
       Kwa hivyo mi mi naomba tuzingatie hii recommendation  ya mwisho ya kuwa mwaka ujao 
iweze kuangaliwa na t upewe ripoti zetu mapema  kama ni hizo tiketi tujue tutapewa tiketi ngapi 
na tupewe mapema , ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Tem porary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Onje .   
       Hon.  Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika nimesimama hapa kuunga mkono ; ni serikali 
kwa sababu vile tunavyojua ni kwamba ser ikali ya K aunti ina mikoni miwili ; mkono moja ni 
executive  na mkono mwingine ni legislature  ambayo ni sisi hapa . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika waka ti tunaenda Show tunafaa tuwe na kitengo yetu ile ambayo 
tumetenga  kwa minajili ya kwenda Show. 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ni vizuri sisi kama W awakilishi tuonekane pale ; hii ni ya kwamba 
ikiwezekana ili W aheshimiwa waende pale ionekan e na hata wageni wakifik a wanajua Mombasa 
ni raha kila M heshimiwa apate hata kama ni quarter per diem  ndio aweze kwenda huko manake 
ni wapate per diem  waende kule hata siku tatu na vilevile waweze kupata …hata kama mabibi 
zao …..uko na watoto waende huko sio kuambiwa shukisha watoto ingisha gari nenda ukalipie 
watoto kule una aibika . 
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7        Wajua saa zing ine gari zinapita kama saa hii tukitengeneza mam bo kama yale itakuwa 
mzuri . Ahsante.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim?  
       Hon.  Ibrahim  Kondo: Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika nimesimama pia kuunga  mkono hoja ya 
Walio Wengi M heshimiwa Mwidani ; itakuwa ni mambo ya kusikitisha ikiwa maonyesho ya 
Mombasa yatakuwa yanaendelea na kuna siku am bayo imetengewa G avana wetu kwenda 
kufungua rasmi maonyesho yale alafu iwe sisi kama Nyumba kuu tunaofanya sheria zote za 
Mombasa tunakosa kuwa  na sehemu yetu ya kuonyesha yale yanaendelea hapo . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika hili ni jambo ambalo lazima tulichukulie na uzito  kwa sababu ni aibu 
kubwa vile Show inaendelea wakati wowote kila eneo lina  Waw akilishi leo hii s isi kama 
Mombasa County A ssembly  tunashi ndwa na kuweka stand  pale katika maonyesho ya kilimo . 
       Inashindwa na mashirika madogo  madogo ambayo wako na stand  zao katika maonyesho 
hayo na sisi ndio tunakubalia mambo yote . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika ningeliomba kupit ia kwa uongozi w a Kiti chako  pamoja na 
Kiongozi wa Walio W engi jambo hili liweze kuangaliwa kwa upana na ili lipi mwe liwekwe 
kwenye mizani.  
       Mheshimiwa spika nikims ikiza ningelipenda pia kuomba K amati il iyotengenezwa 
inayohusika na ma swala haya inakuja na deni ya z aidi ya laki saba tujue ni kipindi cha mda gani 
tulianza kudaiwa isiwe ni zaidi ya miaka kumi imekuwa twadaiwa na hatuelewi deni lile 
limeingia kwa muda gani . 
       Nafikiri mwaka wa kwanza tulikuwa na stand  yetu na lab da ni miaka miwili tu ambayo 
tunadai wa sijui kwa kila mwaka stand  inalipiwa laki moja na nusu ; kupitia kwa uongozi wa ile 
Kamati iliyokwenda ituonyeshe ni kiwango gani kinalipiwa kila mwaka . Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Mwidani respond to the M otion . Yes Hon.  
Hatimy?  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  I am not disputing Mr. Speaker but I want the know what is 
costing for M embers Ksh.8 ,000 per head for M embers to go to the show ; at the show we take 
Ksh.8 ,000 by 43 you get Ksh.344,000 . 
       Mr. Speaker as we al l know we have a problem with the budget ceiling so we need to fight 
with the CRA and our budget  in the S enate to look into the problem we are having because it’s a  
headache . 
       Our budget is Ksh.618M illion , Ksh.618M illion  minus Ksh.400M illion , salaries will gi ve you  
Ksh.200M illion to run this H ouse. 
       So I think Mr. S peaker we need to fight first to get money then we will be attending every 
show . 
       So before we pass this M otion we must look into this issue first so that we get money to 
enable us to pa rticipa te in whatever function or any other event , that is my contribution Mr. 
Speaker . 
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8        Leader of Majority Hon. Mwidani : Thank you Mr. Speaker I would also like to give some 
more information . 
       It is good to know the process that money was from 2014, 2015, 2016 ; every year we are 
supposed to pay Ksh.300, 000 and we have never paid that money that is why it has come to 
Ksh.900 ,000 and something . 
       So Mr. Speaker I will start by sayin g that I am very happy with the M embers who have 
supported this ; actually we should also cons ider the statement made by the Chairman of F inance 
and we should also try to fight so that we increase our ceiling , after increasing our ceiling there 
are so many things we can achieve , actually everything cannot be done without money . 
       So M r. Speaker we are very happy for the Members who have supported this M otion ; 
actually let’s see the other issue which I have brought out. Thank you M r. Speaker.  
       Temp orary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Hamisi Musa the Leader of 
Majority and now that the mover has responded to the Motion and the Members have discussed 
this R eport fully I do stand to put a question that the House adopts this R eport wi th the 
recom mendations in this R eport and those bro ught forward in this Assembly.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
       So Leader of M ajority the other recommendation that has been brought forward you are  
supposed to have them in this R eport, thank you.  
       Leader of  Majority Hon.  Mwidani : Thank you .  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
       Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker before I move the Motion I seek leave to 
seek permission from this Hon.  House Mr. Speaker to amend prayer n umber two to read 7.00 am 
instead of 8.00 am and 6.00pm instead of 5.00 pm.  
       Mr. Speaker I seek permission from 6.00 to 6.00 then Mr. Speaker … 
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just come clear but I think that….  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  The amendments are to read 6.00 instead of 8.00 and 6.00 instead  
of 5.00.  6.00 am to 6.00 pm.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed with the Motion .  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I wish to move the 
following Motion about the  Control of Misuse of County Government Vehicles.  
  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy Moved  the Motion ) 
"Mr Speaker Sir,  I beg to move the following motion;  
       THAT AWARE that there is a standard of conduct that prohibits a public officer or employee 
from using any government property for other than official purposes;  
       FURTHER AWARE that use of government -owned or leased vehicl es is restricted to official 
purposes and must never be used for private purpose such as personal business, errands or 
leisure;  
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  9        CONCERNED that some County government vehicles are being spotted in odd hours at 
awkward places such as bars;  
       NOTING that it is the responsibility of the Chief Officer to ensure that government vehicles 
are properly used.  
       This Assembly resolves  and urges  the County government to;  
1. Create a special unit within the County government inspectorate tasked with the mandate 
of monitoring t he use of all County government vehicles.  
2. Ensure that no government vehicle is on the road especially outside office hours (6.00am 
– 6.00pm) unless on official use or carrying out an emergency. In such an instance, the 
authority for use of the vehicle sha ll be in writing by the officer -in-charge of the station 
where the vehicle is attached.  
3. Ensure that all government vehicles are branded w ith the name of the respective County 
department so as to ease identification as well as curb misuse of such vehicles.  
4. Sensitize County officers or members of the pub lic to report in detail to the Chief Officer 
any government vehicle suspected of being engaged in unauthorized private use ". 
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy tabled)  
 
       Thank you and I propose Hon.  Amur Murfad to second this Motion. Thank you Mr. Speake r. 
 
(Applause ) 
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I rise to second the Motion and I wish to 
contribute at the same time Mr. Speaker ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : You are allowed to continue .  
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr.  Speaker this is not the first time this Motion is brought her e 
although its over six months now this same Motion was brought in this Hou se but due to 
misunderstanding Members did not understand the Motion content  and it was rej ected by this 
House Mr. Speaker . 
       But the reality and the truth of matter Mr. Speaker the County has incur red expe nses in 
misuse of this vehicles ; I will give an example Mr. Speaker Hon.  Amur is travel ling from 
Mombasa t o Kisumu by air, again his official vehicle is driven from Momba sa all the way to 
meet him at Kisumu Airport . 
       Mr. Speaker this is a scenario that we saw it , so why we are saying that if somebody is going 
for an official duty in Kisumu and air ticket have been purchased it should be cheaper than to 
hire a vehi cle from Kisumu for the number of days the Hon.  Member is there than we incur the 
expenses that the car travel all the way from Mombasa to Kisumu . 
       Then Mr. Speaker there's fuel cost there, there's vehicle allowance and the body guard and 
the PA are included in that trip . 
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
10        Mr. Speaker it has become unbearable burden and in this scenario we will be consuming 
more than half a million despite the air ticket hav ing been paid . 
       So Mr. Speaker this Motion was broug ht in this House with good intention but by then 
people did not understand what we are saying ; we were trying to recover about half a million for 
each vehicle that is being distributed and again within our County in Mombasa we still see these 
cars parked at the bars unless we still a special unit to monitor these vehicles because misusing 
should not be left free . 
       Mr. Speaker I request Hon.  Hatimy to charge the owner of the vehicle and we should come 
up with a law  that those who are caught misusing it a certain amount should be charged and not 
the driver . 
       Mr. Speaker Sir am saying why not a driver because the driver obeys the direction of his 
boss but at the end of the day if we charge the driver we will be unfair to the driver , the authority 
should charge the owner for misusing that vehicle. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now propose that this Motion on misuse of County 
government vehicles be debated in this House ...  
(Question proposed and agreed t o) 
       Yes Hon.  Siminyu . 
       Hon. Simi nyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker we really have good laws but 
implementing is a problem and even the check unit it reports in a specific time not all the time.  
       Mr. Speaker we need to have our own ; I have witness ed this, I have seen many vehi cles 
belonging to the C ounty government in weird places and you even see the person using the car 
doing business in a bar . 
       Mr. Speaker if we have our own Check Unit which is going to check our vehicles and 
whoever is responsible to be charged and the money deducted from his salary . 
       In fact Hon.  Hatimy you should come up with relevant laws which we use such salary 
deduction due to the misuse of the County government vehicles ; if we go that way it will means 
people with these ca rs will become responsible .  
       I think this House has to look into this matter properly so that we can have tax payers money 
be pro tected from those who have the County vehicles , and who  think they can use it any  howly .  
       As I said our role is oversight , as an Assembly we will do justice to the citizen doing our 
oversight well and if possibl e we will go to curb misuse of County vehicles we are going to have 
a plus as an Ass embly . 
       I fully support this Motion and I beg Hon.  Hatimy to come with laws which ar e going to 
cover or cater for this, if we have laws then we are going to do much better. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very m uch Mr. Speaker for spotting me . Mr. Speaker I think the 
Motion brought by Hon.  Moh amed Hatimy is a very important Motion with regards to the way 
they represent our people in this House.  
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
11        Mr. Speaker I think that some of the officers that have been appointed for hi gher positions 
just as other Members have been saying here are misusing thos e powers which have been given 
to them and it is important we as the oversight players in this government to come up with real or 
proper laws and am proposing that the Motion mover having brought this as a Motion . 
       We expect this to be turn ed in to a Bill so that it becomes law so that we can as well give 
proper powers to the Inspectorate Department because we know there's a department which is 
under the National government and which deals with the government vehicles . 
       We should come up with our own but it should be turn ed in to a law so that we can compel 
those people who are supposed to work properly but at the moment Mr. Speaker having brought 
here as a Motion it is like a dog without teeth it cannot bite . 
       So we need to ensure that the Inspe ctorate Department is even in proper powers to execute 
its mandate as per the law a nd I think this is a very good Motion and it would be better if it turns 
to a Bill therefore giving powers to those people who needs to implement this. I support this 
Motion  thank you.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :Yes Hon.  Boma . 
       Hon. Boma:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia naunga mkono hoja hii ambayo 
imeletwa na  Mbunge Maalum Mheshimiwa Moham ed Hatimy . 
       Kwa kusema kweli magari yakiwekewa masaa ya kutumika yatakuwa na heshima ; tunaona 
mara nyingi magari ya serikali ambayo hutumika kwa masaa ambayo ni ya usiku , magari haya 
mengi yao hubeba vitu vya hatari , hubeba mihadarati na hubeba hata vitu ambavyo havifaa 
kutumika kwa binadamu.  
       Kwa hivyo magari haya yakiwa yanawekwa masaa fulani tutaweza kuja kusevu pesa nyingi ; 
magari haya usiku mengi yao huwa unayakuta yamewekwa pembeni yatumia mafuta na mafuta 
hayo ni pesa za serikali ambazo zinatumika . 
       Magari haya haya pia yatafanya yakiwekewa muda maalum yatakikana m adereva wetu 
wawe wakiheshimika , kwa h ivyo naomba kuunga mkono hoja hii. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Opeya . 
       Hon. Opeya:  Thank you M r. Speaker . Mr. Speaker this Motion was brought some time 
back ; even the one for tickets but implementing is the problem.  
       These cars are misused , this is a problem even we saw it during the Jubilee launch 
government vehicles used and we saw them entering the Kasarani Ground.  
       If you stay in Nyali around Nyali Cinemax you will find a car of the Inspectorate parking 
around there and those people insid e there are chewing miraa . 
       I ask myself what they are doing there so the Inspectorate themselves are misusing the 
vehicles so the first people we should start with is the Inspectorate ...  
(Applause ) 
       This motion in fact as Hon.  Saad said it needed to be fast  tracked to become a Bill to curb 
the misuse of these vehicles. Thank you.  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Chairman Implementation Committee ... 
September 21,  2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       107 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
12 (Laughter and a pplause ) 
       Am sure you will work on this issue ; as you have said Hon.  Chairman take the issue with 
your Committee ... 
(Laughter and a pplause ) 
       so that we get proper result. Yes Hon.  Hatimy respond to your Motion . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri Members  wamemaliza na Chairman  
wa Implementation  majukumu haya ni yake .  
       Kwa hivyo yeye ndiye anayetakikana kuwa atashika bend era mbele kuhakikisha jambo hili 
limefanyika Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
(Laughter and a pplause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika nawashukuru Members kwa ku niunga mkono na tukiweza kuzuia jambo 
hili tutaweza ku save almost  100, 000 ambazo ilikuwa tukiwalipia kwa kampuni ya mafuta na 
tutaweza kupata pesa za kwenda ASK showground ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshi miwa Spika ningeweza kushukuru Members  na ni jambo muhimu sana ili 
tuweze na hii mambo ya branding  ni muhimu sana Clerk  ahakikishe kwamba amepeleka jambo 
hili mbele ili  lichukuliwe kwa haraka sana na chairman  wa implementation ahakikishe kwamba 
limetimia. A hsante.  
(Laughter and a pplause ) 
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Chairman for Implementation do you have anything 
to add ...? 
       Hon. Opeya:  No. 
(Question put)  
       Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you I do stand now to put a que stion that this 
House adopts this Motion by Hon.  Hatimy on misuse of County government vehicles with the 
resolutions brought before this Hon.  House .  
(Question put and a greed to) 
(Applause ) 
       Yes Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
       The House stand  adjourned unti l tomorrow 2.30 p m in the afternoon.  
The House rose at 3.33pm.  
 
          
   