September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 22nd September, 2016  
The House  met at 2.49pm.  
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats , yes C lerk. 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker I seek leave in this House  to table the 
Motion . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is a N otice…  
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : So I w ish to give Notice of Motion in the O rder P aper, so I seek 
leave if I can be given a chance today  to read it as a M otion . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : First read the Notice of M otion . 
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Ok Mr. Speak er I beg to move the following Notice of M otion;  
       “THAT AWARE that the defunct Municipal Council of Mombasa had pending legal fees 
which are yet to be settled by the County G overnment of Mombasa , which is it ’s successor by 
virtue of S ection 58 and 59 of the Urban Areas and Cities Act, 2011.  
       FURT HER AWARE that the C ounty Government of Mombasa inherited liabilities amounting  
to over Kshs. 2.3 billion allegedly for goods supplied , legal fees and services rendered 
previously ; 
       CONCERNED  that the law firm of O.M Robinson & Company has a pending claim against 
the County Government  from the defunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa era amounting to 
Kshs.700 million ; 
       CONCERNED  Mr. Speaker that the same firm of A dvocates also auctioned several 
properties within the Mombasa County during the transit ion period purportedly under the 
instructions of the County government ; 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  2        NOTING Mr. Speaker that the defunct Transition A uthority did not hand over assets and 
liabilities of the defunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa and that some of the liabilities in cluding 
legal fees may be fraudulent and false intended to misappropriate public funds wrongfully.  
       So I urge this County Assembly to resolve that the County Assembly Public Accounts 
Committee to investigate the following:  
       1. The inherited debt stock pile of the defunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa be subjected 
to investigation including forensic audit to establish authenticity and propriety ; 
       2. That the County T reasury to su spend all payments of debts to A dvocate s and suppliers of 
the d efunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa era pending further investigations ; 
       3. Investigate all the departments involved in the afore mentioned matters ; 
       4. PAC to invite the Ethics and Anti Corruption Commission on the same, thank you Mr. 
Speaker ”. 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank y ou, permission granted for the M otion 
to be moved in this Hon. House  when it comes to that order, yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon. Zainab Mumba . 
       Hon. (Ms) Zainab M umba : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I have a statement on status of 
garbage collection in the C ounty  pursuant to Standing Order 40 (1). 
       I seek a statement on  garbage collection within the C ounty, the County G overnment has 
established garba ge collection areas across the C ounty, however  these areas are poorly managed;  
 (Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Mumba read)  
       “ I wish to request the Leader of M ajority to follow up and bring forward a comprehensive 
report concerning how  garbage is managed within the C ounty ; especially on the following 
Wards, Kibuluni in Bofu Ward, M t Sinai  in Timbwani Ward, Lights in Kongowea Ward, 
Hongera Mjambere W ard, VOK in Ziwa  la Ng’ombe  Ward, and Toa Tugawe in Bamburi ”. 
(End of statement)  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  3        The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Than k you Chair of E nvironment ; as you have 
stated on the statement the L eader will respond, Clerk write to the Leader of Majority, yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
       Hon. Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I have a statement on request for 
fumigation  exercise to be carried out in the Mombasa County.  
       Mr. Speaker I rise to seek a statement pursuant to Standing O rder 40(1) on the increased 
infestation of pests e.g mosquitoes, bedbug s and other insects within the C ounty especially in 
Magon go.  
(Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi read)  
FUMIGATION AND CONTROL OF INSECTS IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
       “Mr. Speaker Sir , the C ounty Government is mandated to conduct regular fumigation i n 
residential areas within the C ounty with a view of control of the pests and reduce  the spread of 
disease such as malaria.  
       I therefore seek a detailed statement from the relevant department on when and how the 
County G overnment will fumigate infested areas ”. 
(End of statement)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you  Hon. Mary, the E nvironment 
Committee will work on this issue and bring that statement in a week ’s time because it is a 
concern and it is also a health issue because without fumigation it will expose residents to a lot of 
diseases rather in the said areas . 
       So the Environment C ommittee work on this issue in a week ’s time, yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon. Zainab .  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab Said Ali : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii .  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you H on., she is in order and she can 
continue, Hon. Zainab Ali continue . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  4        Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab Said Ali : Ahsante sa na kwa kunipa hii nafasi Bwana S pika, mimi niko 
na taarifa  kuhusu malori ya kubeba taka ; yale malori ya kubeba taka ambayo yanakaa kila mtaa 
yanabeba taka na zile taka zinajaa mpaka zapita kiasi . 
       Sasa zikiondoka zile taka zina mwagwa taka kila mahali ya ani tok a pale yanapotoka mpaka 
yafike M wakirunge yanamwaga taka kila mahali, ambapo jambo nzuri yale magari yangekuwa 
na kifunikio a ma neti yakafunike zile taka alafu sasa yale magari yakiwa yanaenda zile taka 
zimefunik wa na ile neti mpaka pale mahali zinapofika kumwagwa ikatolewa  ile neti na 
kumwagwa zile taka.  
       Kwa sababu zile taka zina uchafu mwingi ; kuna pampers , kuna mambo m achafu mengi yako 
mle alafu bado yapita mitaani , kwenye ile mitaa badala ya taka kutolewa inaongeza taka pale . 
       Kwa hivyo ningeomba yale magari yawe na neti ya kufunika na yale magari ya kubeba 
mchanga malori yanabeba mchanga pia bila kufunikwa kukiw a na upepo ile michanga yaruka, 
wale wanaopeleka mahonda wenye kupeleka kwa mbio , wanaumia . 
       Vile ile michanga inawarukia kwenye macho ama kukiwa na upepo mwingi inaumiza , kwa 
hivyo ningeomba ikiwezekana itolewe sheria kuwa yale magari yote yawe na k ifuniko, a hsante, 
chandarua ya kufunika a hsante … 
(Applause)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Committee on E nvironment also work on 
this respond if what ha s been raised is possible, yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon. Zainab Mumba . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir I have a statement on status of 
drainage on the old Mombasa -Malindi road an d Kongowea near Badria Hospital.  
       The Mombasa -Malindi road drainage system is very poor , and  it has blocked completely, 
water  cannot flow well and this can cause flooding during the rain y season, I therefore request 
the contractor to take action and push to unblock the drainage system . Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The same issue goes back t o your C ommittee,  
(Laughter ) 
       Environment  Committee , work on that issue, the E nvironment Committee will work with  
Transport C ommittee …  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  5 (Laughter)  
       Thank you  Hon., yes Clerk, yes Hon. Sarah Nyamvula . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Mr. Speaker I  kindly request with your permission that I give a 
statement  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Continue . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker this statement I informed through the House Business 
Committee and came when I was chairing th at day, it’s about unblocking the drainages in …(??)  
and the state in which the drainage is kept .  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think the sta tement from Hon. Sarah 
Nyamvula  is somehow the same as the one broug ht by Hon. Zainab Mumba so the  Environment 
Committee with also the T ransport C ommittee , what is it Hon. Sarah . 
       Hon. (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Mheshimiwa S pika ningependa kusema hivi kwamba kitu 
ambacho ningependa kifafanuliwe wakiwa wenzangu ambao wamepawa ile kazi ni ule mkataba ; 
ni mka taba gani ambao hawa watu ambao wamepewa kandarasi  za kusafisha ile mitaro 
wanapewa . 
       Kwa sababu Mheshimiwa amesema zile sehemu, mimi nilikuwa nataka kuwaambia haswaa 
zile sehemu zina nini kwa sababu tunaona Mheshimiwa Spika ukifika pale utaona  kina mama 
wachuuzi hii mitaro husafishwa kweli ikapakuliwa lakini uchafu ukaachwa pale . 
       Sasa hii mikataba inasemaje kwa zile kandarasi mwenye kupewa, hu wa ameambiwa akifagia 
aache pale ? Kwa sababu wakisha wacha pale mvua ikinyesha unarudi tena . 
       Kwa hivyo hili ni jambo ambalo taarifa  yangu ilikuwa nataka nifafanue kwa sababu nataka 
kujua ule mkataba hawa watu wanapewa ni wanapewa mkataba wa aina gani , wapakue wa wache 
uchafu pale ama wapakue uchafu wauondoe ili kusiwe saa zote mtu yule anapewa kazi il e ile 
anafanya an aenda uchafu na pale kuna watoto , kuna kina mama , kina baba , vijana , walemavu , 
watu wanafanya uchukuzi wa mboga . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika ni hayo ndio nilikuwa nataka kusema , ahsante.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : But I think Hon. Sarah you had one once came  
to this Honorable House  and said that all was cleared and if am not wrong . 
       Hon. (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa na taarifa  mbili ; taarifa  ya kwanza ni 
kuisafisha  mitaro ambayo ilikuwa imechimbu liwa kule Bamburi  Cement , nikasema kwamba 
ishatengezwa taarifa  yangu , ya pili ilikuwa ndio hii . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  6        The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you, so f rom Hon. Sarah’s 
statement the Transport C ommittee will work on that issue and mind you Transpo rt Committee 
we need the information to this Motion  in a week ’s time and remember Transport C ommittee 
you have  stored so many reports , so work on this … 
(Applause)  
       Yes Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon. Mwabashir i. 
       Hon. Mwabashir i: Ahsante Bwan a Spika kw a kunipa fursa hii. Mheshimiwa S pika 
nilikuwa nimesimama kupata mwongozo wako ; katika kama miezi miwili iliyopita nimesimama 
hapa kuomba taarifa  kwa Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi kama Kamati ya A rdhi kuhusu Kamati ile 
ya County Management Board . 
       Lakini mpaka wa leo alielekeza Kiongozi wa W alio wengi na Kamati ya Ardhi ilete ripoti 
kwenye Bunge lakini mpaka leo ripoti ile hatujaipata . 
       Kwa hivyo naomba ni muhimu tupate ripoti kuhusu jambo hili Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
sababu wananchi wetu wanapa ta shida sana kulingana na masuala ya ardhi. A hsante sana.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Mwabashiri the House  
Business Committee will allocate a day for the business to come to this House.  
       As you have said that it ’s now two months time , so hopefully the business will come in two 
week ’s time , the business in this House  but the House  Business Committee will plan on the day 
that the matter should be brought to this House . 
       Hon. Members with due respect statements tim e is over and Clerk proceed …  
(Applause ) 
       To the next business I have already ruled that …  
(Applause ) 
(Laughter ) 
       Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  7        Yes Hon . Hatimy, yes Hon . Hatimy, Hon . Ibrahim I have already rule d…  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Hatimy proce ed. 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I beg to move the following 
Motion;  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read)  
      “THAT AWARE that the defunct Municipal Council of Mombasa had pending legal fees 
whic h are yet to be settled by the Coun ty Government of Mombasa which is its successor by 
virtue of Section 58 and 59 of the U rban Areas and Cities Act, 2011.  
       FURTHER AWARE that the County G overnment of Mombasa inherited liabilities amounting 
over Kshs. 2.3 billion allegedly for goods su pplied , legal fees and services rendered previously ; 
       CONCERNED  that the law firm of O.M Robinson & Company has a pending claim against 
the Coun ty Government from the defunct M unicipal C ouncil of Mombasa era amounting to 
Kshs.700 million ; 
       CONC ERNED  Mr. Speaker that the same firm of A dvocates also auctioned several 
properties within the Mombasa County during the transition period purportedly under the 
instructions of the County G overnment ; 
       NOTING  Mr. Speaker that the defunct Transition A uthority did not hand over assets and 
liabilities of the defunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa and that some of the liabilities including 
legal fees may be fraudulent and false intended to misappropriate  public funds wrongfully;  
       So I urge this County Assembly to resolve that the County Assembly Public Accounts 
Committee to investigate the following:  
       1. The inherited debt stock pile of the defunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa be subjected 
to investigation including forensic audit to establish aut henticity and propriety ; 
2. That the County T reasury to su spend all payments of debts to A dvocate s and suppliers of the 
defunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa era pending further investigations ; 
3. Investigate all the departments involved in the afore mentio ned matters ; 
4. PAC to invite the Ethics and Anti Corruption Commission on the same, thank you Mr. 
Speaker ”. 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  8 (Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved the Motion)  
       I beg to move Mr. Speaker , and  I request Hon . Saad to second the Motion. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Saad . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker . I rise to second this Motion , if allowed I be 
able also to contribute for this very very important matter which has been brought by Hon . 
Hatimy.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : If you want to contribute just contribute . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the issue that is in this Motion  
today is a very very important issue and we should have addressed this issu e during the time 
when we were on transition . 
       But Mr. Speaker we have had so many cases of this nature coming up every now and then 
and we hear also there are some documents which keep on vanishing with regards to pending 
bills, with regards to so m any issues that requires....  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Duncan.  
       Hon. Onyango : Mr. Speaker is the M ember in order to contribute before the putting of the 
question .  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes he is seconding and is in order but he has 
to put behind after him debating or contributing he won't get another chance to contribute so 
Hon. Saad you can proceed . 
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Faraj : I think Hon . as a seconder of the M otion I need to build  the foundation of this 
Motion and that's why it is best to contribute now , and even be given a chance to contribute even 
after the question has been put.  
       Mr. Speaker the issue s that ha ve been highlighted are very critical for the well being of thi s 
County Government;  the amount which is being discussed here is Kshs. 700M illion.  
       If you look at the budget ceiling Mr. Speaker and if you do comparison of the budget of the 
County Assembly the amount requi red is more than the budget of C ounty Asse mbly.  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  9        Mr. Speaker my c oncern is that the same company;  the same law firm was involved in  (??)   
some of the County properties during the transition period ; its clearly state here that it was 
purported  that this decis ion came from County Government.  
       Mr. Speaker I think it is high time that we stop all payment ; debts are there wh ich have been 
inherited by the C ounty Government through the Public Account Committee and Finance and 
Budget and Appropriation Committee to investigate whatever we pay is within the law and is not 
misappropriated in this County government.  
       Mr. Speaker I think it is crucial and very important to import all machineries that is there ; 
including the Ethics and Anti Corruption C ommission (EACC) so that it can take car e of this 
issue . 
       We saw what happen ed a few days ago when we people were coming in and harassing our 
officers here we felt that the respect that was given it is not there …  
(Consultation ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed Hon . Saad. 
       Hon. Faraj : So Mr. Speaker it is high time this Hon . House  plays its role as the overseer 
and this is our opportunity . 
       Mr. Speaker I think it is important and very crucial we do a comprehensive report and also 
invite other people , other st akeholders and other authorities to come and talk about this issue.  
       Mr. Speaker I don't have much to say but am urging M embers of this Co unty Assembly to 
pass this M otion. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Members I now propose a question to this 
Motion in the Supplementary Order P aper, Investigation in to the pending legal fees of the 
defunct Municipal Council of Mombasa be debated in this Motion . 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
       Yes Ho n. Lucy . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Chireri : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Mheshimiwa 
Spika ninaunga mkono hoja hii moja kwa moja kwa sababu yanayoendelea katika Kaunti yetu ni 
ya aibu . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  10        Kwa hawa wenye kudai hawafai , hawafai  kabisa wana fanya mambo ya aibu;  kitendo 
kilichofanyika juzi ni cha kudhalilisha Kaunti yetu , deni haliwezi likaja likafurisha wafanyi  kazi 
wetu hapa na si deni la juzi ni la jadi . 
       Kwa nini wachukulie hili jambo waje hapa bila adabu wamepoteza adabu wamekuja 
kuwasumbua wafanyi  kazi wetu ; hichi kitendo ni cha aibu.  
       Pili Mheshimiwa Spika hili deni lazima lichunguzwe , mtu mmoja hawezi akafanya kazi ya 
mamilioni kwani kulikuwa kwafanywa kazi gani?  
       Milioni hizi zilizoko hapa ni kampuni moja inamaanish a kuwa ilikuwa hakuna kampuni 
ambazo zinafanya kazi huu ni uongo na uongo huo Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Ni lazima uchunguzwe na madeni yote ya zamani yaangaliwe na yenye kukatwa yaweze 
kukatwa ambayo si halali inaonyesha madeni mengi ambayo si ya ukweli tun apoteza pesa zetu . 
       Nataka uchunguzi ufanyike na haki iweze kutendeka. A hsante sana.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Asha Hussein.  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Hussein : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kuchangia 
kupinga hii hoja  ya kuwa hawa watu waliotoa huduma wakati wa Manispaa  wasilipwe pesa zao.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika watu wameathirika sana ; watu wamefanya kazi , kazi za  kuonekana , kazi 
za mjengo tuko na wakaguzi wa vitabu yaani Auditors  waliohitimu na inataka tuangalie wal e 
ambao waliofanya kazi ambao ni feki walio leta hewa ni lazima wachujwe  kulingana na  
Mheshimiwa Hatimy  alivyosema . 
       Ila kuna watu na  hii sio stakabadhi ya mwisho T ransition walikuja wakatuletea hii na 
wakatuambia wataenda warudi watakusanya vithibiti sho vyote ili ndio watu waanze kulipwa 
Mheshimiwa Spika … 
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Saad . 
       Hon. Faraj : Nafikiri  langu nikutaka kufahamu zaidi Transition Authority  hawajaanza kazi 
jana wala leo na mpaka l eo tu mekaa tunasubiri Transition A uthority draft  watuletee ?  
       Hatutaiona hata tukimaliza uongozi wetu katika Bunge letu , akiwa amepewa hakikisho na 
tarehe kuwa Transition A uthority  watatuletea ripoti zao basi itakuwa vizuri atuelekeze basi 
tuzingoje. A hsante. 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Serah . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  11        Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ninavyojua Transition 
Authority  ni kazi yao sasa sijui itatuletea nini?  
(Laughter ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon . Asha.  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Hussein : Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na wakati uliowekwa katika katiba ya 
Transition A uthority  ndio waliweza kuja lakini Mheshimiwa Spika kazi hii ya liabilities, debts  
and assets  ilipewa Transition jukumu hili na....  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Tom . 
       Hon. Ogalo : Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa Mheshimiwa aseme kama ana  effect  na hii 
kesi…  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Hussein : Mheshimiwa Spika sina ushawishi  ila waliofanya kazi  wako katika 
hiki kitabu ; rekodi zao ziko na sisi tuko na W akili, sisi tuko na Auditors , Internal Auditors  na 
External Auditors  wanaoweza kuifanya shughuli hii bila kuhusisha shirika linalopigana na 
ufisadi nchini.  
       Bwana Spika  tuko na ma afisa walio hitimu;  kwa nini mtu amefanya kazi anadai haki yake 
asilipwe iwe ni huyu Mr. Robinson awe Robinson pekee yake lakini sio watu wote Mheshimiwa 
Spika . 
       Ikiwa anachunguzwa achunguz we Robinson pekee yake lakini si suppliers  wote wala 
contractors  Mheshimi wa Spika kwa sababu kazi ziko za  kuonekana ikiwa wewe umepewa kazi 
ya mjengo Auditor akienda pale ataona akijenga anathibitisha na anaona kila kitu yule mtu 
alipwe kazi yake maanake amekopa pesa kujenga leo msipomlipa ataishi vipi? A hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Patrick Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker  I, 100% support the M otion . Mr. Speaker our role as County 
Assembly is to oversight and if we are not going to oversight money , tax payers money we wi ll 
be doing wrong to our people . 
       Mr. Speaker Sir, from reliable  information Robinson  company  have already been paid  shs 
100 million ; the same company has sold some of our  assets, and now they are saying we owe 
them shs700 million for one year, and s omebody is saying we should not investigate it , we must 
be crazy . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  12        We must investigate each every transaction that ha ve been done by former defunct 
Municipal, they had a lot of corruption during th at time and our Public A ccounts Committee has 
to do i ts mandate and investigate each and every contract . 
       Mr. Speaker there are no cases that are attached that have been handled by this Company ; 
we have to see each and every case and what amount is owed so that we can pay money of which 
we are sure the  service have been rendered but we c annot pay money just like that and the money 
belongs to the Kenyan people and this is wrong . 
       I fully support this M otion because it will be that we are doing our mandate and it has to be 
fast tracked and we are no t saying that they should be paid but investigation s for each and every 
transaction  that is what we are saying . 
       So that when we are paying we are paying for the service delivery,  the suppliers in the 
former M unicipal people used to supply air , so th at means we have to pay for air without 
investigating.  
       Mr. Speaker we have to take our baton as elected leaders and investigate each and every 
matter, I  fully support this Motion. Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Odari?  
       Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon. Speaker for allowing me to voice my opinion for the M otion 
at hand.  
       Hon. Speaker I rise to support this Motion 100% that the Public Accounts C ommittee 
investigates all the debts that have been inherit ed from the former or the defunct Mombasa 
Municipal before anything is done with regard to payment of these debts , with regards to 
Mombasa County . 
       It is common knowledge that the former Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa was in deep rot ; it 
was in ICU bec ause of so many debt s and corruption in all the departments . 
       We know  what was going on and unless we invest igate it is not proper for the County 
Government of Mombasa which has inherited the former Municipal C ouncil to bear the brunt of 
this debt wh ich unscrupulous people have benefited themselves individually and severally 
through corrupt practices.  
       Hon. Speaker these deb ts must be investigated by the P ublic Accounts C ommittee to 
establish whether they are authentically or fictitious;  who doe sn’t know that there was a lot of air 
suppliers who have claims over goods and services which were never supplied . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  13        So Mr.  Speaker it is only prudent f or this government or for this A ssembly through the 
Public Accounts C ommittee to pass a resolution that all the debts of the former C ouncil of 
Mombasa be investigated without any reservation . 
       They should be investigated for us to establish whether they are true debts or fictitious debts 
which came about as a result of corrupt practices which were  undertake n by officials of the 
defunct Municipal C ouncil.  Thank  you Hon. Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Thoya?  
       Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika,  nimesimama katika J umba hili tukufu  
kuunga mkono hoja ambayo imeletwa na Mwenyekiti wa F edha . 
       Manispaa  ambayo ilipita kabla ya kuja kwa serikali  za ugatuzi zilikuwa na mambo mengi na 
nashukuru kwamba serikali  za ugatuzi zimekuja kuweza kutatua baadhi ya matatizo haya . 
       Ni kweli hata kama serikali  za Man ispaa  zilikuwa na madeni na madeni haya yalikuwa 
yamepishwa yalipwe na serikali  ya Kaunti nafikiri kulingana na katiba ni serikali  ya Mombasa 
peke yake ambayo ni jiji na serikali  ya baraza l a Nairobi ambayo pia ni serikali  na pia ni jiji . 
       Mheshimiwa  Spika kisheria serikali  hizi mbili ambazo ni Kaunti  za jiji  zilikuwa na mamlaka 
ya serikali  kuu kwamba yale madeni ambayo  yalikuwa yamerit hiwa katika yale majiji yalikuwa 
ni lazima kwanza yaweze kubebewa na serikali  kuu alafu baada ya hapo ni wakati wa mpito 
serikali  za ugatuzi zianze kuanza kazi zake zikiwa hazina madeni . 
       Ni masikitiko kwamba  shirika la  Transition A uthority  ambal o lilikuwa limeaminiwa 
kwamba litaleta mabadiliko kutoka kwa  Manispaa  kuja kwa serikali  za K aunti kwamba wao 
waweze kuchu kua majukumu ya kuweza kuchukua  madeni ambayo yalitoka katika Manispaa 
wakaweza kuyalipa wale ambao walikuwa wanadai . 
       Na pili zile mali ambazo  zilikuwa ni za baraza wakati ule kabla ya kuja kwa serikali  za 
ugatuzi wakaweza kuziuza kupitia kwa wale m adalali na kuwapatia  nafasi serikali  za Manispaa  
kuja katika serikali  za ugatuzi . 
       Kwa hivyo tayari kosa limefanyika , ni jukumu la Bunge  hili kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba 
madeni yale yote yamechunguzwa na iwapo kosa litapatikana Mheshimiwa  Spika zile asset zote 
ambazo zilikuwa katika serikali  ya Manispaa  ziweze kurudishwa rasmi ili tuweze kuhakikisha 
kwamba serikali  yetu ya Kaunti ina raslimali za kutosha itakayoweza kutuendesha , ili 
tuhakikishe kwamba shida hizi ambazo tulirit hi kutoka kwa serikali  za Manispaa zisiweze 
kuingia kati ka mamlaka ya serikali  za Kaunti . 
       Kwa hivyo kosa lilifanyika , uchunguzi ufanywe basi sheria ichukue  mkondo na haki iweze 
kutekelezwa.  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika naunga  mkono mia chini ya mia.  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  14        The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Nyamvula.  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opp ortunity, first I 
support this Motion by the Finance C hair. 
       There are so many things which have happened because the new structure of the Ken yan 
government ; the handing over of the old to new never happened , that is why a lot of money , a lot 
of assets we can actually go round and in our local estates…..  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Patrick? Proceed Hon. Nyamv ula. 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  So when you go to the estates you can even see what used to 
happen ; some of the stalls which are in the middle of an estate are private property belonging to 
somebody . 
       So you just wonder how that happened , but comin g to this Motion I just want to remind 
Hon. Members  that in the early 2014 I think a M otion came here and we passed it , when we 
wanted to rescue the Buxton  estate . 
      We authorized that money be paid so that we can pay the estate and one mistake that th ey 
did; it is in my mind to date a H on. Member stood and said with others we had intended on 
Buxton  but it was cleverly done and it went through and that triggered that it was not the Buxton  
that we are paying off but somebody amended that others . 
       That was really sad because that is the day that we gave some of these crooks the go ahead . 
       So then somebody who wants to pay up will just come and say we passed this  Motion but 
Mr. Speaker coming to this  I also  want to point out the M otion that some where within this 
Motion mentions that staff ; all this cannot have happened without the help of our staff . 
       We have very important departments because how does somebody who doesn’t work here 
know how to push the paper until the K ssh.1 M illion  comes o ut and not Ksh.1M illion  but Kshs 
100M illion.  
       So there has to be inside information and the only way we can get to the root of this subject 
is to get external pe ople to come and investigate us … 
(Applause ) 
        As much as we want to do it ourselves  Mr. Speaker if we think , which is very unfortunate 
expect us to get a good answer so it is naturally we get someb ody from outside so that we get…  
(Interruption ) 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  15        The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There was a point of information.  
       Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker in this document if you look at it clearly it is saying that we 
invite the Anti-Corruption C ommission; it is an external commission Mr. Speaker.  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  But Mr. Speaker going for a forensic audit I think it is very 
important to understand what forensic audit is before we panic and think what is going to 
happen.  
       The forensic audit we are always requesting, we always hear of forensic audit this is a term 
but it’s just an audit where we will get the information if  you... 
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There is a point of information.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I want to…  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Use your mic.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker PAC works with th e Auditor General and the Anti -
Corruption.  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  So Mr. Speaker as much as we would like to look at it ourselves 
but the structure when it comes to public property we have organs who.. .for the purpose of not to 
be biase d I still beli eve that my dear Hon. M ember as long as we can get to see that company did 
deliver I am sure they will pay all that we are asking , let the right people be p aid not people who 
supplied air … 
(Applause ) 
       Because these are issues which are known ; some ar eas you get people to supply air and so I 
do not think there should be an issue here . 
       Let us support the M otion , let the engine start for investigation ; in fact Hon. Members am so 
glad and I do not know if we have been following the next 2017 is cur rently being structured , 
somet hing that we borrowed from 2013.  
       The 2017 structure that will be handed over will ensure that we are set , the  public 
management sector here , I do not think the Motion is aiming at anybody.  
       The Motion is just tryi ng to see who supplied and if he supplied give us your papers , where 
is the LPO and everything else. Thank you Mr.Speaker . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chief Whip.  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  16        Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ): Thank y ou Mr. Speaker for g iving me this 
opportu nity to give my opinion on this.  
       Mr. Speaker  I stand to fully support this M otion regarding payment of the suppliers or 
peop le who offered services to our M unicipal government the past years . 
       Mr. Speaker  as you know since  the new  government from M unicipal Council to C ounty 
government we  are the successors by virtue of A rticle 58 and 59 of Urban and Cities Act. 
       Mr. Speaker there are a lot of people who did  supplies at that time but the Transition 
Authority did not ha nd over assets and  liabilities of the Mombasa M unicipal to us properly . 
       So some of these  supplies might be fraudulent Mr. Speaker , and honestly speaking some of 
us are very young in our careers we want to become the G overnors of this county , maybe I n shaa 
Allah become the presidents of this great count ry ….  
(Applause ) 
       So we cannot let such a thing to happen while we are in charge of this Assembly Mr. 
Speaker;  we let someone get paid Ksh.700M illion,  the same person a uctioned the properties of 
the County government . 
       We do not know the value of the property , maybe they only owe d us K shs 50 Million, we 
might not know.  
       I support this M otion because we need to thoroughly investigate this issue Mr. Speaker so 
that the government funds ar e not misappropriated because we must protect the C ounty,  we must 
protect the taxpayers money . 
       So I stand to support this M otion and this also applie s to those who did work in the 
Municipal C ouncil should be thoroughly investigated . 
       Make sure  all the work they did was legal so that we can pay , so that they are also human 
because that is the source of money they have to help themselves they will get paid but first Mr.  
Speaker I urge my Honorable Members to support this M otion because fraudulent  supplies get 
investigated . 
       The County G overnment is willing to pay only if the thing is legal Mr.  Speaker. Thank y ou. 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Riziki Fundi . 
       Hon. Fundi:  Ahsante Bwana Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hi i niweze kuchangia katika hoja 
ambayo imeletwa mbele yetu.  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  17        Mheshimiwa S pika k wanza nataka nizungumze kw amba sisi Waheshimiwa ambao 
tumecha guliwa tuje tufanye kazi kulinda wananchi  na tuna mikakati ambayo lazim a tutumie 
wakati tunafanya kazi.  
       Hili Bunge  labda nikitumia lugha ya Kiingereza  tusiwe 'reactive ' kwa kuwa jambo limetokea     
sasa ndio tunawaka ; sababu jambo fulani limetokea sasa watu wote wametoka usingizini . 
       Mheshimiwa  Spika hili ni swala lataka lichukuliwe  makini sana ; kwanza  tupate hesabu 
kuanzia tulipoingia 2013 wale ambao washalipwa kwanza tuwajue , wale waliokua na madeni 
yao ya zamani na washalipwa kwanza tuwajue isiwe kwamba  tumeona kwamba sasa tumeletewa 
mtu fulani hatumpendi na kwa sababu  ametushika shingo ndio tuseme o oh asilipwe . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika hii ni pesa ya wananchi  na ikiwa ni pesa za wananchi  lazima tuangalie 
kwamba wale ambao walifanya  kazi walipwe kwa sababu ni haki yao na wale ambao walifanya 
kazi za uongo  pia walipwe wajulikane . 
       Lakini kufikia s asa Mheshimiwa  Spika tumekaa hapa yapita takriban miaka minne na kuna 
watu washalipwa  pia katika hichi kipindi, isiwe sasa huyu anadai  ndio tunataka kuja mbio 
kusema huyu anadai kiasi  fulani, kwa sababu Mheshimiwa  Spika tunataka tuletewe orodha  ya 
wale amb ao wameshalipwa....  
(Interruption)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There is a Point of O rder. 
       Hon. Faraj:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, swala lilioko sio hela hizi peke yake ambazo 
zitazun gumziwa katika milioni mia saba.  
       Ukisoma kati ka zile resolutions  ukisoma resolution  ya kwanza imezungumza wa zi kuwa 
ukiniruhusu niseme kwa Ki ingereza , “The inherited debts of defunct Municipal Council of 
Mombasa be subjected to investigations , including forensic audit to establish our authenticity 
and propriety ”. 
       Hii inaon yesha wazi Mheshimiwa  Spika hatushu ghulikii  deni ambalo limezungumziwa hapa 
peke yake , bali ni madeni yote ambayo kwamba yameshalipwa, na ya le ambayo yatarajiwa 
kulipwa , nafikiri  tuwekane sawa ili tupate kuelewa, a hsante . 
       Hon.  Fundi:  Mheshimiwa Spika akili yangu imetulia sana sio kwamba  sielewi ninach o 
kizungumza , labda pengine niwapeleke katika m swada  katika maombi nambari ‘ 2’, “That the 
County T reasury to suspend all payments of debts ”. 
       Hilo neno moja kuon yesha ya kwamba hapo nyuma kabla ya leo kulikua na madeni 
yakilipwa yale ya zamani sasa kabla hatujaingilia yale ambayo yanataka kusimamishwa kwanza 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  18 tujue yaliolipwa ni yapi;  yalikua ya ukweli  ama si vyo kabla hatujaingilia hili swala la milioni 
mia saba . 
       Yaonekana kuna wengine waliku wa washalipwa wana m adeni yao tangu Manispaa.  
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika tunacho  kiomba kwanza tuletewe orodha isiwe watu 
wamekuja hapa, Wanachama kuja kujiombea kazi ya kwenda kukaa mahali siku sita saba 
kufanya udadisi  wapa te senti na kumbe twataka tuele we chanzo na kiini cha haya mambo ni 
nini...  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Serah . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Nafikiri M heshimiwa n dio mimi nikasema tukienda kwa Hansard 
kuna m swad a tulipitisha ya kulipa Buxton na wengine .  
       Kwa hivyo kusimamisha Mhes himiwa ni sawa kuwa vitu vilishalipwa kwa sababu tulipitisha 
Mswada hapa , ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Hon. Fundi:  Mheshimiwa  Spika naomba W aheshimiwa wasikize kwa makini ; natangulia 
kusema ya kuwa kuna madeni, wakati tukiteng eza b ajeti yetu ya kwanza mimi nilikua 
Mwenyekiti mdogo wa b ajeti kuliku wa na shilingi 2.9 billion madeni tuliochukua huko nyuma . 
       Sasa hii mia saba inawezekana iko katika ile shilingi 2.9 billion la kini nina hakika kwamba 
ile deni haitabakia pale  pale; kuna wengine wameshalipwa . 
       Kwa hivyo tukita ka kujua kwanza kuanzia 2013 tu ingie hapa mpaka kufikia leo yale madeni 
yaliokua ya zamani waliolipwa ni kina nani na wamelipa pes a ngapi, kabla hatuja angalia 
kusimamisha Mheshimiwa. .. 
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Kibwana . 
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you M r. Speaker , i think my friend here who i do respect is 
beating around the bush . 
       I think if you fee l that the M otion is not (??) because there are issues we wa nt to settle in 
Mombasa in the M otion you should have give n us evidence that there are people who have been 
paid. 
       I think what he is telling us is just rumour monger ing that there are peopl e who have been 
paid and he has no evidence to show that . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  19        So Ho n. Speaker let 's conc entrate either you support the M otion or you go against it . 
(Interruption)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Jimmy . 
       Hon Fundi:  Mr. Speaker one  cannot stand on another point of order . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  He is in a point of information. Hon Jimmy . 
       Hon. Odari : Thank you Hon . Speaker I think as a point of information I think H on. Riziki 
what he wants to say here he is requesting for a back date of all the payments that have been 
made since 2013, and then i think it 's not proper for a Hon . MCA from Miritini to say that Hon . 
is rumour mongering . It's not a Hon orable  word i wish he withdraws that . 
       The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon . Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nilikua nataka ku julisha N yumba hii 
tunaposema tunataka kufanya forensic,  forensic audit  itasema pending  zilikua ni ngapi , nani 
amelipwa nani hajalipwa.  
       The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Riziki Fundi . 
       Hon.  Fundi:  Mheshimiwa Spika hil o ombi  amba lo limetolewa, tusijiweke wakati 
tunapovuta mkokoteni unaweza ukaamua wewe ukae m bele uvute mkokoteni au ukakaa n yuma 
ukaus ukuma mkokoteni . 
       Kwa hivy o hapa mimi n ataka tusukume mkokoteni tusiuvu te mkokoteni, haya ni mambo 
mazito na tusil ete dhi haka katika kazi ambayo ni muhimu sana.  
       Hii ni pesa ya w ananchi ikiwa tumesh tuka kwa sababu ya shilingi 700 million i kwa sababu  
wafanyi  kazi wetu wamesht uliwa mpaka tukashtuka kwamba wanataka kuchukuliwa hatua kwa 
madeni ambayo yalipitishwa hapo zamani lakini hatukushtuka w akati madeni mengi ne yalikua 
yakilipwa . 
       Kwa hivyo maoni yangu nataka uya angalie vizuri M heshimiwa Spika kwa hivyo tunasema 
kabla  hatujafanya hiyo forensic audit  tunataka tuambiwe ni a kina nani wameshalipwa kuanzia 
2013 mpaka sa a hii, isiwe watu fulani wa shajilipa sasa wanajua kwamba wao yao yashaisha 
watu wengine wawakanyagie . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika hilo ni swala lazima tu liangal ie kwa makini sana kwa sababu hizi ni pesa 
za wananchi sio za Riziki Fundi wala sio za mtu yoyote . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika tukiangalia h ayo maombi  vile ambavyo yameandikwa 
nimekusomea ya pili imeandikwa kusimamisha;   ni kuon yesha kwamba tulikua t ukilipa lipa hapo 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  20 nyuma sasa ndio tunataka tuletewe tuyaone hayo madeni ambayo tulilipa tuwajue wale ambao 
walilipwa. N atumai Mswada  huu ni m zuri kweli , nau unga mkono . 
(Laughter ) 
       Lakini tusiwe tunaangalia mkono wa kushoto umefanya nini na mkono wa k ulia hatutaki 
kujua...  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon . Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:   Mheshimiwa Spika mawazo  yangu ni  kusema kuwa kama 
anajaribu ku irekebisha  huu Mswada ama anaingiza sheria za nidhamu za Bunge n ambari  52 
kama sivyo basi  nafikiri twaweza kuendelea . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon. Riziki I think your time is almost up .  
       Hon. Fundi:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kwa kumalizia tu ningesema pesa am bazo 
tunazilinda ni pesa za w ananchi , tuwe makini sana  tukae ngangari tuhakikishe kwa sa a hii 
hazipotei lakini pia tujue kwamba kuna watu ambao wamefanya kazi za haki ingawa wamefanya 
huko nyuma . 
       Kwa hivyo wale watu pia tusiwadhul umu kwa sababu sisi tunataka kumfurahisha  mtu 
mmoja au wawili , kwa hivyo wale ambao walikua na pesa zao za halali tusiwasimamishie ulipaji 
wao wa pesa wakati wengine wameingia katika biashara pesa zao wa meziweka hapa zimekaa 
miaka min ne, mitano . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika hiyo pia twataka sisi tuangalie kama wana nchi kwa s ababu tuko hapa 
kama W aheshimiwa lakini sisi ni wananchi pia wa Mombasa . 
       Kwa hivyo a hsante Mheshimiwa S pika. 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Ibrahim Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim  Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, nimesima ma kuungua mkono kwa 
dhati mswada huu . 
       Kwanza kabisa ningepend a kumpongeza ndugu y angu Mheshimiwa Riziki Fundi kw a 
kuunga  mkono mswada huu .  
       Mambo yako wazi maombi yamewekwa wazi Mheshimiwa S pika na baadhi ya mambo 
ambayo yako hapa ni yale  yale yamerudiwa . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  21        Kwa hivyo langu ni kusis itiza tu kw a haraka kikao hiki ha PAC kianze kufanya uchunguzi 
wake ili ituletee majibu mwafaka na  ningependa ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa R iziki wakati 
anasema watu wanajitaf utia pesa ni ka ma atakua anazidi kudhalil isha N yumba hii . 
       Ikiwa miswada inaletwa na kuilekeza kido le cha lawama kwamba baadhi ya K amati 
zinatafuta pesa  kwenda kuleta maswala ambayo yanah usika na N yumba hii na masu ala ya 
wananchi wa Mombasa . 
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ndug u yangu M heshimiwa Riziki Fundi nampenda sana ... 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon Ibrahim address the Motion .  
       Hon. Ibrahim  Kondo:  Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika nazidi kuelewesha N yumba hii ya 
kwamba ndugu y angu ambae ni Mheshimiwa katika N yumba hii aelewe kazi zinavyofanywa..  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon.  Mwabashiri . 
       Hon. Mwabashiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, mas uala ya kusimama ati M heshimiwa 
yule anataka watu wakale pesa h uu Mswada u mekuja ni muhim u sana ikiwa Ibrahim Kondo 
amep ata nafasi ni vizuri asimame ajadili hii ripoti . 
       Hapa kuna mtu anataka alipwe milioni mia sa ba; siku zote haonekani anaonekana juzi , 
lazima yazungu mzwe hapa, mas uala ya M heshimiwa Riziki kuzungumza kwamba ku na wengine 
wanalipwa wasi tengwe  wale ambao hawajalipwa kuna miradi imekwama na mpaka leo 
haiend elei kwa s ababu wao wanadai Kaunti na K aunti haitaki kuwalipa . 
       Kwa hivyo masuala haya ni muhimu namuo mba ndugu yangu  ajadili mambo haya.  
(Applause)  
       The Tempo rary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon . Kondo . 
      Hon. Ibrahim  Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, kizungu ndio kinatatiza hapa . 
(Laughter)  
       Na maombi  nafikiri zimewachanganya wale waliokua wamesimam a na kuanza kupinga 
mswada huu Mheshimiwa S pika. 
       Kwa hivyo mimi Mheshimiwa S pika naunga mkono na nasema ka zi hii ianze kwa haraka ili 
jambo li lilotokezea lisirudiwe tena katika uongozi wa Kaunti ya Mombasa , ahsante sana . 
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  22        The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes H on. Riziki . 
       Hon. Fundi : Mheshimiwa nimekubaliana na swala lake lakini natak a nimfahamishe 
kwamba sisi kama Kaunti  hili swala pia linatuhusu sana . 
       Kwa hivyo ikiwa kuna ile dadisi  ambayo itafanywa ifanywe hapa kwa chumba cha mikutano 
ili na sisi tuweze kuchangia yale mambo  ambayo tunayo, isiwe watu watatoka hapa waende 
Ukunda na sisi tunataka kuchangia.  
(Laughter, Applause ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon. Riziki as you saw in the recent when 
Nyeri MCAs wa nted to impeach the Governor a M otion was brought i n the House  for 
investigation to continue in the House.  
       So if you want the investigations to continue wherever any place you wish you are also 
allowed to bring a M otion but am sure even the Public Account Committee sittings were 
conducted in this Ho n. Chamber.  
      So you are allowed to come and put whatever input that you have in this so Hon . Members 
unless there is  somebody who is opposing this M otion because i have seen only one person 
opposing Hon . Asha Hussein who has opposed this M otion . 
       So i rise H on M ember s to put a  question on this issue as per C hapter 6 of our constitution ; 
Members are responsible to be accountable to the people through your actions and decisi ons.  
       Hon. Members you have to put into considerations that also we have signed a code of 
conduct of which am sure whatever was being debated in this Motion  is a matter of concern , it's 
a crucial issue  and it is an issue of public funds and Hon . Members you as leaders you have to 
stand firm to protect wananchi 's public fun ds. 
       So i hereby put a question that the Motion on the Supplementary Order P aper number two 
on the investigation into th e pending bills of the defunct Municipal C ouncil of Mombasa be 
adopted in this House.  
       With the prayers brought by the mover  of this Motion and mover should put into 
consideration that if he intends to change the prayers must be brought in this Hon orable House  to 
change t he prayers he intends to change.   
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
September 2 2, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        108 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Repo rt is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  23        Hon. Members th e House  stands adjourned until Tuesday afternoon.  
The House rose at  4:10pm. 