August 2, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      109 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 27th September , 2016  
The House met at 2. 50pm. 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk . 
PAPER  
       Yes Patrick Siminyu, C hairman Committee  on Disaster Management .  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker as we understand that  the Report of fire station in the 
County  is very important in this House, as a Committee  we were facing technical  challenges 
Mr. S peaker but am sure if you give me until next week Tuesday the report will be ready.  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Next week Tue sday the report will be 
ready, y es Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Majo rity L eader, yes Hon . Prischillah Mumba . 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Prischill ah Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to read the Notice of 
Motion behalf of Hon. Mwidani Majori ty leader . 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Go ahead . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba:  Thank you Mr. S peaker sir, i seek t o give Notice of 
the following M otion . 
(Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba read)  
       "THAT A WARE that  Section 13 3 of the Public Finance M anagement Act, 2012 stipulates  
that not more  than 90days after passing of the Approp riation Bill in every year the County 
Assembly shall consider and  approve the F inance Bill with or without amendments .  
       FURTHER AWARE THAT  the deadline e nvisaged for the approval of the  finance Bill 
every year is September  30. 
       CONCERNED THAT  the September 30, 2016 of this year falls on a Friday  which is a 
non sitting day of the County A ssembly.  
       I therefore urge the County A ssembly to  RESO LVE that;  
       1. The County A ssembly of Mombasa to hold a Special Sitting on Friday 30th September 
2016 at 2:30pm . 
August 2, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      109 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2         2. Any stipulations or requirements  unde r Standing O rder no. 26  or any other Standing 
Order are hereby temporarily waived .  
(End of Notice of Motion)  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much, yes Hon.  Saad 
Faraj what is it ?  
       Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker i think the  intention of the mover of the Motion was this 
Notice to be read  as a M otion because it qualifies to be a Privilege M otion . 
       Looking into the content of this particular M otion and i think Mr. Speaker we should 
discuss and pass it so that being a Privilege Motion you can allow it to be deliberated and 
passed, thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay maybe  i ask the House, M embers 
as many as are of the opinion that this M otion should be discussed . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
        It will be discussed during the Motion business, C lerk. 
MOTION  
       Yes Hon.  Prischil lah Mumba .  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba:  Thank you Mr. S peaker sir, i aris e to give the 
following M otion . 
(Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba read)  
       "THAT  AWARE THAT Section 133 of the Public Finance Management Act , 2012 
stipulates that  not more  than 90  days after passing of the Appropriation Bill in every year the 
County Assembly shall consider and approve the Finance Bill with or without amendments  
       FURTHER  AWARE THAT the deadline env isaged for the approval of the Finance Bill 
every year is September 30.  
       CONCERNED that the September 30, 2016 of this year falls on a Friday whi ch is a non 
sitting day of the County Assembly.  
       I therefore urge the County Assembly to RESOLVE that;  
       1. The County A ssembly of Mombasa to hold a special sitting on Friday 30th  September 
2016 at 2:30 pm  
       2. Any stipulations or requirements under Standing Order no. 26 or any other Standing 
Order are hereby tempo rarily waived .  
(End of Motion)  
August 2, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      109 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3         I would like Hon . Saad to second . 
       Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker I rise to second the M otion, thank you . 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I propose the question, it has 
been proposed that author ity to hold a Special Sitting  to approve F inance Bill 2016  on Friday 
30th September 2016...  
(Question put and agreed to)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Mumba?  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba : Ahsante M heshimiwa  Spika nimeona umuhimu wa 
sisi W aheshimiwa kuweza kukalia hichi kikao na kuweza kupitisha hii Finance Bill kwa 
sababu nafikiri kuna mwisho wa kupitisha hii Bill. 
       Siku zimeenda na hatuna wakati wa kuweza kupoteza ila tuweze kupitisha ndio ma mbo 
mengi yaweze kuendel ea katika K aunti kwa sababu saa hizi tumekwama kwama kwa sababu 
Finance Bill  ndio imebeba utovu wa kila kitu . 
       Kwa hivyo ninaomba W aheshimiwa wenzangu ili tuweze kushirikiana tuweze kupitisha 
hii Finance Bill ndio tuweze kufan ya yale yan atakikana.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Wangudi.  
       Hon.  Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika hata mimi nichangie mswada ambao 
umeletwa na Kiongozi wa Walio W engi na kuwasilishwa na Naibu wa Kiranja wa Walio 
Wengi. 
       Mheshimiwa S pika naunga mswada huu mkono kuwa  iko haja  tuwe na  kikao ambacho 
madhumuni yake ni kuidhinisha sheria hii ya mambo ya fedha . 
       Naona ni kazi kubwa ambayo inahitaji kikao chake peke yake bila mjadala mwingine na 
pia Mheshimiwa  Spika naona kidogo hatuna muda kwa sababu mwisho wa kupitisha ni 
tarehe 30 mwezi huu . 
       Iwapo itapitwa na hiyo siku hatutakuwa na uwezo wa kutoza ushuru ama kukusanya 
ushuru wetu wa Kaunti.  
       Nasihi wenzangu ambao  ni W aheshimiwa wa Jumba hil i tuweze kukubaliana kuwa tuwe 
na kikao ambacho  tutatumia kupitisha sheria hii. K wa hivyo naunga mkono.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Madundo?  
       Hon. Mohamed Madundo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika Al Hajj kwa kunipatia fursa hii 
na mimi pia vile  vile naunga mkono Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi  ambaye ameleta h uu Mswada  
kuhusu mambo ya  fedha  na katika Fedha  ndio mambo yote katika Bunge . 
       Bila mambo ya f edha  huwa hakuna chochote kinafanyika , kwa hivyo Kamati ya Fedha  
ipatiwe nafasi kwa haraka ili tupitishe kwa sababu kulingana na muda ambao umebakia ikiwa 
leo ni tarehe  27 ikiwa sijakosea basi ni muhimu tufanye hima hima ili tuweze kumaliza haya 
matatizo ambayo yako katika Bunge letu . 
       Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono kwa dhati na pia we nzangu vile  vile waunge mkono.  
Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Patrick Siminyu.  
August 2, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      109 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4         Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me th is opportunity to support this 
Motion that has been brought by the Deputy Majority Leader on behalf of the M ajority 
Leader . 
       Mr. Speaker we have to follow the law and as we understand the budget cycle has …it is 
very important for this H ouse to have a Special Sitting to get the job done . 
       Mr. Speaker as you kn ow the County A ssembl y is the oxygen that helps the C ounty  to 
run and if we operate as a County without a F inance Bill there will be no wa y. 
       Mr. Speaker I fully support because we are g oing to do justice for Mombasa C ounty , 
thank you H on. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Saad Faraj.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika; kwanza ni kukukaribisha katika Bunge 
letu baada ya kutoka katika ziara tukufu huko Mecca , natarajia kuwa u metuombea maombi 
kwa wale walio tarajia maombi . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika mswada ambao uko hapa ni mswada ambao kwamba ni muhimu na 
namuona Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  pia ameingia na sisi uhai wetu kama 
tunavyoelewa kama Kaunti y a Mombasa . 
       Ni kuweza kupitisha Bill ambayo iko kati ka mikono yetu na ni lazima tufahamu 
kikamilifu ya kuwa Bill hii na ule msururu wa kutengeneza bajeti u ko na msurur u ambao ni 
lazima tuweze kuipit isha ili tuwe katika sheria na nidhamu vile inavyohitajika . 
       Na ukiangalia Mheshimiwa S pika tuko na siku  kama tatu hivi , siku ya mwisho ya 
kupitisha itakuwa tarehe 30 ambayo ita angukia siku ya Ijum aa. 
       Ni wajibu wetu sisi sote kutaka kutekeleza majukumu yetu kama inavyostahili ni tuweze 
kupitisha mswada huu Ijumaa itakapowadia tuwe sisi tutaweza kuijadili Bill hii na kuipitisha 
ili kupatia nguvu Kaunti kuweza kukusan ya pesa zinazohitaji kukusanywa . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon . Hatimy .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi pia 
nasimama kuunga mkono hoja hii kwani sheria 133 ya Finance Act  iko wazi  kusema kuwa 
Finance Bill  itakuja baada ya siku tumepitisha Appropriation Bill . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kama tunavyojua kazi ya Appropriation Bill  ni nini? Na 
kazi ya Finance Bill  ni nini? Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika bila ya Finance Bill  hii ndio uti 
wa mgongo wa Kaunti . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika twaomba Waheshimiwa tukubaliane sote kwa kauli moja tupitishe 
huu Mswada  tarehe 30th September, 2016 tu je kuweza kusoma hii Bill na tupitishe 
Mheshimiwa Spika. A hsante.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Nasser . 
       Hon. Nasser  Rashid : Ahsante sana Al  Haj Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi nasimama kwa 
kuunga mkono.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika naf ikiri W aheshimiwa wote ambao wako hapa Kitengo chao  
wanategemea hii Bill, lazima tuunge mkono . 
       Vile vile ningependa kumuunga mkono Naibu Kiongozi Wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  kwa 
kuleta hii ripoti na ningeomba Nyumba hii mbali na kuleta ripoti hapa kama Kiongozi wa 
Wengi  hayuko basi aanze kupewa gari, askari  hadi na ofisi Mheshimiwa Spika .  
August 2, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      109 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  (Laughter and Applause)  
       Kama Kiongozi wa Wengi  hayuko basi Naibu apewe ulinzi wa kisawa sawa. A hsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswa bah Rashid) : Yes Hon . Prischillah Mumba do you 
want to say anything concerning Hon . Nasser's statement .  
      Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi nimesimama 
hapa nataka kumshukuru Mheshimiwa mwenzangu na mpinzani wangu mkubwa w a 
Shimanzi wa 2017 . 
(Laughter)  
       Lakini kwa sababu leo amenitakia mazuri na  kuniombea mazuri nimeshukuru, mimi 
nasema nashukuru kwa sababu yeye anatuombea tupewe magari Naibu wa Kiranja wa Bunge  
na  Naibu wa Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi.  
       Manake sisi t unasahaulika kwa kila majukumu lakini nilijua hayo majukumu 
yatakumbukwa kuwa ikiwa tunaweza kuwakilisha Bunge wakati wenzetu hawako basi na 
hayo mambo mengine yaangaliwe kama alivyozungumza Mheshimiwa Nasser . 
       Lakini hayo mengine ya zaidi naona tuta enda chemba na ningeomba twende na 
Mheshimiwa Nasser hata kama tutaenda Dubai ama America tumalize tofauti zetu tukija hapa 
tutakuwa tushachagua nani atakuwa Raisi na nani atakuwa Naibu  wa Raisi wa 
Shimanzi/Ganjoni ward.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Msw abah Rashid) : Thank you Hon . Prischillah I now put a 
question;  Members Order ! I now put a question .  
(Consultation)  
       Members Order!  Members I now put a question that as many as of the opinion that this 
House to get authority to hold Special Sitting to  approve Finance Bill 2016 on Friday, 30th  
September, 2016 . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
       Yes Clerk, Yes Hon.  Hatimy what is it?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to request to move a Motion 
in this House .  
       The Deput y Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay is it another different Motion?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Mr. Speaker .  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It's okay . 
MOTION  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker that pursuant to 
provision of Standing Order 107 this Assembly resolves to reduce that publication period of 
the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2016 No. 4 from seven days to four days Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Thank you Hon . Hatimy I think we 
don't need to put a question to that M otion so it has been done thank you. Yes Clerk  
BILLS  
(Interruption)  
       Order Number 9 is Finance Bill, yes Hon.  Fadhili what is it?  
(Laughter)  
August 2, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      109 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6         Yes Hon.  Fadhili .  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank yo u Mr. Speaker with me I have got The Mombasa County 
Inspectorate  Bill, 2016 ...  
(Interruption)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No we are dealing with The Mombasa 
County Finance Bill, 2016 . 
       Hon.  Fadhili you must have skip ped the Fin ance Bill we are in order number 9 , 
Chairman Finance Committee proceed, the procedure is that the Clerk to read the Bill for the 
first reading. Yes Clerk . 
 
MOMBASA COUNTY FINANCE BILL, 2016  
FIRST READING  
 
(Clerk read)  
 
"A Bill of AN ACT of the Mombasa Coun ty to provide for various taxation, imposition of fees 
and charges for services, and other revenue raising measures by the County government and 
for matters incidental thereto ...". 
(End of First Reading)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mem bers Pursuant to Standing Order 
121 section 1 , The Mombasa County Finance Bill 2016 stands committed to the Finance 
Committee. Clerk . 
BILL  
       Hon.  Ndanda , Chairman Committee  on Administration and County Security so it has 
been brought to the House by t he Chairman. Yes Hon . Fadhili . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker  
(Interruption)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No we need to know are you 
representing Hon . Ndanda? Hon . Fadhili , are you a Member of the Committee ?  
       Hon. Mwal imu: Yes Mr. Speaker .  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay, yes Clerk . 
 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY INSPECTORATE BILL, 2016   
 FIRST READING  
(Clerk read)  
"A Bill for AN ACT of the County Assembly of Mombasa to provide for the establishment, 
organization, functions and conduct of the Mombasa County Inspectorate; and for connected 
purposes ". 
(End of First Reading)  
 
       Thank you , now the Mombasa County Inspectorate Bill, 2016 now stands committed to 
the Committee on Administration and County Security. Tha nk you. Clerk ? 
 
August 2, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      109 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  ADJOURNMENT  
       There being no other Business this House stands adjourned unti l tomorrow Wednesday at 
9.00 am.  
The House rose at 3.16pm  