November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 15th November , 2022  
Third Assemb ly - Tenth Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 2:30p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
  
[The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the Chai r] 
 
PRAY ERS  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Have your seats Hon ourable  Members.  
Yes, C lerk?  
STATEMENT  
 
[Interruption]  
Yes, Honourable  Manuari ? 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Katika swala la Statement  na 
kutokana na kanuni za Bunge  namba  80; na kama unavyojua  sisi ni watu wa kuvuka kutoka fer i 
na kila siku huwa tuko pamoj a kama ma MCAs w a kutoka feri ila swala lilitokea leo asubuhi 
Waheshimiwa watano kudhalilishwa katika kivuko cha fe ri na askari wa Coast Guard pamoja na 
wafanyikazi wa fe ri. Katika harakati za Waheshimiwa kuwania kuja katika Bunge 
tukadhalilishw a kiasi cha kuwa kulikuwa na m korogano wa sintofahamu baina ya Waheshim iwa, 
wafanyikazi wa fer i na askari wa Coast Guard. Mheshimiwa Spika , ningeomba kwa  niaba ya 
Bunge hili na Waheshimiwa wengine ambao watatumia kivuko cha f eri, tuwaite wahusika wa 
Keny a Ferry na w ahusika wakuu wa Coas t Guard ili  tulizungumze hili swala kwa nia ba ya 
Waheshimiwa wengine . Ikiwa sisi ambao wametuzowea  wametu dhalilisha kiasi kile , 
inamaanisha mwengine pia atakapo tumia kivuko kile na kujieleza kuwa mimi ni Mheshimiwa 
fulani , heshima yak e itadu nishwa. Hi vi sasa Mheshimiwa Spika, sisi kama Waheshimiwa  kutoka 
ng’ambo ya pili kwa  sababu ndio njia yetu tutaitumia kila sik u tutakuwa ni wenye kudhalilishwa, 
wenye kuonyeshwa unyonge kiasi ch a kuwa tutak uwa hatuna thamani na hatu kutaka kuleta 
kelel e ila tuliju a tuna njia muafaka ya kueleza ujumbe wetu. Kwa  hivyo kupitia kwako 
Mheshimiwa Spika, taasisi husika  tuiiteni tukae  nayo chini tuwaeleze kuwa kuna Waheshimiwa 
kama wale Waheshimiwa  wengine Wabunge  kwa sababu hata Mbunge akipita  huheshimiwa na 
akapishwa mbele lakini  sisi tulijieleza kama Waheshimiwa lakini  tumedhalilishwa vibaya sana. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 2 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Manuari , I will 
direct your Statement to th e Committee on Powers an d Privilege to take char ge and I wi ll not ify 
the Speaker to what transpire d today so the Committee will s it and look for a day to call the 
named persons so that they appear  before the Committee . And a Committee  has po wers and the 
Committe e will act accordingly as per our Standing Orders a nd as per the Constitution of Kenya 
and as per the County Government Act . Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
ACCESSIBILITY OF BUILDINGS BY PEOPLE LIVING WITH DISABILITIES IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
Yes, Honourable Frankline Makanga?  
Hon. Makanga: Mr. Speak er Sir , I beg to move t he following Motion;  
THAT AWARE that Se ction 21 of the Persons with Disabilities Act of 2003 , persons with 
disabili ties are entitled to barrier free and disability friendly environment to enable them to 
have access to buildings roads a nd other social amenit ies and assistive de vices and other 
equipment to provide their mobility;  
FURTHER aware that disability is the expe rience of any conditi on that makes it more 
difficult for a person to do certain activities or have equitable access with in a given society;  
CONGNIZANT THAT it is vital to provide pe ople with disabilities with basic facilities to 
live independent lives on a n equal basis with ot hers; 
CONCERNED THAT although there are laws that require buildings to be accessible to 
people livi ng with disabilities ( PWDs) they have been  ignored ; majority o f our buildings 
including but not limited to County Assembly building, Coun ty government offices  
schools, hospitals, supermarket, and banks. This has made it very difficult for PWDs to 
access  essential services in bot h public and privat e premises;  
I, there fore urge this Assembly to resolve that;  
1. To have adequate prov ision of spac e into doorways and w ithin rooms to allow for 
wheelchair dimensions and turning circle ; 
2. To reserve parking spaces for PW Ds; 
3. To be designed and constructed in such  manner that the fa cility or part of the 
facility is accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities includin g wheelchair ramps for 
steps and mobility ; 
4. With more than one floors to consider installing an elev ator that serves for 
transport of persons or goods ; 
I, ask my brother and my friend Hon ourable  Solomon Ngugi to second the Motion.  
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Yes, Honourable  Solomon Ngugi?  
Hon. Ngugi : I, Solomon Ngugi Wainaina  second the  Motion. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani) : Thank you  Honourable Members . I 
propose a question that the Motion on accessibility of buildings b y people livi ng with disabilities 
in Mombasa County be debated in this House ? 
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 3 [Question proposed and agreed to ] 
Yes, Honourable  Makanga?  
Hon. Makanga:  Thank you Hon ourab le Speaker and also, I thank the Hono urable 
Members who are  in this House for al lowing this Motion to be tabled into this Honourable 
House. Mr. Speaker Sir , we are living in Mombasa and I believe we come from a community 
where we are living with t he people who are in our ministry who in one way or the other, they 
have challenges in ref erence into definition of disabilities.  Honourable  Speaker , we are havin g 
Members in ou r society who seek services from offices ; both the government and private offices 
but they are not  able to access those buil dings because  of their d isabilities . Honourable  Speaker , 
I have witnessed several cases including  in this buildin g, where some of our staff  who by 
circumstances Honourable Speaker  have ch allenges because disabili ty we were all created by 
God and nobody cho oses to have a challe nge and these challenges can come in any way ; it can 
come because one has  been  involved in a road tr affic accident , it can come because of a chronic 
medical condition and  it can get anybody , anytime life can change and unless we make this 
building being accessi ble to the people , not only the staff and Members of the County Assembl y 
but even the public that they may able even to come and attend some of these proceedings that 
we are  making as a  House.   
Honourable  Speaker , the challenges of living with  a disability or havi ng a disability is  
discouraging, painful and many peo ple with disability are struggling even  to live a life that most 
of us are living . So Honourable  Speaker , let us alleviate the suffering that  our people go through 
that we may ease  the burden of them accessing our building.  Honourable  Speaker , when you 
move arou nd town and the buildings that we are having in towns ; including Bima Towers which 
host some of t he ma ny offices of this Honourable government you cannot  access if you have a 
disability because even the lifts or the elevators are not working . So, it is my prayer and it is my 
plea that this  Honourable  House will find it fit so that w e may ease t he burden that our people are 
going through oth er than mak ing ramps Honourable  Speaker . We have people who also have 
challenges of vision that  is still a disability and we have to make this building accessible to the m 
so other than making ramps and put elevators we should also be able to have markers or 
directi ons that will guide them to know how to follow their path even when they come 
Honourable Sp eaker , it is my humble request . Honourable  Speaker , it is my humble prayer  and a 
request to this Hon ourable  House that  as w e consider this Motion , let us consider ho w we are 
going to make our great pe ople living with disabilities feeling comfortable and happier residents 
of this Hono urable and beautiful County of Mombasa. T hank you , Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. F adhili  Makarani ): Than k you Hon ourable  Makanga. Yes 
Honourable  Hamida?  
Hon. Noor:  Thank  you Hon ourable  Speaker , I do support the Motion. I do support the 
Motion because everything that my fellow Member has anchored in h is Motion is true, w e do 
need friendly places f or the  disabled because  if one of the Persons  with Disabilities ’ (PWD ) 
disab led comes  with a wheelchair Mr. Speaker, he will not have access to our building in this 
Assembly right now because we are not Pe ople Living with Disabilities (PWDs) friendly. Mr . 
Speak er we even need sign s for them so th at wh en they do com e into the building , there are 
some PWD s who need the signs for the deaf people that they can see the signs and they can go to 
the office where i s needed.  Right now, in the Youth Departm ent Mr. Speaker , somebody wi th a 
wheel chair  cann ot reach  the top offices because it is not (PWDs) friendly . 
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 4 So, with this Motion I do urge my fellow Members to pass the Motion so that our fellow  
(PWDs) people can get their right ful rights  within the government and outside the government 
buildings. Thank you very much.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim 
Omondi?  
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir , thank you for the opportunity that yo u have give n me.  Mr. 
Speaker, I wan t to stand and suppor t this particular Motion brought forward by the Honourable  
Member for Chaani and Mr. Speaker am going to support this Motion with reasons . Mr. Speaker , 
I have been observi ng in our environment some of the ter ms tha t are referred to People Living 
with Disabilities and I find it humili ating. Mr. Speaker , I want to refer to one of our Hon ourable  
Members in this House which we used to have some games and accide ntally one of the 
Honourable  Memb ers who was our goalkeeper and  a very good one but accidentally that was the 
first day that we were playing wi th our opponents since we joined this Assembly that was in the 
last Assembly . The Hon ourable  Member go t an accident when he was a ctually in  the g oal M r. 
Speaker  and what came after that the terms that were being referred to him as ‘kiwete’, ‘kilema’. 
Mr. Speaker , those terms are not favo urable , they demean because the people living with 
disabilities are people who have ca pabilities  of just do ing anything t hat any other person can do.   
Mr. Speaker , Section 22 (1) o f the People Living with Disabilities Act, 2003 also provides 
that the proprietor or the owner of the building should ad apt the building and ensure that  the 
build ing me ets the requirement s which can be actually be accessible by the people livin g with 
disabilities . Mr. Spea ker, section 24 of the People Living with The Disabilities Act, 2003 also 
mandates the National C ouncil for Persons that are Living with Disabilities that is t he (NCPWD) 
to serve with an adjustments order upon the ow ner of the premises for the provider of t he 
services or a need . Mr. Speaker , the County government of Mombasa should undertake  steps to 
enforce the laws and the r egulati ons o n accessibilit ies and mobility , not only accessibilities . I 
want to empha size mobility also should be looked into which is enforced in Section 21 of the 
People Living with The Disabilities Act, 2003 . Mr. Spe aker, the rig ht of people l iving with 
disabilities have  a further which being constitutionally recognized under  the rights of people 
living with disabil ities. United Nations Convention of Rights of People with Disabilities , that is 
(UNCPW D) al so minimize s the barriers to e qualization of opportunitie s Mr. Speaker in an aspect 
of social, cultural, economic  and political lives for People Living with the Disabilities.  Finally, 
Mr. Speaker Article 54 of th e Constitution of Kenya , 2010 pro vides in  inter alia  that is a  person 
with disability shoul d be treated with dignity and respect it deserves. Mr. S peaker, I support. 
Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Hamid?  
Hon. Moha mmed Hamid:  Ahsante s ana Mh eshimiwa Spika . Mimi napenda kuunga  
mkono Mswada ulioletwa na Mh eshimiwa mwenzangu ; ningelipenda kusisitiza mambo mawili 
tu katika mjadala huu…  moja si si kam a Waheshimiwa  na sisi  kama wawakili shi wa wananchi 
wa Mombasa , nafiki ria ni jambo muhimu hili eneo letu la Bunge tuanze kuonyesha kwa mifano 
kabla hatujaanza kuwek ea sheria watu wengine nje hilo ni ja mbo la kwanza. Rai yangu ya p ili 
ambayo n ingelipen da pia  tuiangalie vizuri n a naona wenzan gu wote hatujaiangalia ; serikali y a 
Kaunti iliyopita ilipitisha Mswada  na wakaweza kutengeneza barabara zote ndani ya Mombasa, 
ndani ya  Central Business District  (CBD ) lakini hii leo tunakuta njia ya wale  amba o ni 
walemav u wa kutembea na viti  vyao vya magu rudumu kwenye sehemu  hizi. Ni sehe mu hizi hizi  
ambazo wachuuzi wanaweka biashara chini na inakuwa ngum u hawa wat u kupata njia  yao.  
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 5 Kwa hivyo , ningeomba mambo haya mawili tuyazingatie  kama Nyumba , ya kwanza ni  hilo 
nililozungu mza. Habari sisi wenye we tuwe ni mfa no na pili tuangalie maswala ya hi zi pavements  
zote ndani ya Mombasa ni namna gani hawa wachuuzi wataondole wa ili mobility  iwe r ahisi kwa 
hawa watu ambao tunajarib u kuzungumzia hizi sheria zao. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes, Honourable  Maryam ? 
 
Hon. Baimu:  Ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi. Mimi nauunga mkon o 
mjadala huu kuhusu walemavu kwamb a waweze kupewa nafas i ya kuweza ku access buildings . 
Katika kuong ezea hio ningeomba ; kando y a kwamba mambo ya accessibility , am a kuweza 
kupata hizo huduma kwa ma nyumba, nafikiria walemavu ni watu ambao katika hii nchi ye tu 
maisha yako duni sana. Kwa hivyo  ningeomba, maana yak e kulingana na vile ninavyotambua 
walema vu wa le wenye severe disability  wao peke yao ndio wan apata pesa kut oka kwa serikali 
nafikiri kama sij akosea ni elfu tatu ama nne kwa mwezi. Kwa hivyo ningeomba hii Nyumba, 
tafadhali tuangalie hil i jambo la hawa walem avu maana yake mlemavu ni mlemavu, si kw amba 
ana severe disability  ndio aweze kupata kitu amb aye ana ulemav u mwengine hawezi kupata kitu. 
Ahsante. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank yo u. Yes , Honourable  Milka ? 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the chance to also contri bute to  the Motion  and I 
will beg in by thanking  the Honourable  Member, Hon ourable  Makanga for bringing this Motion 
to this House seconded by  the Honourable  Member representing people living wi th disability or 
people differ ently enabled. I am very s ure that we finally are going t o pass th is Motion because it 
is a v ery important one.  Persons with d isabilities should be treated with  dignity and respect and 
referred  to as people who should also en joy the rights as contained in  our 2010 Constitution  
under the Bill of Rights just as Honourable  Ibrahim Oyugi has elaborated ve ry well. I do not 
need  to repeat , they should be treated with dignity and the call for them to be given facilities in 
our Count y so that they can access as they strive to access servi ces that we easily attai n because 
we are d ifferently enabled als o. They should be abl e to get the s ervices by accessing the areas 
easily , so I am also seconding the Motion that the  PWDs should be given  an enabling 
environment to carry out  their activities w ithou t any hinderance.  
 
[The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ) exits the Chair ] 
[The Tempora ry Speaker ( Hon.  Amriya  Juma ) assum ed the Chair ] 
 
As I said  earlier,  I know this Motion is goin g to pass ; however,  we have a trend  of passing 
Motions Madam Speaker in this House and they go gathering dust at the Executive of fices. This 
is an appeal that should  not go gather ing dust  in the cabinet and wherever the y will be kept. It is  
a Motion that  is so important, it is a Motion that should be addressed immediately, it is an issue 
that should be dealt with immediately s o tha t the PWDs are able t o access the services. I 
remember i n thi s very House we passed a Motion on a vailing brea stfeeding areas;  I know you 
were one of those  Madam Speaker ; you are one of those who tackled that and another 
Honourable Member plus myself and we  have  never followed up to know what happened to that 
Motion w hich was passed in this Honourable  House , we should be having th ose areas for  the 
breastfeeding mothers. So , the same thing should not happen to this Motion , that it is so 
important and emotive  …. 
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 6 …to the PWDs  so my humble re quest  is as we pass this Motion , it should be  followed u p 
very closely so that  it is implemented. W ith that, I su pport the Motion and I thank the 
Honourable  Member who brought it up. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Juma 
Manuari  what is  it? 
 
 Hon. Juma Man uari:  Ahsante B i. Spika. Kwanza niu nge mkono swa la hili la watu wa 
uwezo maalum uli oletwa na ndu gu yangu Mheshimiwa Makanga na ukawa second ed na ndugu 
yangu Mheshimiwa wa kiteng o chao wa uwezo maalumu Bwana  Ngugi, rafiki yangu. Mimi Bi. 
Spika, kwanza ningeanz a kuchangia ka tika Majengo  yaliojengwa kupitia nembo ama jina la 
Serikali ya Kaunti, kwa sababu pale kwangu mkabala na mimi katika eneo langu la wadi, kuna 
nyumba inaitwa Likoni B. Hii nyumba mimi mwenyewe juzi nilipanda nikiwa na  Naibu wa 
Gavana, kiten go cha wenye uw ezo maalum wakizingatiwa, wakati lile ni Jumba  na ni Jumba  la 
kiserikali na ni Jumba  ambalo litahudumikia wananchi. Inama anisha katika hilo Jumba  tayari 
wenye uwezo maalum wame wekwa kando.  Kwa hivyo kupitia swala hili Bi. Spika, mimi kama 
kiongozi ningel iomba kwanza kabla hatujafika kwa mwananc hi kumwambia, nyumba yake 
tuigeuz e hata kama ni ghorofa moja atuweke sehemu ya watu wenye uwezo maalum kwanza sisi 
wenyewe tuishi kwa mifano.  Bi Spika , la pili ni katika maswala y a vyoo vya umma  ambavy o 
bado vinasim amiwa na serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa. A ma kweli tukiingia katika vile vyoo, 
hawa ndugu zetu wenye uweze maalum, huwezi ona na kama kutakuwa kume wekwa choo cha 
kukaa  basi kwa mazingira ama maandari yaliomo kule ndani,  hata huyo kiwete … pole mwenye 
uwezo ma alum atashindwa pia kukikelia. Bi. Spika naunga mkono Mswada  huu. Ahsante.  
 
[Laughter ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya  Juma ): Naam Mhe shimiwa  Fatma?  
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Bi. Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii. Kwanza 
kabisa, namshukuru Mwenyez i Mungu Muumba  wa mbingu na ardhi, pasi na kizuizi kwa k uwa 
ndani ya hili Jumba siku ya leo. Nimesimama hapa Bi. Spika kama Mheshimiwa aliyechaguliwa 
na kura nyingi sana za walemavu, nafikiri katika hili Bunge hakuna mtu mwengine isi pokuwa 
mimi. Nawapa kon gole walemavu.. . 
[Applause ] 
Nawapa kongole Wodi  yangu. P ili Bi. Spika , namshukuru kaka yangu Mhe shimiwa  
Madialo, kwa kuweza kutukumbuka sisi ndugu zake ambao tumo humu ndani, nafikiri kama 
sijakosea kila mmoja katika Wodi yake ali weza kuleta wheelchairs  na walkers …  
[Applause ] 
Kabla sijasahau ndugu yangu Mh eshimiwa  Madialo, mimi natoka katika Wodi ambayo ina 
walemavu wengi sana, kwa hivyo ukituletea tena mimi unipe mara tatu zaidi ya wale wenzangu 
unawapatia…  
[Applause ] 
Ni kweli kwa ha kika Bi. Spika sisi tun amshukuru Mweny ezi Mungu ametuumba na via 
vyetu, na Waswahili  wanasema hujafa, hujaumbika .  
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 7 Kwa hivyo tum uombe Mwenyezi Mungu tukae hivi hivi na afya alitupatia Mwenyezi 
Mungu. Bi. Spika , walemavu wanaishi katika maisha ya kusikitisha sana; si katika hili Jumba  
letu tu, ha ta ukiingilia katika hospitali zengine za  kiserikali … 
[Interruption ] 
Naomba unilinde manake nas ikia simama, simama haijulikani kwa simamishwa nini Bi. 
Spika ! Nasikia simama, simama na mimi nimesimama tayari. Kwa  hivyo naomba unilinde.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Proceed Hon ourable  Membe r. 
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Walemavu wanaishi katika maisha ya kutatanisha, japokuwa ni 
maisha ambayo Mwenyezi Mungu amewachagulia, lakini pia sisi twatakikana tuwafikirie Bi. 
Spika. Kw a hivyo nimesimama kuun ga mkono hoja hii iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa wa W odi ya 
Chaani, nampa kongole. Ahsante sana.  
[Applause ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Yes, Mhe shimiwa  Solomon Ngugi?  
Hon. Ngugi:   Bi Spika ahsante sana. Kwanza niregeshe shukurani  kwa Mwenyezi Mungu 
mwingi wa rehema aliyeturuzuku hidaya ya uzima. Nimesimama hapa mbele kuunga mkono 
hoja iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa ndugu yangu wa kutoka kata ndo go ya Chaani ndugu daktari 
Honourable  Franklin Makanga. Swala alilozungu mzia ni la ukweli na wengi wet u 
wamelishuhudia na wam epata kuliongelea. Mimi ninaomba Waheshimiwa wenzangu t uliunge 
mkono hili jambo na tulisukume lipite, sio tu unavyosema kupanda, hata hiz i tiles unazoziona 
zilizowekwa kila mahali hufika wakati zinapooshwa kukawekwa ishara  ya kuonyesh a kwa njia 
ya kimombo , “slippery”  yaani kunateleza na ile ishara  amewekewa mtu mzim a, sio yule 
mlemavu manake mwenye magongo ukamwekea kuwa kwateleza, hata akaja na m agongo yake 
bado atateleza ataanguka. Sasa ile ishara  haiondoi ule ulemavu wake.  Pili, nishukuru serikali ya 
Kenya kutut ambua sisi walemavu mpaka leo hii mimi nimeteuliwa kuja kuwakilisha  hapa. 
Walinibadilisha jina kutoka kwa vipofu, mabubu, manani tukapewa  jina letu spe sheli  amba lo 
tunaambiwa ni maalum , kitengo maalum chetu sisi. Kenya , moja wapo sisi wenye vitengo 
maalum, h atutozwi ushuru tunapoletwa kitu kwa nchi hatutozwi choc hote, twashukuru kwa 
serikali ya Kenya na si hapo tu, na zile zengine ambazo zitat usaidia sisi kulingana na vile 
tunavyoishi pia watufanyie. Ahsante sana Bi. Spika, ahsante sana  Daktari Makanga kwa ku leta 
hoja hii hapa.  
[Applause ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Yes, Honourable  Salim Baya?  
Hon. Salim Baya:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika kwa kunipati a nafasi hii na kwanza 
nimshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu  ambaye ametuumba sote na katupatia fursa hii ya kukutana hapa 
kwenye  Nyumba hii. Majina yangu kamili naitwa Hamisi Salim Bay a, ambaye nawakilisha kata 
ndogo ambayo ni kubwa ni Wodi ya Timbwani na napenda ku unga mkono hoja ambayo 
imeletwa na jirani mwenza Mhe shimiwa  Franklin Makanga , Daktari, ambayo itakuwa ni mwizi 
wa fadhila kam a nitapinga, kwa sababu  Mwenyezi Mungu amenijalia furaha adhimu na akaweza 
kuniumba  nikiwa viungo vyangu viko sawa tisaini kwa mia . 
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 8 Kwa hivyo na unga mkono hoja hii ili letwa na Mheshimiwa  Franklyn Makanga wa Chaani 
tisaini kwa mia , kawaida yang u nikibakisha zile kumi kwa sababu ya ubinadamu . Ahsanteni.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Yes, Honourable  Madialo.  
Hon. Madialo:  Ahsante  sana. Karibu n ikuite Madam  Speaker  Sir lakini nikakumbuka Bi 
Spika! Ningependa pia kuchukua  fursa hii , sitakuwa mwingi wa maneno lakini nilikuwa nataka 
niende kwa re kodi ya kwamba nimesimama na kuunga  mkono hoja hii, ambapo imeletw a na 
Mheshimiwa  Makan ga. Vile mwenz angu Hon ourable  Kushe am esema , kusema kweli hata katika 
Wodi  yangu ba adhi ya mambo ambayo  yalisababish a nichaguliwe ni hiyo kutembea na 
walemavu ; nimebahatika ya kwamba muda hadi muda nimekuwa nikip okea  vifaa hivyo kama 
wheel cha irs, walkers  na ile h ii ya makwapan i siju i inaitwaje … 
Hon. Katana:   Miti tembezi … 
Hon. Madialo : Miti tembezi ! Mswahi li amenieleze a inaitwa hivyo  na nimesaidia sana 
wale katika Wodi  yangu kwa miaka miwili nilip okuwa katika kampeni  na wengi katika Wodi  
waliona jambo hil o na wakasema ikawagusa moy o na pia vile Kushe amese ma nimesa idia 
baadhi yenu n a baadhi ya hizi vitu la kini sa a hii kuendelea mbele ba do nachangia hapo nimeona 
kwamba Kushe na haswa ndugu yetu Ngu gi ndio yatakikana wapo kezwe sana kwa mfan o Ngugi 
apokezwe san a kwa sababu yeye ndio yuko  kwa kile kitengo .  
Mwisho sijui mim i ni mgeni mutanif undisha kidogo proce dure nilikuwa  naomba sijui 
kama katika Mswada  huu isis itizwe pia nikichangia sasa sijui utanipa tia mwelekeo  ni kwamba 
pia ile mambo ya kandarasi kwamba  pia wal emavu kuna kiwango  fulani a mbapo im ewekwa  
katika  Katiba  ya kwa mba pia itekelezwe  kwa sababu haite kelezwi.  Kwa h ivyo pia wakati 
tunasema kuhusu walemavu mijengo ikapate kutengenezwa kulingana na  pia s pecifications 
ambapo itasaidia vivyo hivyo . Ningependelea pia jambo hili ya mambo ya  kandarasi la 
walemavu pi a iwekwe na ik apate kutekelezwa ., Ahsante sana Bi Spika.  
[Applause ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma) :  Yes, Honourable  Pamela.  
Hon. Arwa : Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me  this opportunity to contribut e. I 
want to support the Motion moved by Hon ourable  Franklin e Makanga , MCA Chaani Ward. I 
support 100 per cent  and I also want to echo what my colleague has said Hon ourable  Milka  
Areba that let us not just p ass this Bill at this Hon ourable  House and take it for granted because 
even from th e look of  things the other day the national gove rnment advertised  the posit ion of the 
CEC and the PS but it was unfortunate that the People living with disabilities,  they did not 
consider them , even the other day you heard my are a MP, Honourable  Juma Mishi Mbo ko was 
complain ing o n the s ame issue . So, it is hi gh time this H ouse put into cons ideration  the matter of 
PWD s with a great concern, because outside here those people they feel as if they are not God’s  
creatures , so if we consider them in this Hon ourable  House,  I think that is  a bless ing to us as  
Honourable  House because P WDs they have many challenges compared to us , so it is high time 
we put this matter into consideration and push th at their issues be looked  at a very sympathetic 
manner otherwise thank you Madam Speaker.  
 
The Temp orary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Okay , before I  accord Hon ourable 
Franklin the opportuni ty to respond to the Motion,  I just want to direct the attention of Members 
to Standing Order 73 that talk s about ,  
November 15, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        10 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 9 1. The rules of debate , the proceedings will be in English, Kiswahi li and Kenya sign      
language ;  
 
2. Once a Member beg ins the speech  in any of the lan guage provided for under Clause 
one shall continue in the same language until the conclusion of the M embe rs’ speech.  
 
So, Members kindly note . Yes, Honourable  Franklin e please respond to your Motion ? 
Hon. Makanga: Thank you Madam  Speaker . I am so humbled  this afternoon  that the   
Honourable M embers in this House have been able to resonate  and to be in the shoes of the great 
people that we love people with disabilities who live among st us.  I appreciate  the leadership of 
this Hou se for eve n consideri ng allowing th e Motion to come t o the floor and every contribution 
that has been made by th e Hono urable  Members has been noted and I believe  even as we do this  
while we may say it is our d uty to do so , but I can tell you we have touche d even the  heart  of 
God. Hono urable  Madam Speaker , one thing that has also come out in the discussion is the issue 
of the toilets ; it is a p rovision in the law that we ought t o have atleast  a toilet  for each gender th at 
is accessible to the  PWDs.  Madam Speaker , when you walk also in the corrid ors of town you 
will realise that there is only one pavement in town , that is along Di go Road Markiti area where 
there is a pave ment that is disability friend ly. So, I believe  it is high time that as we pas s this 
Motion, the Committee that wi ll be responsible for Implementation  they follow this Motion to 
have it implemented and further Madam Speaker am aware that the previous House second 
Assembly they passed a Bill on disability but when they passed the Bill it wa s not assented  to 
because there were reservations from His Excellency  the Governor then.  It will be honourable at 
this House after passing this Motion in the meantime we also move with spe ed to reintroduce 
that Bill in this House and als o to ha ve a policy d ocument that sh all be used to enf orce whatever 
we have passed as a House that we may not only be  a legislative House but also, we do our 
oversight to ensure that our great people become ben eficiaries for our lea dership. Madam  
Speaker,  I am so grateful  for this opport unity that you have given me and my prayer is that to all 
of us who have made this a success may God richly bless y ou. Thank you  so much Madam 
Speaker.  
[Applause ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Thank y ou Hon ourable  Franklin e. Now 
Members, I now p ut the ques tion that the Motion by Hon ourable  Franklin on the accessibility of 
buildings by People living with Disability be appro ved in this H ouse in the same terms as 
moved . 
[Question put and  agreed  to] 
So, the Motion by Hon. Fra nklin Makanga MCA C haani Ward on  Accessibility of 
Building s by Person s with Disabilities in Mombasa County is here by adopted.  
[Applause ] 
Yes Clerk. 
ADJOURNMEN T 
The House stands adjourned until Wedn esday 16th November , 2022 at 10 :00a.m. 
The House rose at 3:16p.m. 