February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedn esday, 3rd February, 2016  
The House met at 9:13a.m. 
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Clerk?  
MOTION  
Hon.  Serah Nyamvula.Yes, Hon.  Zeinab Mumba.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika, h uu 
Mswada w a Nyamvula nadhani ulishapita tulifanya wiki iliyopita . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Ni kweli naona kama kuna matatizo.  
(Interruption)  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Point of ord er! 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Fadhili.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker, with due respect it was captured  in the House Business 
Committee and I am sure the House Business Committee sat and the M otion that Hon.  Zeinab is  
saying that  has been debated in this House  I am sure if it was debated in this House, the House 
Business Committee could not have written it to be debated today.  Mr. Speaker I am sure Hon.  
Nyamvula  is also aware that this same M otion has not been debated that’s why on behalf of Hon.  
Nyamvula, I am just asking on her behalf for you to accord her more time even if it will be in the 
afternoon for us to  consult the Hansard de partment and the mover of this M otion for us to g et a 
clear notification if the M otion has been debated or  I am sure that the M otion has not been 
debated in this H ouse... 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Mary Akinyi . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you M r. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir  on behalf of the Hon.  
Nyamvula, I am the one who tabled the Notice o f Motion and then it was debated in the 
afternoon … 
(Applause ) 
...I tabled the Notice of M otion on the Wednesday morning and it was debated on 
Wednesday afternoon.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay. Yes, Hon.  Meya Mstahiki.  
Hon.  Mwidani:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Actually, she has made a clarification b ecause I 
am already having the N otice of M otion on Wednesday morning a nd so she has said it was 
debated in the afternoo n this is what I wanted to clarify. It is very true and it was debated in the 
aftern oon. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Madundo naona mkono wako uko 
juu. 
Hon.  Mohamed Madundo:  Nilikuwa namuita madam , Mheshimiwa wasemaje b wana 
sikusikii.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Fadhi li, iko nini?  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Hon.  Speaker , we are busy concluding  on this M otion and Hon.  
Madundo has started auctioning ; I don’t know if he is auctioning a point or what be cause I did 
not understand him h e just stoo d up with a po int. I think it is an auction but Mr. Speaker Sir  and 
this matter, my point is that …, get my point because there is a House Business Committee. Mr. 
Speaker, if the House Business Committee in their s ession paper schedules that this Motion is to 
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 be debated today morning and  the Hon.  Member said that this M otion h as been passed, I think 
this is a waste of public  funds because  typing a whole M otion like this and so mebody comes and 
says that the M otion has been debated in this Hon.  House!  Mr. Speake r I am wondering if the 
Motion  within a span of just one week is also  getting away into this Hon.  House for the second 
time, in my view the House Business Committee should be constituted again because they are  
lying, they are  not doing their work properly because if we let this thing to continue we might 
also debate somethi ng that has been debated yesterday.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Which things? You say it has not been 
debated  so which thing s do you want the  the House Business Committee  to do?  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker…  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Msw abah Rashid) : Are you aware whether the M otion has been 
deba ted or not? Because previously you said the M otion has not been debated.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Yes Mr. Speaker Sir, as  this is a Hon.  House and i f a M ember stands 
before you and says that it  has been deba ted w hat I was saying is for us to get time and go back 
to the Hansard department for us to get a clear, for us to get a clear…  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thanks , Hon.  Mwinga?  
Hon.  Mwinga : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I thi nk the Hon.  Member is trying 
to waste our time because we have evidence in this House …  
(Interruption ) 
Hon.  Mwalimu : Point of order! Mr. Speaker I have a point of order.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, is your point in order Hon.  Fadhili? Hon.  
Member from Mwakirunge is o n a point of order so he  is trying to say something but the floor is 
still yours he has interrupted you so let’s hear what he is saying and then we will come back to 
you. 
Hon.  Mwalimu : But I  am not wasting time  Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : No, let’s hear this side. Let’s hear this side 
how you are wasting time.  
Hon.  Mwinga: Mr. Speaker, I think we have evide nce in this House t he Order papers for 
Wednesday morning and  afternoon appear w e have a Notice of Motion  and the M otion we are 
discussing here Mr. Speaker … 
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili can you continue?  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr.  Speaker  Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir, if the Hon.  Member is just 
standing with an O rder paper and i s saying that it is evidence  I also have an Order paper which 
indicates that the M otion is to be debated today . Mr. Speaker S ir, we cannot just rely on the 
Order paper that he is carrying because also the one which I  am carrying contains the same 
Motion th at is written in the O rder paper that he is holding . So by saying that he has got the 
evidence does not assure this Hon.  House, my point is, let us just get some ti me even if you will 
direct the M otion to be debated or for th e House to be assured that the  Motion has been 
discussed . Mr. Speaker sir, we don’t kn ow the resolution of the  House , the mover of this Motion 
has not yet arrived, in my opinion we might not let this M otion to be debated b ecause it is a very 
good M otion, so from you C hair…  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Kithinzi : Point of order Mr. Speaker!  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Zeinab what is your point of order, Hon.  
Zeinab?  
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3  Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba:  Mheshimiwa Spika, mi mi nashangaa sana Mheshimiwa 
Fadhili; k wa sababu wakati h uu Mswada u livyokuwa u kizungumziwa sijui kam a alikuwepo hapa 
ama hakuwepo n a kuna msemo Waswahili wanasema, mwezi ukiwa mchanga, wengine ni 
huchanganyikiwa , sasa sijui kama amechanganyikiwa kulingana na  lile eneo analotoka  vile 
ambavyo anavyotupotosha…  
(Applause ) 
 Ningeomba Mheshimiwa Fad hili awache kutupotosha h uu Mswada u lipita na 
tukazungumzia hapa na hata…  
(Applause ) 
 ...Na kwenye Hansard  pia iko na  ikitolewa hata alikuwa yuko k wa hivyo anatuchanganya 
Mheshimiwa Spika, a hsante.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Msw abah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Fadhili.  Mheshimiwa Zainab,  
kwanza ningependa kuuliza, sasa hivi mwezi ni mchanga ama?  
(Laughter ) 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Kithinzi:  Mheshimiwa Spika, sa sa huu mwezi ni mchanga ndio 
maana yuachanganyikiwa.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Ras hid):  Yes, Hon.  Fadhili . 
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I personally do not un derstand 
the Hon.  Member f irst, instead of her directing her issues to  this Hon.  House, she was directing 
her issues to me,  of which I am sure it is not amo ngst the procedu res of this House a nd both the 
Hon.  Members they said that I am wasting time, now h as risen another one Hon.  Member saying 
I am mentall y sick . Mr. Speaker Sir, if y ou don’t protect me they will stand another Hon.  
Member, and  maybe he will  start beating me . Mr. Speaker Sir, I need your guidance because 
what I am saying is, let us get from the Hansard department be cause they are saying that the 
Motion has  been debated, I am saying the M otion has not yet been debated.  Let’s hear from the 
Table C lerks m aybe we will get confirmation from the Table C lerks and the Hansard department ; 
what I am fi ghting for Mr. Speaker, is time  for you and the House even if it i s to re -constitute for 
another five minutes  for the c onsultation for us to find out i f this M otion has really p assed in this 
Hon.  House , that is my plea , thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay. It is okay. I was waiting for you 
Members to deliberate since there is no more deliberation.  I am asking the Table C lerks to 
confirm to this House whether  this M otion was debated or not i t may have been debated or it 
may not have been debated and maybe there was an error in printing, we don’t know. So, we are 
asking the Table C lerks;  Table Clerks can you check from your documents , on your records 
whether this M otion was debated or not ... 
(Consultation s between Table C lerks and Hansard officers ) 
(Techn ical h itch) 
  …Members it has been established by the C lerks in conjunction with the Ha nsard 
people that in fact this M otion was mo ved and passed. I do not think the House Business 
Committee meant to make this mistake but I think maybe there was a mistake somewhere i n 
printing the copies with the O rder paper or something but this M otion was deliberated and 
passed by this Hon.  House.  Clerk?  
MOTION   
REFURBISHMENT OF FOOTBALL PITCHES IN EACH SUB COUNTY AND FINANCING 
OF FOOTBALL ACTIVITIES BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 Yes, Hon.  Fadhili ? 
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4  Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand here on beha lf of the 
mover of this Moti on...th e owner of this M otion , because I am the mover now Mr. Speaker, Hon.  
Mswabah Rashid.  
(Hon.  Mwalimu move d the Motion ) 
 Mr. Speaker,  
 THAT AWARE there are football  pitches within the C ounty which are used for football 
activities;  
 FURTHER AWARE tha t football can be a source of livelihood for the youth s; 
 COGNIZANT THAT if the football pitches are refurbished they will create a conducive 
environment for football and subsequently a minimal amount of money can be char ged on the 
spectatrors to watch  football matches and this monies can be used to pay the participating teams 
and for the maintennaced of football pitches ;  
 CONCERNED THAT football pitches are currently in a deplorable condition and thus 
the football standard is affected,  
 I urge this A ssem bly to RESOLVE THAT;  
1. The County g overnment to refurbish ; including putting up a perimeter wall a nd erect 
atlea st one football pitch in each S ub county.  
2. That the County g overnment to sponsor local teams by paying their subscription to the 
relevant football  bodies.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I ask Hon.  Mwidani to second my M otion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Mwidani.  
 Hon.  Mwidani:  I second the M otion, Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Members I  shall put the questio n, 
that this House debates the M otion as moved by  Hon.  Fadhili Makarani.  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 Yes, Hon.  Makarani.  
 Hon.  Mwalimu :  Mr. Speaker I know that we have the C hair of youths , gender and 
sports … (Technical h itch) and Mr. Speaker sir it is not that I was trying  to persuade her to 
support my M otion but I know she has been spearheading a match for yout hs and gender issues . 
Mr. Spe aker, I am sure that as per my M otion, I have brought my M otion and be specific in 
football as a game ; having in mind that in the places that we are coming from there are football 
pitches around and maybe, in every school you will find a football pitc h that is why I brought the 
Motion based on football pitches but I am sure  that in these foo tball pitches because when w e 
secure these football pitches many games will be held in those schools . So Mr. Speaker, I am 
sure apart from Abu Hureira and the pitches we shall be screaming t ogether, very, very many 
youth s...(Technical h itch)…one pitch ,  for them to nu rture their talents , as I have put my pra yer. I 
would like this Hon.  House to come together and push Mr. Speaker and the realization of this 
Motion will have a positive impact to this C ounty because we know the plight in  Mombasa , 
where w e are heading to.  I salute the C ounty government of Mombasa for all the miles it has 
taken towards training the youths in the rightful direction because there was a time our youths  
were leading to that direction , of hoo liganism and whichever the case.  The youths were idle Mr. 
Speaker but the county government of Mombasa took an initiative and they started sponsoring  
very many, many sports in the C ounty of Mombasa  and in a way it reduced the very  many  cases 
that were trying to come .  
 So Mr. Speaker, I am urging my fellow Hon.  Members to support my M otion that we re -
start securing these pitches because  when we build walls along those pitches we wil l be pushing 
away land grabbers, we will be promoting football , we will be  promoting sports,  we will be 
firmly implementing sports , and  if possible  we are going to promote the m social ly and 
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 economically .  So Mr. Speaker, I will urge the C hair of Gender and Sports because it is wrong if 
I use the back door b ecause I was supposed to consult the Hon.  Chair before I  bring this M otion 
but with due respect, I respect the Hon.  Chair and…  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon.  Mwinga : Point of order Mr. Speaker ! 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  of Mwakirunge what is your point of 
order?  
 Hon.  Mwinga:  Mr. Speaker I know every Hon. Member has his or her opinion . Mr. 
Speaker, why is the Hon.  Member trying to persuade Hon.  Nyamvula to second the M otion?  
(Applause ) 
 She has her own opinion Mr. Speaker so let her, when she is debating, let her tal k her 
own opinion h e should not pers uade her to s upport  the M otion … 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : The M otion was already seconded by the 
Hon.  Member for Mtongwe. So I think Hon.  Fadhili had a point to ask all of you to support his 
Motion .  I don’t know why he is pa rticularly insisting on Hon.  Nyamvula but he has a point to 
lobby around and ask each and e very one of you to support his M otion . Yes, Hon.  Fadhili your 
three minutes  is almost over. 
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker the House should know that I 
have been given the privilege by this Hon.  House because I am usually  when I am talking to the 
people I am somehow disabled in talking so it is usual and even more times by the Hon. s they all 
know . Mr. Speaker I have just raised it to the Hon. Chair more because you know behind every 
successful man  there is a woman s o I don’t just  move without the help of a woman and I know 
the Hon.  Chair , she is in the right position  to push for this , she is always and always in the office 
of youths, sports a nd gender that is why I am trying to give her the flag for her to know the 
Motion beforehand but I am asking the Hon.  House, I am aware in the House here that it has 
been seconded by his worship Hon.  Khamis Musa Mwidani , former M ayor. Mr. Speaker I am 
sure wit h the help of many others this M otion will be passed in this House. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Opeya.  
 Hon.  Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. We have just heard a long lecture from our 
lecturer Hon.  Fadhi li about this M otion but the House supports, Mr. Speaker in fact the points 
our lecturer told us is a list of those plots  (Technical Hitch) in fact most of the land grabbing 
happened in the 80 ’s and 90 ’s and  most of these football pitches, volleyball pitche s, handball 
pitches, basketball pitches, netball pitches th ey were left open, there was no body and our 
predecessors who were called Councilors took advantage of that inp ut before we came . That is 
why we found nothing because they  took all the pitches befo re us, s o, Mr. Speaker I agree that 
there must be measures to be taken to stop those (Technical Hitch) give our youth a chance to 
play on better pitches … (Inaudible due to technical hitch )…so this M otion and I am sure it will 
pass Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Mwadziwe of Mwakirunge.  
 Hon.  Mwinga : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi nimesimama hapa 
kuupinga Mswada  huu. Mheshimiwa Spika, nafikiri kuna mambo muhimu ambayo tunaweza 
fanyia vijana na watafurahia na wataona kweli, sisi kama Mombasa Kaunti tunawajali  hawa  
vijana.  Mheshimiwa Spika tunavyozumgumza saa hii, vijana wengi hawana ma kazi, vijana 
wengi wamekaa mitaani, k wa hivyo kwanza nasema kaunti yetu ya Mombasa itaweza ku -
refurbish  hivi viwanja vyote 30, hiyo ni mambo sikubaliani nayo…  
(Interruption ) 
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6  Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa  Mwadziwe, have you read the 
Motion properly? The Motion says one pitch in each Sub -county; have you read the M otion 
properly?  
 Hon.  Mwinga: Mheshimiwa Spik a, mimi nimeisoma…  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon.  Mwangi : Mr. Speaker!  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Fadhili, the mover of the M otion ? 
 Hon.  Mwinga : Mr. Speaker I think it has been said in the House that there is a Hon.  
Member in quotes mwezi mcha nga  I am seeing that the Hon.  Member is the one who is mwezi 
mchanga   he does not und erstand what is written on the Order paper or Notice paper , thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes M embers you should read the M otion 
properly , Hon.  read t he Motion properly before contributing and stop misleading people. Yes, 
Mheshimiwa Mwadziwe of Mwakirunge.  
 Hon.  Opeya:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika nakubaliana na wewe lakini kama ninge changia 
kunayo mambo ambayo tunaweza kusimamia hawa vijana. Mheshimiwa Spika nasem a hivyo 
kwa sababu kama tunavyojua Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa haiwezi kuwa na jambo la muhimu au 
jambo la kutumia pesa . Kama muonavyo nyinyi Mheshimiwa Spika title deed  havina , viwanja 
vyenyewe ni viwanja ambavyo tumefanya ku azimiwa na watu binafsi, kwa hivyo   viwanja vingi 
vya mpira ambavyo viko katika Wo di zetu sio viwanja ambavyo ni vyetu kabisa au sio ni vya 
wale vijana .  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika mimi  nikijua ya kwamba stadium  yetu ya 
Mombasa ina endelea  kukarabatiwa na hiyo ni stadium ambayo inaweza kut engenezwa na mechi 
kubwa kubwa zikachezwa hapo vijana wa kwetu wakaangalia vile wachezaji wakubwa wakubwa 
wanavyocheza. Mheshimiwa Spika ukisema ya kwamba tunatumia pesa hizi kutengeneza hivi 
viwanja tutakuwa tunatumia pesa nyingi kutengeneza hivi viw anja lakini, tukiangalia vijana 
wenyewe ambao tunawatengenezea hivi viwanja wa na mambo mengi ambayo wamejitia . 
Mheshimiwa Spika, vijana hawana mipira, vijana hawana viatu vya kuchezea, vijana hawana 
hata h aya mavazi za kuchezea  na sisi tutatumia pesa nyi ngi kutenge za hivi viwanja . Kwa hi o 
Mheshimiwa S pika mimi naomba vile viwanja ambavyo sasa hivi vinatumika sioni ni vibaya; 
wacha vijana waendelee kutumia viwanja lakini sisi kama Kaunti ya Mombasa tuna pesa basi 
tuwasaidie hawa vijana kwa  sababu saa hi i ukienda katika viwanja vya huko mitaani unapata 
vijana wanacheza mpira hawana hata viatu.  Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni jambo dhahiri kwa  
sababu sisi kama Kaunti ya Mombasa kama kweli tunajali hawa vijana basi tuwasaidie tuwapatie 
vifaa tuhakikishe kwamba v ijana wetu wamepata vifaa vya kutosha ndio basi tuje tuangalie viatu 
baadae lakini si jambo zuri tutengeze nyumba lakini ndani ya nyumba  hakuna vitu i takuwa 
hatujafanya jambo lolote.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa wa Mwakirunge. 
Yes Hon.  Mary.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi pia 
nilipoangalia mjadala huu kwa ki undani kabisa nimeonelea napinga mjadala huu. Napinga 
mjadala huu kwa  sababu Mheshimwa Spika  hivi sasa hatun a kiwanja  chochote katika Sub-
County  kama vile ilivyosemekana mbali na kuwa hich o kiwanja ni kiwanja cha mtu f ulani. Hivi 
viwanja vyote ambavyo viko  katika Sub-county  ni viwanja vya shule n a hivyo viwanja vya shule 
ndio huwa vijana wanasaidika nazo kwa k ucheza mpira. Mheshimiwa Spika tukisha sema kuwa 
wewe tunapata mapato kutoka kwa wale vijana wakati wakiwa na michezo yao wawe wanatoa 
visenti kidogo kidogo wakiwa wanaingia katika vile viwanja. Mheshimiwa Spika hivi visenti 
ikiwa hazita enda katika mifu ko yao moja kwa moja , hizi pesa itabidi zifuate ule msururu ambao 
unahitajika n a kitambo zifuate huo msururu unaohitajika ndio tena iwarudie kule chini itakuwa 
inachukua mda mwingi ambapo kwa kusema ukweli tutakuwa hakuna kitu ambacho tumefanya. 
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Mheshimi wa Spika  unaona hawa watoto ama hawa vijana  wanapocheza katika hivi viwanja 
amba vyo wanajipatia nguvu sana kwa ajili ya kucheza ndio ile talanta yao inazidi kuongezeka na 
ndio hata wakienda hata kucheza na  wengine unaona kuwa wanashinda, w anashinda kutokan a na 
huo mchezo . Kwa hio mimi S pika naona kuwa hakuna haja ya kuwa tuchukue pesa tutengeneze 
hivi viwanja na kisha tukishatengeneza hivi viwanja  mwishowe havitaweza kusaidia  hawa vijana 
vile inavyohitajika. Hivyo basi  hizi pesa ambazo tun ataka kutengen ezea hivi viwanja  na mapeni 
ambayo watakua wanatoa hapo kwa zile mechi itakuwa haiwaendei moja kwa moja, n aona 
hakuna haja ya kuwa tuwe tena wanakodi, kule kwenye we wanatafuta pesa ya kuishia s i ajabu 
nitakapo tengeneza pesa zangu kitita hivi, hata mtu amb aye anataka kuenda kuingia kuangalia 
ule mchezo pale atakuwa anatafuta Mheshimiwa ampatie mapeni ndio aweze kuingia mle ndani 
aende akatizame michezo vile vijana wanavyocheza. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Hami si Musa Mwidani.  
 Hon.  Mwidani:  Mheshimiwa Spika  nimesimama hapa kwanza kama mchezaji wa mpira,  
mimi ni n ambari moja , naona kama sasa hivi tunazungumzia mambo ya michezo  lakini nataka 
kuwajulisha (Inaudible ...) viwanja ikiwa ni vibovu tume weka magunia ya k uaibisha lakini pia 
twapata pesa. Bwana Spika nafikiri naunga mkono huu mswada kwa  sababu mimi mwenyewe 
nilikuwa mchezaji … 
(Applause ) 
Sasa tusidanganywe kwamba mchezaji  yeyote atacheza vizuri ikiwa uwanja  ni mbovu, 
hiyo haitawezekana h ata mlevi wa wapi u kimpa shilingi elfu 50 lakini akicheza mahali pana 
vumbi na pana mawe hatakuwa mchezaji. Bwana S pika ukifanya kutizama hata uende wewe sasa 
hivi… (Inaudible ) kitu ya k wanza inatazamwa ni u le uwanja  uwe ni  mzuri, k wa hivyo hapa 
hatusemi kwa wepesi na mtu ak isema kuwa kuna mwingine anakataaa, hatujakataa mengine pia 
yaletwe, yapitishwe , vija na wasaidiw e lakini mimi kama mchezaji mpira, ningekuwa mchezaji 
naiunga mkono hii kwa  sababu naelewa ile t aabu wanayopata vijana. Bwana S pika ukienda 
mitaani ukaona vile  viwanja vijana wanavyovichezea utasikitishwa sana l akini lazima kikweli 
uwanja mmoja ambao sisi hucheza vizuri kabisa  itampatia morali y ule mchezaji aendelee 
kucheza mpira. Kwa  hio Bwana S pika hapa tusizungum ze kitu kwa  sababu kuelewa pia s io 
kuzungumz a tu lakini pia kuelewa jinsi vile mambo yalivyo  ndugu zangu. Hivyo basi mimi  
niliyo  nayo  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naiunga mkono na ningependa tuiunge mkono zaidi na 
ikiwa kuna mambo ya vijana  hatujakataa yaletwe na mengine; m fano tukipitisha kiwanja  
tunawez a tukapitisha pia …(Inaudible )…kwa hivyo M heshimiwa Spika huu ni wakati wa 
kuwaundia vijana viwanja . Ahsante.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Kalume Salim.  
 Hon.  Kalume : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi na muunga mkono  huu mjadala ambao 
umel etwa na Mheshimiwa Fadhili kwa  sababu, kwa kusema kweli hapa Kaunti ya Mombasa   
tuko na uhaba w a viwanja haswa wakati kama huu t imu yetu ya nyumbani inaingia katika ligi ya 
kimataifa na hivi sasa katika Kaunti ya Mombasa hakuna kiwanja chengine cha kutumia  
isipokuwa kiwanja cha Manispaa,  na kiwanja cha Municipal Stadium  iko katika harakati za 
ukarabati. Kwa  hio mechi za kimataifa sisi watu wa Mombasa hatutaziona  imeb idi Bandari 
wachezee N yayo National S tadium …  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswab ah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Mwadziwe  what is it?  
 Hon.  Mwinga: Mheshimiwa Spika, naona Mheshimiwa anajaribu kutup otosha kidogo 
hapa. Mheshimiwa S pika, kiwanja chetu cha stadium kilianza kukarabatiwa kutoka kitambo … 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Ra shid) : Hon.  Mwadziwe is your point in order,  what 
order numberi?  
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8  Hon.  Mwinga: Mheshimiwa Spika hebu nipatie dakika mbili ni some  kidogo.  
(Laughter ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Kaa chini utatuambia.  Naam  Mheshimiwa 
Salim Kalume.  
 Hon.  Kalume : Mheshimiwa alik uwa anataka kupinga lakini haju i atapinga vipi ; kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hapa Kaunti ya Mombasa kiwanja ambacho tumekuwa tukitumia ni 
kimoja ambapo kama mambo haya yangekuwa yamefanyika tangu kitambo  leo nadhani leo 
Bandari ingecheza hapa ,v iwanja vidogo kama  Bamburi, Kisauni ama Nyali tungeona wachezaji 
wa kimataifa wakija hapa  vile vile ninau nga mkono  mjadala huu kwa  sababu ukiangalia vile 
viwanja kama vile waheshimiwa wenzang u  wanaopinga mjadala huu wa naosema wale vijana 
hawana pesa za k ununua viatu, za kununua fulana , za kununua vifaa vya kuchezea i takuwa ni 
socks  wakati tunavitumia katika viwanja , tutakusanya zile pesa ambazo zitawasaidia wale wale 
vijana ambao wana shida kama zile kwa  sababu kama hawawezi kujisaidia wale vijana, hatuwe zi 
kuwanunulia viatu kila siku (Inaudible ). 
 Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono mjadala huu.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes, Hon.  Zeinab.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Kithinzi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika,  nimesimama pia mimi 
kuunga mkono mjadala huu kwa  sababu tukiangalia ndani ya Kaunti ya Mombasa hatuna 
kiwanja chochote kile ambacho kimewekwa ukuta , tupewe kiwanja kimoja ili turekebishe vizuri 
ili wale wachezaji wacheze vizuri. Lakini k atika Mswada  huu wam esema  kila Sub-county ni 
vizuri sana kwa  sababu viwanja hivi hivi mabwenyenye ndi o wanavinyemelea ; viwanja hivi n a 
tukiangalia hapa ndani viwanja hivi vingi havina stakabadhi za ardhi, k wa   hivyo tukiweka 
ukuta na vyeti itakuwa ni jambo la muhimu sana. Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kukuambia ya 
kwamba h uu Mswada u fanyiwe haraka iwezekanavyo iwe katika  utekelezaji  ili tuweze 
kuwasaidia vijana wetu mashinani. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Kithinzi.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab Kithinzi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi . 
Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga h uu Mswada mkono; n a kuiunga, naiunga kwa  sababu 
raha ya mchezo nau jua na maana mpira wa miguu nau jua. Mheshimiwa Spika, hapo nyuma 
nilikuwa kipenga wa  mchezo wa  football  na hizi shida vij ana wamekuwa wakipata nilikuwa 
naziona kwa  sababu  viwanja si vizuri, viwanja ni vibaya inabidi sasa kile kidogo ulic Hon. acho 
inabidi tukakodishe kiwanja kile kilichoko vizuri vijana wacheze ambapo ilikuwa ni hasara. Kwa  
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika, ni Mswada mzuri na ni ngeomba waheshimiwa wenzangu waipitishe  
kwa sababu wataka popitisha, vijana wetu watafadhaika na pia itapunguza mambo mengi kwa  
sababu kuna vijana wako manyumbani wa nataka ku cheza boli wanajua, lakini 
…(Inaudible )…vile viwanja wanahofia saa zengi ne wana weza kuenda pale walipishwe kodi 
kama ni nguo ….(Inaudible ) …. K wa hio nau unga mkono h uu Mswada , mia fil mia 
Mheshimiwa Spika, a hsante.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Serah Nyamvula.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Nyamvula:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipatia nafasi. 
Mheshimiwa Spika, nasimama, kwanza kujenga hoja yangu, p ili hii hoja Mheshimiwa Fadhili 
ameisoma kwa niaba ya Mheshimiwa Mswabah Rashid alivyosema ni kwamba tunaelewa 
kwamba kila mtu ana haki ya kule ta kitu tunaita private motio n kwa hivyo hii ama private 
motion  ni sawa. Lakini pia  nimemsikia akisema ya kwamba  hii ingekuwa vizuri kama ni 
Mswada  pia u ngekuwa kama Kamati ingekuwa  tumepe wa muda tukajua kidogo kwamba huo  
Mswada u nakuja kama Kamati  ya Vijana, Jinsia na Michezo.  
 Lakini tunakubali kwamba ….(Inaudible)…  kwa nini tunaileta kwa kiwango cha Kamati? 
Kama tunavyojua Mheshimiwa Spika wewe ukiwa ni Naibu wa Spika  na pia Mwenyekiti a liyeko  
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 ni kwamba Mswada  kama h uu unaletwa na tunaweza kuu chambua vizuri na kuangalia kama 
kuna m ambo meng ine ambayo tunaweza kuongezea k ama vile Mheshimiwa mwenzetu Opeya 
alivyosema ya kwamba sio michezo ya mpira wa miguu  peke yake lakini pia kuna mi chezo 
mingine ambayo imeingia amba yo inahitaji ku tambuliwa  kwa mfano kama hii michezo ya mpira 
wa migu u ya baharini imefika wakati Kaunti ya Mombasa  ianze ku sema ni sehemu  gani ya 
bahari, ya ufuo wa bahari ambapo mchezo wa  mpira wa miguu  ufuoni na pia mpira wa pete 
utachezwa kwa  sababu saa hii watu watakuwa wakicheza .  Kwa hivyo ni la umuhimu sana n i 
vile ambavyo ….(Inaudible…)  ni vile kwamba haya mambo yathibitishwe ; tumefika wakati 
umefika tujaribu sisi, nazungumza kama vice patron  wa Frère town football club t umejaribu 
lakini hatukuweza kupata kiwanja chetu t ukiweka magunia  vijana ndio wa kwanza kuyat eremsha 
chini . Sasa naunga mkono huu mjadala kwa  sababu mbili pekee na ninaiunga mkono tukijua ya 
kwamba sisi ni wat ungaji  sheria manake tukienda kwa b ajeti ya 2015/2016 sijui kama kuna pe sa 
ya hii, hakuna pesa ya hii n i ninavyojua pesa iliyoko ni ya kut engeza Social hall , lakini ya hii 
itabidi tusu kume katika b ajeti ya 2016/2017 .  
           Hivyo basi  siku zote tunaambiwa kuna kile kiwango ambacho lazima tuangalie kama 
katika utendaji wetu wa kazi wa mwaka huu, hii pesa imetengwa ama vipi , naunga mkono kwa  
sababu m bili ya kwamba kama vile ulivyosema tutenge neze hizo kulingana na kila Sub-county  
ipewe moja , naunga mkono kwa  sababu imesema pia  hizi timu ziweze kupewa, kusaidika kwa  
sababu sisi kama  Waheshimiwa sote  tunazijua zile shida ambazo za stakabadhi za ardhi  tunazijua 
shida hizi ni kwamba kila mtu wanavyotenda katika  viwango  tofauti  tofauti  za kucheza sisi ndio 
tunaofuatwa, w atu wanataka kuenda Taita we utafuatwa wa Mombasa, Changamwe we 
utafuatwa uchangie. Kwa  hivyo itakuwa jambo jema kama tunaweza kuwasaidia  vijana;  
Mheshimiwa Spika sisi wengine na unajua Mheshimiwa tunachangia sana kwenye michezo 
kushinda vile watu wanavyojua k wa mfano, ukijulikana wewe umetoka nje watu wanakuambia 
hata ukienda ng’ambo mama ulete mpira, usilete kitu chengine mama leta mpira,  lakini kama  na 
sisi tunajua hivi vitu viko na jezi ziko, na mipira iko kwa serikali ya Kaunti  na tumeshaenda 
sehemu  nyingi  na nikaona pesa zote serikali ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa inatoa mipira na ikatoa je zi. 
Sehemu Bunge ya  siku moja nilienda na Mheshimiwa  Musa atakubaliana na mimi t ulitoa je zi 
nyingi sana ; sasa M heshimiwa japo sio kwamba saa zengine twasema kuwa Mombasa hatuna 
hivi vitu lakini ni vile hatukupewa na mimi kama Mwenyekiti wa vijana, jinsia na michezo  
ningepen da mniunge mkono anapo kuja na Msw ada muweze kuwa na usawa wa kutoa zile 
jezi…. 
(Applause ) 
            …sio Sub-county  moja iangaliw e kushinda Sub-county  zengine i naniuma sana, 
inanisikitisha sana ya kwamba kwengine kunaweza tolewa  yaani hiyo siku tulitoa karibu je zi 
dozen  kumi na tano. Kwa  hivyo Mh eshimiwa Spika nau unga mkono lakini nasema sisi ka ma 
wengine, tuleteeni tafadhali, tuleteeni Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  utafanya sisi tena  tusaidie hawa 
vijana kuingi a ndani ya hiyo timu ya mpira wa miguu  tukizidi kuenda mbele ni kwamba mambo 
hayo yote tunayoya tengeneza ni mazuri lakini ingekuwa muhimu sana tuone kwamba 
inatekelezwa na tafadhali tukimaliza, ningekuomba tuweke mkutano na wewe kama Kamati  
yangu ili tuzidi kuchambua tuone utekelezaji utafanywa kivipi. A hsante.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Members, Hon.  Ashu.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Hussein :  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama 
kuunga mkono h uu Mswada . Mheshimiwa Spika ila mwenza ngu Mheshimiwa Serah na mwenye 
Mswada  pia tukiangalia swala hili litaingia katika b ajeti ya  2016/2017 Mungu akipenda na 
ningependa katika ule usawa kila kiongozi aweze kupawa kiwanja kimoja, isiwe katika eneo 
Bunge .  
February 3 , 201 6                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10  Hawa watoto tuko nao ndani ya Wo di 30 za Kaunti ya Mombasa na pili Mheshimiwa 
Spika mbali na kuunga mimi mkono huu mjadala, lazima tuzingatie kwamba hizi shule zenye 
viwanja kuna shule zengine ni zetu na kuna shule zile si zetu na hazina stakabadhi za ardhi . Kwa  
hivyo jambo la msingi pia ni kuangalia zile shule zitakuwa na stakabadhi ili tuweze kuekeza 
ndani ya shule ambazo ni zetu isije tuka wekeza ndani ya shule ambazo sio zetu.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika kwa hayo machache, hoja naiunga mkono kila tunapotaka kufanya maendeleo tujaribu 
kufanya maendeleo katika grassroot level ili Administrator  wa Wo di yoyote ikifa nya kazi 
pamoja na MCA ’s katika Wodi . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you ver y much. Members that means 
the M otion has been deliberated to the full ; now I will put the question, M embers as man y as of 
that opinion that this M otion  be passed ...  
(Applaus e) 
 Yes, Clerk?  Yes, what is it Hon.  Nyamvula.  
 Hon.  (Mrs .) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker  I want to thank you for this opportunity. I want to 
bring to  the attention of this House that the first M otion of the day  mapping of tourist att raction 
sites within the C ounty  government within the County by myself was brought to this House on 
27th of January 2016 and it was discussed on that day. I just want to correct that abnormally. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Mwidani.  
 Hon.  Mwid ani: Mr. Speaker this is a House  of law,  If I could just come and whisper 
with you that she should not come and take us ba ck where we have already passed, where was 
she when we had this M otion? To be very sincere, she is not in order now to talk on what we  
have said whether she feels that she needed any correction she should have jus t come and 
whispered with you t o be very sincere.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : This M otion, we had already passed  that 
busin ess and it was agreed that the M otion has b een passed maybe she came in late . Yes, Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Members, this House stands adjourned until in the afternoon. Thank you.  
The Hous e rose at 10:00a.m. 