March 3, 2020                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be  obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 3rd March , 2020.  
The House met at 3:00p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Ahar ub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Hon. Members you may be seated.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Serjeant-At-Arms, please  ring the bell for fiv e minutes as there is no quorum .  
 
(Quorum Bell rung ) 
 
 Yes Clerk , do we have a quorum ? Please confirm . 
 
(Quorum confirmed)  
 
 Okay next Order Number;  
 
MOTION  
TEMPORARY ADJOURNMENT  OF THE HOUSE TO ALLOW HONOURABLE MEMBERS TO ATTEND THE 
BURIAL OF THE WIFE OF FORMER CHANG AMWE MEMBER OF PARLI AMENT HON . RAMADHAN SEIF 
KAJEMBE  
 
 Yes Hon. Junior Wambua , the Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Wambua ): Ahsante sana Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii. 
Nasimama kwa Kanuni za Bunge nambari  28 (1) ambayo tungelitaka tua hirishe vikao vya 
Bung e ili tuweze kwenda kwa mazishi . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Inasema nini hio Kanuni ya Bunge  28 (1) . 
 
 The Chief Whip ( Hon. Wambua ): Standing Order 28 (1) ; Members may at any time 
adjourn for reasons stated seek leave to move that this County Assembly do now adjourn . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, you are seeking leave?  

March 3, 2020                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be  obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua): Yes? 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Under what circumstance or what is the issue or rea son 
behind it?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon.  Wambua ): The reason is that Mr. Speaker  Sir… 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So you are going to move the Motion on that, it is to 
move a Motion right?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Wambua ): Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika kua hirisha  hii Nyumba Mheshimiwa 
Spika  yuko sawa sawa na sharia…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But he needs to move a Motion, why is he seeking leave ! 
I need to know what is the re ason.  
 
 The Mohamed Hatimy : Hapana ! lazima a seek leave . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And that is why even if you look at Standing order  28(2) 
it gives me that power so that I know what is the reason , but he is not stating what is the 
reason so how am I supposed to kn ow? 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mwa nzo lazima umruhusu Mheshimiwa Spika leave ; 
umruhusu halafu aeleze kwa sab abu gani anataka hi i Nyumba i ahirishwe . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So I have already told him that I have accepted that , so 
now you may move the Motion , and that is what I have told him.  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningelitaka 
kuomba Bunge lia hirishwe  ili tuweze  kuhudhuria mazishi ya ki ongozi au ya bibi wa kiongozi 
ambaye amekuwa kiongozi ndani ya Bunge hili kwa muda mrefu. Kwa hivyo nilionelea ni 
muhimu sana kama tunaweza kua hirisha kikao  ili tukaweza kuhudhur ia, bibi ya Mheshimiwa 
Ramadhan  Kajembe.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Mazishi ni wapi? Ni saa ngapi?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua ): Bwana Sp ika nilikuwa sijafahamu sana kuhusiana 
nayo lakini ile  nataka kukuelezea ni kwamba najua ni saa kumi . 
March 3, 2020                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be  obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3  Nimesoma katika  mitandao ya kijamii  na nataka kuifanya taarifa  katika Bunge ili 
watu waweze  kujua ni wapi ambapo t unaweza kwenda mazishi , itakuwa K isauni, Mombasa . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Members I now put a question. ..Yes Hon. 
Fadhili?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): I second Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Question put)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon. Members . I now put the question that 
the Motion by Hon. Junior Wambua  be considered by this House in the same term as moved . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Hon. Junior Wambua , please explain to us , the floor is open now . 
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua ): Ahsante sana Spika kwa kuruhusu Hoja  hii 
iendelee , nilikuwa nimeghadhabi ka kidogo lakini ni kwamba tuweze kupata nafasi 
Waheshimiwa wote ili tuweze kuhudhuria hayo mazishi ili tuweze k uwa na mwenzetu 
ambaye amekuw a Mjumbe hapa katika Momb asa na pia katika Bunge kuu la K enya. Itakuwa 
ni jambo la Busara kama Waheshimiwa  wataweza kuu nga mkono ili tukaweze kutekeleza 
jambo hilo. Ahsante sana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Junior Wambua . Yes Hon. Mohamed 
Mohamed?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika  nafikiri 
itakuwa ni sawa sawa kabisa  sisi kuwez a kuhudhuria mazishi k wani Kaj embe ameweza 
kuhudumia N yumba hii nafikiri kw a mihula  mitatu alipokuwa ni Diwani  na pia kuwa 
Mbunge ndani ya Mombasa . Kwa hivyo nafikiri itakuwa ni heshima sisi kwenda kuonekana 
kule twende tukapate na  sisi kuhudhuria mazishi , isipoku wa tu mwenzangu hi i Hoja  
ameisema lakini sijui kama anataka twende mpaka kesho am kesho turudi?  Kwa kusema 
kuwa anaomba ruhusa leo peke yake ama na  kesho pia twende tukakae naye yule mzee ili 
turudi wiki ijayo  Mheshimiwa  Spika. Ahsante . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think Hon . Hatimy on that one  we have our Order 
paper whereby we have our  business for tomorrow and the Member has just asked for 
adjournment for now , I don’t think he has asked for tomorrow as well. Yes Hon. Kibwana 
Swaleh?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I just agree with my 
colleagues ; we are not adjourning the Assembly for other dignitaries or people who passed 
away but even to our Mama  who we respect. I happen to be in the Constituency where  Hon.  
Kajembe was the Member of Parliament  and I remember the advice the mother gave us when 
we were about to enter into politics or active politics , that is around 20 07 and I remember the 
way she encouraged me to vie for that seat  although by that t ime I was in another party the 
Party of National  Unity. 
March 3, 2020                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be  obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  I was willing to join ODM but I found ODM at that moment was so hot so when we 
went to the ir house she advised me now hii Nyumba huku ni kugumu  but now I can go to 
PNU . So I took that advice from the mother and I think it is an honour for u s to give her 
respect because I remember  being a leader is also to give other people respect , so I think it’s 
good for Chief Whip to adjourn this House for us to attend the burial ceremony.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Evelyn Osongo?  
 
 Hon. Osongo : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity granted . I agree to the 
Motion so as to adjourn and attend the funeral ; sometimes be ing together with other people 
makes somebody also  a little bit happy  because seeing some leaders  there shows that we are 
close to one another.  Thank you .        
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Evelyn . Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker , thank you. Mr. Speaker on this one  I want to con cur 
with the M embers who have spok en; I think one of the ground s is that Mr . Kaj embe has been 
a Member of Parliament in the Constituency where I come from of Changamwe for several 
years. I happen to be one of the people who have been mentored  by him a nd to me I think it is 
very imported to attend that particular funeral. N umber t wo, Mr. Speaker S ir my colleague 
said th at the service that M r. Kajembe gave to this particular C ounty through the County 
Assembly I thin k it is very important for the Members to join or to be with him at this  
particular time when he is down. Thank you very m uch. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim . Hon. Members just a 
reminder; it is almost 3 :15p.m, so I thi nk the funeral is at 4 :00p.m so may be I will ask Hon 
Junior Wambua to reply so that I put the question . 
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningetaka 
kushukuru  Waheshimiwa  kwa kuchangia na kupeana nafasi hiyo ili  tuweze kw enda tukazike 
mwenzetu am baye anaheshimika sana katika mji huu wa Mombasa na Bwana Hatimy nafikiri 
ni leo tu au ni  wakati huu tu , kesho tutakuwa kama kawai da. A hsante sana Bwana S pika.  
 
(Question put)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Wambua . Hon. Members , I 
now put a question that the M otion by Hon. Wambua be adopted by this H on. House in the 
same term s as moved ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members th is House stands adjourn until Wednesday 4th of March , 2020 at 
10:00a.m . 
 
The House rose at 3:18p.m. 
 