March 9 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 9th March , 2018  
The House met at 3 :06p.m. 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 The Deputy Speaker:  Have your sea ts. Yes, Clerk?  
PAPERS  
LAYING  OF PAPERS  
 
 Yes, Hon. Amriya Juma Boy just table the paper . 
 Hon. (Mrs.)  Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker  I wish to table the next week 
Notice paper commencing on 12th March , 2018  to 15th March , 2018 . 
 The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
 Hon. Robert Nyiro...  
(Interruption)  
 
 Yes what is it Hon. Faith?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would wish to bring the statement 
on behalf of Hon. Nyiro he was requesting to seek to know from the Chairperson Committee 
on Envir onment, Waste Management and Energy whether he is aware that rainy season is 
approaching and what measures that the County Government is putting in place to reduce the 
effects or mitigate the impact of the disaster on the environment and the population. Th ank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Chairman Committee on Environment, Waste Management 
and Energy , any response ?  
(Silence ) 
 
 Yes, Hon. Raphael Bwire . 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I wish to step in on behalf of the Chairman 
who asked to be al lowed to respond come next week , he is not within. Thank you .  
 The Deputy Speaker: Yes Clerk ? 
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Kizito Opeya . 
March 9 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 (Silence ) 
 Yes Clerk ? 
CONSTRUCTION OF FRERE TOWN , SARAJEVO ROAD  
 Yes, the Committee on Transport do you have the response on construction of Frere 
Town , Sarajevo road .  
(Silence)  
 Yes Clerk proceed ? 
STATEMENT  
 Committee on Transport?  
(Silence)  
 
 It seems the response s are not ready they will be discussed in the House Business 
Committee. Yes Hon. Amur ?  
 Hon. Amur: If the Chair is not in or the Vice Chair is not in, but the M embers of 
the such Committees are in the House Mr. Speaker we need to be informed as some issues 
pertaining to the problems are very urgent such as the one of the security lights . Mr. Speaker , 
it is sad to sa y the vehicles are l ying at the yard, people who have been employed are getting 
salary and yet they are not working and it is not their making fault, it is because of the 
Department ... 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Amur we are in order number 10 and I can see you are 
talking about order number 8 which has been passed by events.  
 Hon. Amur:  You see Mr. Speaker when I rose about number 8; we always bel ieve 
that the Speaker is bright . But the issues that are in th is House Mr. Speaker regardin g number 
8 it is very sensitive ... 
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker:  But I have already ruled that the next House Business 
Committee will sit on this and I am sure we will allot another time if they failed , that is when 
the Committee concerned ; the Powers and Privilege or any other Committee , will take 
charge.  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker with all due respect to you...  
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Amur you are out  of order. Yes Clerk?  
March 9 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 STATEMENT  
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations Hon. 
Mohamed Hatim y, or any other M ember to  that Committee?  
(Silence ) 
 Yes Hon. Hatimy response on order number 11 ? 
(Silence ) 
 It seems the response  is not ready ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I have no idea about this question . 
 The Deputy Speaker:  The statement was raised  in this Honorable  House and you 
are the one who said you will bring the response in one week time.  
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Spe aker I just want to notify the Members that the 
Executive M ember of Finance are working on it and they have already remitted some of the 
monies to KRA, LAP FUND and NHIF and if you need any evidence I can request for that 
evidence.  
 The Deputy Spea ker: Then it is better you request for evidence and give us the 
actual figures of what has been deducted and remitted to the said institutions either NHIF, 
LAP FUND etc.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ok, I will be ready Mr. Speaker by Thursday next week. 
Thank yo u. 
 The Deputy Speaker:  It is ok. Yes Clerk?  
NEXT WEEK 'S ASSEMBLY BUSINESS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Amriya . 
 Hon. (Mrs) Amriya Juma:   Thank you Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to Standing Order 
41(2) (a) I wish to present  the next week 's Assembly Business through the Notic e Paper and 
it reads as follows;  
1. On Tuesday, 13th March , 2018 at 2:30 p.m we shall have Paper or Notice of Motion 
the particulars are from the County Fiscal Strategy Paper (CFSP) by Hon. Mohamed 
Hatimy (Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Budget and  Appropriation).  
 
2. On Wednesday 14th March , 2018 at 9: 00a.m we shall have a Notice of Motion ; 
Linkage between City P olytechnic and County based industries by Hon. Athman 
Mwam wiri (MCA, Likoni Ward) .  
 
3. On Wednesday 14th March , 2018 at 2:30p.m we shall a Notice of M otion on the 
installation of high mast light at Uwanja wa Soja by Hon. Charles Kitula (MCA, Frere  
Town Ward) . 
 
March 9 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          10 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 4. Wednesday  14th March , 2018 we shall also a Notice of M otion on promotion of youth 
friendly health services by Hon. Athman Mwamwiri  (MCA, Likoni Ward).  
 
5. Thursday, 15th March , 2018 at 2:30 p.m. we are going  to have  statements according to 
the S tanding orders, this is a request for statement on Waste Management in the 
County by Hon. Tobias Samba (MCA, Tudor Ward).  
 
6. Thursday, 15th March , 2018 at 2:0 0p.m. w e shall al so have a request for statement s on 
the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries, Livestock and Co -operatives plans during 
the rainy season  by Hon.  Robert Nyiro (MCA, Bamburi Ward).  
 
7. Finally, Mr. Speaker Thursday the same date 15th March , 2018 at 2:30 p.m will have a 
request for statement on School Zone road and safety signs by Hon. Athman 
Mwam wiri (MCA, Likoni Ward).  
 Thank you for this opportunity Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Amriya and to bring to the  attention of the 
Assembly the S upplementary A ppropriation Bill was  supp osed to come today , but due to 
Gazzet tement  it will also fall under the Businesses of next week as from Tuesday when we 
allot the time , Members will be notified. And also Hon.  Members before we put a question , 
one Hon.  Maimuna Salim from Shanzu robbers attacked her house and she was robbed 
almost everything so if you get time you can pass by  her h ouse and console her. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 There being no other business the House stands adjourn ed until Tuesday, 13th 
March, 2018 at 2:30 p.m.  
The House r ose at 3:20p.m. 
  
  
  
 
 
 
     
 
 