November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
    
 OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
     Wednesday, 20th November , 2019  
The House met at 2:48  p.m. 
 
      (The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON HEALTH HON . KIBWANA SWALEH 
ON INSTALLATION OF MOBIL E CONTAINER CLINICS IN MAGOGONI WARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Baya?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I wish  today to give 
a response to a S tatement that was raised by my colleague from Magogoni Ward.  Hon. 
Speaker I stand to give a Statement response on the installation of mobile container clinics in 
Magogoni Ward requ ested by Hon. Tobias Samba on behalf of Hon. Shomari Mohamed on 
the 30th October, 2019 during the 98th Sitting of this House.  Mr. Speaker Sir, Magogoni Ward 
has a population of 32,575 people and is served by Mlaleo Health Centre and Junda 
Dispensary which are the nearest facilities.  Mr. Speaker, the plans are to put a container clinic 
if land is made available. Currently, regular outreaches to Magogoni area are done to ensure 
access to health care services. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY LEADER OF MAJOR ITY HON. MWIDANI ON ANNUAL STATE OF THE 
COUNTY ADDRESS  
 
 Yes Chairman F inance Hon.Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) consulted  the Table C lerk) 
 
 Just a minute . Hon. Hatimy?  
  
 Yes the Leader of Majority Party, Hon. Mwidani . 
 

November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 2  The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
give a response to a Statement.  Hon. Speaker, I stand to give a Statement response on the 
Annual State of the County Address requested by Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri on the 6th 
November, 2019 during the 102nd Sitting of this House.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I communicated 
with Acting County Secretary Mr. Jo ab Tumbo who informed me that His Excellency  the 
Governor will give the above mentioned address after the long recess in accordance with the 
County Government Act. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spik a. Mheshimiwa Spika sijui 
kama Katibu anayeshikilia nyadhifa hio ana ufahamu ya kwamba su ala hili linatendeka kila 
mwaka!  Na kwamba kabla twende likizo au m apumziko itakua tumefunga mwaka!  Kwa 
hivyo hili analolisema atalifanya baada ya mapumziko, je ni ya mwaka huu ama ni ya mwaka 
kesho? Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes the Leader of the Majority , can you 
respond?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika nafikiri lugha 
iliyozungumzwa iko fasaha. Kwa sab abu likizo ndefu katika kalenda  yetu, likizo ndefu huwa 
iko katika mwezi wa Desemba ambao hivi sasa tukienda tarehe 4/12/2019 mpaka mwezi wa 
pili Februari ambayo ndio tunaita likizo ndefu. Hapo ndio Mheshimiwa Gavana anatakikana 
ama anaombw a kuja kutoa hotuba yake, kwa hivyo Bwana Spika hili ni jambo laeleweka na 
ikiwa labda halikufanyika nyuma labda ni kwa bahati mbaya. Lakini haswa likizo ndefu ndio 
sasa tukifungua inakuwa ni kalenda ya mwaka kwa sababu tunaenda na kalenda.  Kwa hivyo 
Bwana Spika mimi ningemu omba aliyeuliza hili suali aombe Mungu tujaliwe, twende likizo 
ndefu tuje tufungue tumwangalie amekuja Gavana ni vizuri na ikiwa hakuja kweli itakuwa 
hapo kuna makosa. Lakini haswa yeye anafaa kuja mara moja baada tukishatoka kwa likizo 
ndefu. Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika sijui nitumie ufasaha wa  lugha gani 
ambayo Kiongozi wa W engi tutakwenda n ae sambamba!  Mheshimiwa Spika sw ali langu 
lilikua kwa nia njema, kwa sababu utek elezaji wa  majukumu yetu yanaambatana na ruwaza 
ya m stahiki Gavana na Serikali yake. Hivyo basi amejukumishwa kati ka Katiba ama katika 
kanuni za u gatuzi ya kwamba ana wajibu kila mw aka kupeana taarifa ya hali ya g atuzi lake 
na si o kuja kutoa taarifa ya kuf ungua Bun ge. Nikimnukuu Kiongozi wa W engi kwamba 
Februari tumwangalie kama hatakuja kwa sababu ndio kalenda ya mwaka inaanza, 
hatuzungumzi kalenda ya mwaka tunazungumzia hali ya g atuzi ndani ya mwaka haijalishi 
amekuja katika mwezi gani lakini ndani ya m waka huo amejukumishwa ni wajibu wake kuja 
kuzungumzia wakazi wa Mombasa mip angilio, kanuni na taratibu ya r uwaza yake ndani ya 
mwaka huo. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika asadiki hapa ya kwamba ndani ya mwaka huu 
ambao tunaofunga tarehe 5/12/2019 majaaliwa, Mst ahiki Gavana hatokuja. Halafu aombe 
ama atupashe ya kwamba ameomba ama amesema atakuja mwaka kesho, ili tujue ya kwamba 
mwaka huu sisi wawakilishi na wakaazi wa Mombasa hatutapata kauli ya Mstahiki Gavana 
katika mwaka huu tuwachane na suala hilo tusubirie mwaka kesho ya kwamba mwaka huu 
Gavana hatohutubia Bunge hili kwa wananchi wake ! Hivyo tu Mheshimiwa sidhani kama 
hapo kuna ugumu wa lugha Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 3  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu) : Hon. Mwamwiri is it a f inancial year or a 
calendar  year that you are referring to?  
 
 Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika mwaka uko mara mbili ; kunao 
mwaka wa kifedha na kunao mwaka wa kibunge, yote akijitetea kwayo yote haiku tendeka 
lakini langu mimi kama M uwakilishi naangazia zaidi mwaka wa kibunge a mbao ni baina ya 
mwezi wa p ili hadi mwezi wa kumi na mbili. A hsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay the Leader of Majority am sure you 
heard the Member and you understood what he said, they are not satisfied with your 
response, it is as if you a re misleading the House.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : No Mr. Speaker I am not misleading the 
House, Bunge linapelekwa na kalenda , halipelekwi na mwaka wa kifedha w a pesa ! To be 
very sincere, Bunge sisi twaenda na kalenda yetu Bwana Spika; nikito a mfano hata Uhuru 
Kenyatta  wakishatoka l ikizo ndefu  yeye ndio anaingia siku ya kwanza kufungua Bunge na 
hiyo kalenda  tumekopi pia kama  Serikali ya kitaifa. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika sija  mislead, 
ikifaka Februari  ambapo ndio sasa katika kalenda  yetu.... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Leader of M ajority from what Ho n. 
Mwamwiri was saying is the state of th e County address ; first is different from the opening of 
an Assembly and secondly what Hon. Mwamwiri raised is in this calendar year that we are 
sitting in , has the Governor addressed the Assembly?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika  nafikiri nimemjibu kwa mba 
ilikuwa inatakikana ile l ikizo ndefu  tuliokuwa tumekwenda kufungua huu mwaka alikuwa 
inapaswa aje,  kweli hiyo tumekubali hakuja, ndio nimesema wakati huu tutahakikisha  
kwamba baada ya likizo ndefu  atakuja  kuhutubia  the annual state of the County addres s. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika sijui 
Kiongozi wa W engi anajaribu kimbia swala gani, mwaka wa ki Bunge haujafunga, kwa  nini 
ashurutishe ya kwamba mpaka tutoke likizo ndefu? Mwaka wa k i Bunge haujafunga bado ipo 
fursa, angetuambia kalenda  ya Mstahiki Gavana iko na majukumu mengi hatopatikana 
tukalielewa hilo lakini yeye kusingizia kwamba tukitoka atakuja kuangazia, hiyo ni hotuba ya 
kufungua Bunge, anapotosha Bun ge hili Mheshimiwa Spika na yeye ni mkongwe mwele di 
wa maswala ya ndani ya Bunge. Tunalolizungu mzia ni swala ambalo lilikuwa litendeke baina 
ya mwezi wa pili hadi kufikia tarehe tano mwezi wa D isemba, akiri kwamba halija tendeka 
na sababu atupe, hana sabab u siku zilizobakia kabla tufunge Bunge atuambie kipi kinacho 
msibu Mstahiki Gavana kuweza kulit ekeleza hili jukumu lake la kik atiba. Sisi ni wanaadamu, 
yeye ni  mwanadamu yeye ni G avana wetu...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Tunampenda tunamtambua tutalielewa, tutamridhia na tutasubiri a mwaka kesho kwa 
sababu tunaju a ana majukumu, anatutendea kazi . 
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 4  Kwa hivyo kama atashindwa kwa muda uli osalia kwa sababu ya sababu hii;  kwamba 
hakuweza kuanzia mwezi wa pili hadi  Disemba  kwa sababu hizi, tutamridhia, t utasubiria 
mwaka kesho t umuone na sio lazima mwaka kesho aje mwezi wa pili, hata mwezi wa tatu, 
akija mwezi wa nne haidhuru yamkini amelitekeleza analostahiki kuja kuhutubia ndani ya 
Bunge hili kwa wananchi wake wa Mombasa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwa limu) : Okay . Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Shukran Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nikimnukuu Kiongozi 
wa W engi amesema ya kwamba ni kama Gavana alighafilika na mwaka wa kibunge 
unakamilika pasipo hotuba ya Gavana,  kwa hiyo akaomba radhi  na katika majibu  yake 
akasema ya kwamba ameomb a na aruhusiwe aje tutakapo fun gua Bunge baada ya likizo 
ndefu. Kwa hivyo mimi ningeomba W abunge wenzangu tu livumilie maana tumebakisha wiki 
chache sana kwenda katika likizo ndefu, hata leo Gavana akaja akahutu bia hatutopata wa saa 
wa kujenga h oja katika ile h otuba yake maana tumebakisha siku chache sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika kwenda katika likizo ndefu . Kwa hivyo yote yale tumeuliza ametuletea majibu na 
akaomba radhi ya kwamba lishafanyika na sote twajua kwamba yakish a mwagika maji 
kuzoleka ni vigumu hivyo basi  mimi n ingeomba aliyeleta hoja hii na W abunge wenzangu ya 
kwamba yote hutusaidia kujenga hoja za mwaka na kuleta yale ambayo yanakabili watu wetu 
kule mashinani lakini yashafanyika na kiongozi wetu ameomba msamaha. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy,  proceed . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi 
nafikiri tunajifuma  wenyewe kusema ati kuna kalenda ! Kalenda  ya Bunge iko wapi?  Kalenda  
ya Bunge iko wapi? ! Mheshimiwa Spika angalia Kanuni za Bunge nambari 25 yasema nini, 
Kalenda  lazima iwe gazette d, kuna mtu ako  na gazzeti.. is it gazetted ? Iko wapi ? 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mohamed Hatimy you are out of order ! 
You are misleading the House because if you said that we do  not have a gazette calendar 
Hon. Hatimy it will also mean that we are sitting illegally.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ofisi ya Karani mkuu  wa Bunge iko hapa, give us a copy of 
that gazette  notice ! Twataka kuona gazette notice  Mheshimiwa Spika, tusipelekane round , 
twataka Mheshimiwa Spika Karani wa Bunge  yuko hapa twataka kuona kopi ya nakala ya 
gazette notice . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you, so it will mean the Leader of 
Majority is also misleading the House because he is the one who has been pres enting the 
calendar in this Honourable  House and he is  the one who has been bringing M otion of 
adjournment of this ... the calendar of this Assembly, it will as well mean that the L eader has 
been taking us on a ride, use your mic rophone ! 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nitasimama na msimamo wangu until 
and unless  I am given a copy of that gazette notice, otherwise  ikiwa kusema hii ni kukaa kwa 
njia ya haramu, ni njia ya hara mu and I stand by my words . 
 
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 5  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. T obias Samba.  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker , it is good we are learning here.  Hon. Speaker 
we want to teach others;  if my memory serves me better I think wh en we resume d the P aper 
was laid, in fact I raised the first concern about the calendar and the Leader of M ajority laid 
our calendar here and we were given a calendar of the events . At some time we raised that 
issue, how can we have several adjournments and recess and at som e given point we wanted 
to adjust our calendar and it became very difficult because we had laid the official calendar 
initially , and  that is why we could not amend and here Hon. Speaker a Member standing and 
telling us we do  not have  a calendar of events and he has been in th e House and he has been 
signing.  I would request through your Chair let us cancel all…  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Samba have your seat. Hon. Ogutu? 
The Leader of Majo rity will represent to this Honourable  House the gazett ed calendar in our 
next sitting ; the House Business will accord time and present the gazette notice of the House 
calendar…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ni tukubaliane Mheshimiwa Spika hi li jambo  
lisimamishwe…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The issue on the calendar will  pause on that 
because that... Yes Hon...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Am a Member I do receive weekly gazette notice s Hon.  
Speaker. Mimi niko nazo nipatie tu tarehe  nitakutolea, atoe tarehe iliyoku a hiyo lakini 
nimekubaliana na  uamuzi w ako. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chief Whip?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tayari ushatoa amri yako 
na ni bora tuweze kupata muelekeo kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Hatimy tusidanganye yeye ndio 
ana ufahamu zaidi kwa Bunge lakini kuna ukweli ndani yake sisi kama Bunge tulipitisha 
kalenda lakini leo hii nataka tutumie jukumu letu kama Wabunge hatua ya kwanza tulipitisha 
kalenda kweli lakini hatua ya ku  gazette  ni ya ofisi ya Karani m kuu wa Bun ge na kama wao 
hawaja  gazette  kalenda itakuwa ni jukumu letu kama MCAs kuweza kuangalia ofisi ya 
Karani mkuu  imeweza kupotosha Jumba letu na kuchukua hatua  kama Wabunge wa Kaunti.  
Ahsante sana.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members…  
 
(Silence)  
 
Hon. Members I  will  now request the Leader of Majority to liaise with the office of 
the Governor and to respond accordingly in this House . 
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 6 This is  because it  is a constitutional right for the Governor to come and address the 
House in  the remaining time, t he Governor has  time for him to come and respond  and if he 
has other reasons as to why he w ill not be available then the Leader of Majority will also 
reply because from his reply the Leader of Majority was addressing another address and th e 
person responsible for this  had requested another issue so they were talking of different 
issue s. So I request the Leader of Majority in our next sitting to respond on this issue on 
when the Governor might be  coming to this Honourable  House and the issue of this Calendar 
the Leader of the Majority will  liaise with the Office of the C lerk and it is a concern that Hon. 
Moham ed Hatimy has raised . So also the Leader of Majority will  liaise with the office of the 
Clerk to respond to this Hon ourable  House with the gazet ted document.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes C lerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS HON. MOHAMED HATIMY ON DISBURSEMENTS OF EQUITABLE SHARE TO 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF  MOMBASA FOR THE FINA NCIAL YEAR 2019/2020  
 
Yes Hon. Moham ed Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohammed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka 
kujibu Taarifa kutoka Mheshimiwa wa w odi ya Junda. Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
(Silence)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kutoa taarifa kwa Nyumba hii kuwaele za kuwa sisi 
tume pokea  pesa 2019/2020 kw enye bajeti yetu ambayo ni equitable share  yetu Kshs. 
7,485,441,000, Bunge la Kaunti  bajeti ni Kshs. 683,827,75 6.93 mgao  kwenye hii pesa 
Mheshimiwa Spika  asilimia  9.14%  ya hizi fedha  Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Moham ed Hatimy there  is a concern;  
yes Hon. Athman?  
 
Hon. Shebe Ath man:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
nafikiri ni jana tu nimempongeza Mwenyekiti Mwenza wa Afya kwa utaratibu mzuri aliokuja 
nao kuhusu masuala ya majibu kwa maswali ya Taarifa   na ni kinaya kwa sababu Mwenyekiti 
wa sarafu anasoma habari muhimu sana ambayo inatuhusu sot e, si Mheshimiwa wa Junda 
pekee yake lakini sisi tuko gizani, tuko chini ya himaya yako Mheshimiwa Spika twataka 
kujua pia sisi ni wahusika wakuu katika hili suala kuu la senti. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nataka kusema kuwa hii ripoti 
nafikiri; quarterly report  ilikuja ndani ya  hii Nyumba na S pika akatoa uamuzi kuwa kwa y ule 
anayetaka quarterly report  hii taarifa  ataipata ndani yake. Kuwa watapata kuwa watakwenda 
kwa Karani wa Bunge  kwa sababu kile kitabu Mheshimiwa Spika ni  kikubwa na mimi 
nimetoka kunikimbiza mpaka kupata hii taarifa . Kwa hivyo naomba muniw ie radhi y ule 
aliyeuliza hili swali nimempatia hii  karatasi na pia tuta gawanya  baada ya kumaliza nitapeana 
muang alie hii hesabu ambayo tunapeana.  
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 7 Mheshimiwa Spika ni mesema kuwa pesa ambazo mgao w etu ni shs 7,485,441,000, 
bajeti ya K aunti ni shs 683,827,756.93 M heshimiwa , mgao w etu wa Bunge la Kaunti  ni shs 
163,772,744.68 ambapo pesa ambazo zime poke wa ni shs  1.719300 ...(Technical hitch)  
Mheshimi wa Spika. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika Bunge la Kaunti  limeweza ku pokea  shs 
178,487,844.85 . Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker according to the report I have is 
that the equitable share received up to 31st of October , 2019 is 1.7 billion and the County 
Assembly so far received  the first amount ; we received ... indicated here is shs 30 million. Th e 
second disbursement was shs 154 million Hon. Speaker and I do  not know how I will be 
convinced that out of shs 1.7 billion so far received (Technical hitch) as A ssembly we have 
only received shs 84 million and Hon. Speaker we have so many pending bills w ithin 
Assembly . As we speak we have  not paid for the office rents H on. Speaker ; you can imagine 
if this is justi ce being done here s o I want to call upon the C ommittee on F inance t his is for 
the benefit of all of us why should E xecutive receive this such amount of money only to give 
an Assembly shs 84 million according to them? Hon. Speaker , yes it is 30 plus 54 , I do not 
know whether it is my eyes but that what I am seeing. .. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Okay yes then le t the Hon . Member to 
respond.  
 
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa mujibu wa sheria pesa zinakwenda 
kwa asilimia, kwenye pesa tul izopokea shs 1,792,719,300 mgao w etu ilikuwa ni asilimia 
9.14% we are supposed to be receiving  shs 163,772,744 lakini sisi tumepatiwa shs 
178,487,844. Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia tumepatiwa excess  ya shs 14,715,100 
Mheshimiwa wa Junda nataka ufanye kweli ni 30 plus 54 waiwacha figure  ya juu 94 ambayo 
hizi ni mishahara  amba yo tumelipiwa za robo ya kwanza  ya mwaka wa kifedha  ambayo  
jumla  inakuja  shs 178, 487,844 . Nafikiri endelea kuongeza sio tu shs  80 million i plus shs 94 
million i. Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Hon . Chair.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): So Hon . Bwire I remember you had alleged 
that the County Assembly had received only  shs 30 million so far so as per the report that you 
are carry ing are you satisfied?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker I need more explanation on this ; I can see paid/IB 
executive/s alary and other expenses which amounts to shs 94 million, I am not satisfied 
because I can see the paid IB executive so I do  not know whet her that belongs to the County 
Assembly or executive and secondly I see the County A ssembly of Mombasa request ; one, 
shs 30 million, County A ssembly of Mombasa request , two shs 54 million. S o I do  not know 
whether this paid IB executive salary and other expenses which amounts to 94 ... belongs to 
the A ssembly Hon. Speaker and that is why I was not in a position to add 94 to 30 and 54 
million . So am not satisfied whether  shs 94 million belongs to the County A ssembly yet 
there is an indication that it was on executive IB salary and other expenses that was 
amounting to  shs 94 million. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 8  The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. M walimu ): But you can see total County A ssembly 
funding.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  I need an explanation from the C hair, what does it mean paid/IB 
executive salary and other expenses amounting to 94.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ):  Okay Chair please advice.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika IB paid from the executive  ni 
mishahara y etu sisi imetengezwa na executive lakini kuanzia huu mwezi tumeanza kulipa sisi 
wenyewe Bunge la Kaunti  inajilipa sasa wenyewe lakini miaka yote inalipwa IB executive , 
kwa hivyo executive  ndio walikuwa wakitulipia mishahara y etu. Ndio wamelipa hii shs 94 
million i kwa mda wa first quarter  hizi nyengine ndio tuli omba  ambayo ni  shs 84million i. 
Hizi ndio tulio mba zilioingia kwenye account  yetu lakini hizi nyengine ni pesa ambazo 
zimelipwa na executive  kulipa mishahara y etu na wa weza confirm  na ofisi ya  Karani wa 
Bunge , kuona hii hesabu ya shs 94 ni ya ukweli ama uwongo. Na  vile vile  halikuuzwa 
matumizi, swali  ameuliza ametaka kujua ni pesa ngapi ambazo tumepokea sisi kutoka  
Controller of Budget M heshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Bwire . 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker  of course there was a reason as to why I asked for the total 
amount  so far the County has received;  I had a reason and the expenditure being one of the 
reason as to why I asked for it so Hon. Speaker with your directives I would wish to ask for 
five days I go sit down to compile this report w ith the report I have from the Controller of 
Budget and then i f you allow me next week I will bring it back to this House.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ):  Yes Hon. Moham ed Hatimy.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika I am objecting the request because  sio 
sheria kuja na swali ; either come with a supplementary question or another question, lakini 
huwezi sema kuwa siku tano  uende uka chunguze  alafu urudi tena, wataka kuendelea na swali  
lilelile! Ni kinyume na sheria Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker I need that law that bans me from compiling and bringing 
back the report ; If he is in a position to tell me this law does not permit you to do what you 
are asking for Hon. Speaker I will comply.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Let Hon . Moham ed Hatimy respond first.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumwambia mwenzangu aende 
akasome  taarifa  ya Eskin  May yasema nini juu ya taarifa  ndio ataona kwamba maneno 
ninayosema ni ukweli ama uwongo.  
 
 Hon. Bwire: Hon. Speaker I am the one  who raised this question but again I will 
comply with the directives though I pray that you consider my prayer. We al ready have the 
report from the Controller of Budget with us and I wanted the C hairman to bring me this 
report then I compare wi th the report we have from the Controller of B udget then If I will not 
be satisfied with the report where do I  go if not this House.  
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 9  So I would wish you to permit me if incase they tally the report from the Controller of 
Budget and the report presented here by the C hair tallies allow me to bring back the response, 
if they do  not tally again Hon. Speaker allow me to bring back to this House, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Hon . Rosemary before we wind up.  
 
 Hon. Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I am just confused because I can see people 
are reading from papers which we do  not have so we are really lost, we could be contributing 
to this but we do  not have the papers, is it possible for everybody to be furnished with these 
kind of documents, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Hon Tobias.  
 
 Hon. Samba: Yes m y concern has bee n drawn by the response of the C hairman for 
budget and Hon. Speaker maybe I be info rmed I think the role that the C hair is trying t o play 
should be played by the Executive . The C hair for now shou ld not be resistant , whenever a 
Member requests for anything he should not tr y to be defensive but for now i  think the best 
answer he coul d have given is that maybe the E xecutive are not in the offic e for now but for 
him to tell a Hon . Member who is concerned and everybody in this House knows what Junda 
Ward is undergoing through and that is why the Hon ourable  for Junda brought up this 
Statement . So it i s not fair and when we are the C hair we ar e not supposed to befriend the 
Committees , we are supposed to give the required answers or rather Statements to the House , 
we are supposed to give  the required answers or other S tatement to the House that satisfies 
the House . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank  you Hon. Tobias Samba. Hon. 
Members as the Chair will not obstruct what Hon. Bwire said but I will request Hon. Bwire 
after the said investigation that  you said you are going to make  prepare a supplementary on 
the same to the House Business Committee. Y ou said five days then whatever that you will 
be sat isfied or not satisfied just lay  it before  the House Business Committee and proper 
channel s will follow.  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Yes Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and P ublic works or any 
other Member from that Committee?  
 
(Silen ce) 
 
I understand that the Majority Leader is a Member of Transport Committee.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker with due respect you know 
you have to be very honest, ye s I am a Member but I have never been called for  the meeting 
to have the response. S o I have to be very sincere , I do not want to lie things which actually I 
know the truth.  
 
(Applause)  
 
So I will just request the House to postpone this issue to the next meeting please Mr. 
Speaker.  
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 10 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  I thin k the Hon. Member from Mkomani 
Ward is satisfied by the response from the Hon . Majority Leader.  
 
Hon. Opeya:  Mr. Speaker I think I can give them until next week since he requested 
for it . Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay the House Business Committee will 
slot a day but Hon. Majority Leader make sure you take charge  of that Committee  because a 
drainage in Mkomani Ward  has been an issue which the Hon. Me mber has raised it  in this 
Honourable  House for quite a long time.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY THE LEADER OF MAJORITY HON . MWIDANI ON THE 
TABLING  IN THE COUNTY ASSEMB LY OF THE SGR REPORT  BY THE COUNTY GOVERN MENT  
 
Yes Hon. Ath man Shebe?  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Nafikiri mimi ndiye 
niliku wa nisubirie majibu kutoka kwa K iongozi wa Wengi katika Bunge letu la Mombasa , 
baadhi ya maelezo haya niliyaleta takriban mwezi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuhusu m aswala 
ya athari ya SGR katika Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa na tangu swala hili Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti lianze nafik iri ni takriban miezi mitatu wa kazi wa mji wa Mombasa katika 
msemo wetu tuliouzoea Mombasa raha sasa umekuwa Mombasa karaha.   
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti haya maelezo nimekuwa nikiya leta hapa kila 
mara na nashukuru ch ini ya himaya yako  leo umehakikisha kuwa hili swala liweze kuj uliwa 
mbivu na mbichi ijulikane , sababu ni takriban miezi mitatu. Mheshimiw a Kiongozi wa 
Wengi amekuwa ana piga mithili ya mpira wa kona haya maelezo kwa hivyo  mimi nafurahi 
kuwa naona yuko hapa natabasamu mzee wangu namuheshimu kwa yale majibu nitapewa 
basi wakaazi wa Mombasa wataweza kujua je  athari za SGR katika Bunge la Kaunti ya 
Mombasa limejadiliwa ama namna gani?  Kwa sababu wengine wanaona kuwa tunasoma 
katika vitabu tofauti Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na sisi ni viongozi tuliowekwa hapa 
kuwakilisha wao ; hivyo basi  nafura hi kuwa umenipatia fursa hii na nangoja  kwa hamu na 
hamumu Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Wengi ka tika Bunge maelezo ya kueleweka. A hsante.  
 
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you . Yes Hon. Leader of 
Majority?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante s ana Bwana Spika pia 
namshukuru Mheshimiwa kwa bidii anayoifanya kupata hi i ripoti. Bwana Spika mimi 
ningemuomba Mheshimiwa hizi tara tibu ninazifuatilizia na nafikiri bila kuficha n i kwamba 
tulijua kwamba mkubwa  ambaye ni Gavana alikuwa  amelazwa . Kwa hivyo ni kitu ambacho 
kinatakikana yeye mwenyewe atoe  ruhusa  ndio yule anayeshikilia wadhfa wa  Chief  ama 
Katibu wa Kaunti achukue hatua muafaka . Bwana Spika  kwa ha ki na ukweli kwam ba jana 
nilipoulizia haya maneno Katibu wa Kaunti  ndiye akaniambia kwamba anaandika  majibu 
ambayo Gavana amempatia , kwa h ivyo Bwana Spika si kwa sababu ninayape ndekeza ni 
maneno yaliyo ukweli . 
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 11 Kwa hivyo ningelimuomba Mheshimiwa kwa hatima z a uongozi na za kiheshima 
anipatie muda mpaka  wiki ijayo  nilete ile ripoti kamili ambayo nitakuwa nimepewa na  hasa 
najua ni  kwamba alikuwa atataka ile ripoti amekabidhiwa Gavana. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika 
namuomba Mheshimiwa anipe huo muda  na Mungu Akipenda  tutaweza  kutekeleza vile 
anavyotaka. A hsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Mhesh imiwa Mwenyekit i wakaazi wa Mombasa kwa jumla 
Wallahi  wamengoja milele katika maelezo haya ya athari ya SGR naona wanakufa bila 
kelele. Kiongozi wa waliowengi katika Bunge anaomba tena muda Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
labda tu niweze kumfahamisha kidogo kwa  sababu…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Shebe are you not satisfied with the 
request for one week or.. .? 
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Ndio maana nilikuwa naja hapo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa 
sababu sijaridhika ni takriban miezi mitatu sa sa hivi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : But the Leader of Majority has requested for 
one more week so I think it is better we wait for one week…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nafikiri Kiongozi wa Wengi 
amejieleza vizuri na wiki moja am bayo ameiomba bila shaka mimi nitakuwa na subra ya 
kusubiri kama kiongozi lakini naomba Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti isije tena ikawa hali ni ile 
ile kwa hivyo nina  matumaini wakati  huu Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi katika 
Bunge atakuja na maelezo yakueleweka Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Kwa sababu hili swala 
wakaaz i wa Mombasa unajua Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tunaumia na swala la SGR kwa 
hivyo nitasubiri baada ya wiki moja na pia nitapa ta nafasi nzuri ya wakaazi wa Mombasa 
wajitokeze kwa sababu watataka kusikia kauli ya Bunge la Mombasa na kuhusu athari hii ya 
SGR , kwa hivyo kiongozi nitasubiri. Ahsante . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you . So the Leader of Majority , 
the Hon ourable  House will be waiting for this report and the House Business Committee will 
allot when and time you are going to respond on this issue.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON HEALTH HON . KIBWANA 
SWAL EH ON  A PROPOSAL  TO HAVE  REGULAR RESHUFFL ING OF HEALTH WORKERS WI THIN THE 
COUNTY HEALTH FACILI TIES TO ENHANCE  EFFICIENCY AND PRODU CTIVITY  
 
Yes Hon. Ath man Shebe?  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimwa Mwenyekiti . Waswahili wasema 
yataka uwe na bahati ya mabati kujaliwa kula vya  katikati , naona leo nimeweza kuf uatanisha 
maelezo yangu kwa mpigo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, nashukuru.  
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 12 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nasimama tu kut aka maelezo kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti 
Mwenza wa Afya cha ngamoto ninayopitia sijui kama Wenyekiti wenza nitakuwa 
nimewajumuisha katika mchakato huu kuwa wale wakuu wasimamizi wa matibabu katika 
Sub County Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wengi wamekuwa na ukiritimba, utep etevu na 
kutowajibika na yote inachangia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kukaa muda mrefu wafanyikazi 
wa Kaunti kwa maeneo moja zai di ya miaka kumi, kumi na tano kuendelea . Kwa hivyo 
nataka kujua je utaratibu huu unaendezwa namna gani? Unachuku a muda gani hao wafanyi  
kazi kuhakikisha kuwa wanapelekwa kat ika maeneo mengine ili kuweza kuboresha utenda  
kazi na uw ajibikaji Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Ahsante . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chairperson Committee on Health?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Hon. Hamida I understand you are a Member of Health Committee plus the Leader 
of Majority , any response?  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. We need to sit down and deliberate on this 
one so that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Be audible.  
 
 Hon. Noor:  We need to sit down and deliberate on this one so that we can bring an 
answer to him for what he has asked for when we are going to sit with our Chairman.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So when are you going to respond back to 
this House?  
 
 Hon.  Noor:  Mr. Speaker I think this will be after the recess…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : After the recess, ok. Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Shebe Athman:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hata mimi nimejaaliwa kuangal ia 
baadhi ya uso za watu wamesh tuka. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tunaongea kuhusu haki 
muhimu ya Kikatiba afya na hawa wafanyi  kazi, Mheshimiwa nilikuwa nasubiri aniambie 
labda wiki moja l akini ananiambia baada ya likizo? Tunazungumzia kuhusu mwaka ujao 
mwezi wa pili Mheshimiwa , takriban tarehe 10. Mimi naona Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hii 
Kamati imeanza kuleta mzaha katika masuala ya afya ; tafadhali, baada ya likizo Mheshimiw a 
tunazungumza miezi miwili mfululizo hapa na kuna watu wangu wanaumia. Tafadhali 
ningeomba Mheshimiwa Mwanachama  wa Kamati ya Afya aweze kuwa makini na haya 
masuala ya Afya tafadhali Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tusikaushane mate.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Athman Shebe. Hon. 
Hamida had requested for at least after recess they bring back this response but I will give the 
Committee 14 d ays to respond back to this Hon ourable  House as per the statement from the 
MCA Jomvu Kuu Ward. Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
November 20, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    110 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard  Editor 
Page 13  
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker there is a statement that I brought here some three to 
four weeks one month ago and it was supposed to be responded back by 16th and it is 
unfortunately maybe somehow they are some of the statement that are supposed to be 
responded to and other they are not. Now this is the second time I am raising up to question 
on the same note. I had given out a statement on demolition of structures at Buxton by 
Inspectorate, till now I do not know the fate of the statement. So through you r Chair at least 
give direction on that statement. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Tobias . I think it is the 
mandate of the House Business Committee that t he Committee that is preparing businesses 
that will see the door of the day of this Hon ourable  House , so liaise with the Committee so 
that the matter will be brought forward maybe in our next sitting, but liaise with the House 
Business Committee…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Samba:  It is not a new statement…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes it is not a new statement, but maybe 
the House B usiness Committee had a lot of businesses that they program them to come in this 
week , maybe your statement might be  coming in our next sitting. So that is why I am sayin g 
liaise with the House Business Committee and they will give you a date and time as to when 
the response is going to come to the floor of this House.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no other Business the House stands adjourned until 
Tuesday, 26th November , 2019 at 10 :00a.m.  
 
The House rose at 3:45 p.m. 
      
 
 