November 2 6, 2019                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          111 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
      COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 26th November, 2019  
The House met at 10:42 a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated.  Serjeant-At-Arms 
ring the bell for at least five minutes.  
(Quorum bell  is rung ) 
Yes Clerk confirm if there  is quorum?  
(The Clerk confirmed the quorum)  
Yes Clerk, next order?  
 
     MOTION  
    AMENDMENT TO MOTION  
 
Yes Hon. K ibwana Swaleh, Chairman Committee on Health  please move the amendment 
to the Motion .  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Hon. Speaker I wish to inform this House that we are unable to 
continue with the amendment of the Motion . Mr. Speaker we had arrange d a meeting with t he 
Chief Officer , Public Health and also our lawyer Fiona  for advice  and consultation  on the issue . 
Hon. Speaker th e issue that is before this Hon ourable  House we may end up facing some legal 
challenges because of other (??) can cause. Hon. Speaker i will ask because I read the desire of 
the (??) mine is just to request for more time to arrange another meeting so that we can conclude 
this issue . So Hon. Speaker I just want  you to give us more time at least  upto next week and we 
have agreed that we will  summon the Chief Officer on Thursday the following week . Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Kibwana . So you are asking for more time 
which is how many sitting days as you are aware that we are going for  long recess next week ? 

November 2 6, 2019                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          111 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  No I was asking for next week Tuesday.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Next week Tuesday . 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Yes exactly . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So next week on 3rd  December , right. T hank you Hon. 
Kibwana.  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  So I seek leave up to  next week Tuesday . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You are seeking leave up to Tuesday 3rd ; okay permission 
granted. So Clerk make sure it will be brought back to the House Business for it to be planned 
for next week Tuesda y. Yes Clerk next order?  
                         ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 26th November, 2019 at 
2:30p.m. 
                                   The House ro se at 10:52 a.m.  
  
 
 
 