September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 28th September , 2016  
The House met at 2: 40pm. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have your seats , Yes  Clerk . 
MOTION  
Yes any Member from ... 
(Interruption)  
 What  is it Hon,  are you a M ember from that Committee ? Yes Hon Kibwana . 
Hon Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Mr. Speaker , being a Member of the A d hoc 
Commit tee I would like just to read the report from the A d hoc C ommittee and Hon S peaker 
it is about Mombasa County Public Service Board that was 2015/2016.  
Hon Speaker the report stated clearly  the membership of the Ad hoc  Committee led by 
Hon Tom Ogalo . 
(Hon Kibwana Swaleh read the report)  
1.0  INTRODUCTION  
Mr. Speaker Sir,  
 
The Mombasa County Public B oard, a body corporate established pursuant to Section 57 
of the County Government Act 2012.  
The composition, terms and mandate of the Board are stipulated in the Act.   
The functions of the Board as provided for section 59 (1) of the County Governments ar e: 
 
a)  Establ ish and abolish offices in the C ounty public service;  
 
b) Appoint persons to hold or act in offices of the County p ublic service including in the 
Boards of cities and urban areas within the county and to confirm appointments;  
 
c) Exercise disciplinary  control over, and remove, persons holding or acting in those 
offices as provided for under this Part;  
 
d) Prepare regular  reports for submission to the County A ssembly on the execution of 
the functions of the Board;  
 
e) Promote in the C ounty public service the values and principles referred to in Articles 
10 and 232;  
 
f) Evaluate and report to the County Assembly on the extent to which the values and 
principles referred to in Articles 10 and 232 are complied wi th in the County Public 
Service B oard.  
 
g) Facilitate the development of coherent, integrated human resource planning and 
budgeting for personnel emoluments in counties;  
 
h) Advise the County Government on human resource management and development;  
 
September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 i) Advise the C ounty government on implementation and monitoring of te n national 
performance management system in counties and ; 
 
j) Make recommendation to the Salaries and Remuneration Commission, on behalf of 
the county government, on th e remuneration, pensions and gratuities for county public 
service employees . 
 
2.0 OBSERVATIONS AND FINDINGS  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir,  
 
The Committee in scrutinizing the report found that;  
2.1 The Board has since inception employed 50 nurses and it took into account the 
regional and gender balance which is expect ed in the public service.  
2.2 The Board has also emplo yed Sub -County administrators ; four of which have 
taken office.  Two are yet to take office and the delay is due to financial 
constraint s.  The Board has also employed 30 ward administrators, one for 
each ward.  Nine of the ward administrators are female.  
2.3 The Board has also employed five medical specialists.  
2.4 Twelve officers in the Department of Finance have been recruited, and one 
staff for the Board in the year under review.  
2.5 The Board does not have a substantive Chief Executive Officer.  Mr. Juma 
Mbaya is currently acting in that position.  He had acted as CEO for one and a 
half years and he was subsequently removed from that position.  He was 
reinstated as an acting CEO and he in his sixth month of acting.  
 
3.0 CONCLU SIONS  
 
4.1 The Board has recruited staf f in necessary departments and with time and more funds  
it will be possible to recruit more especially in the essential services such as health.  
Hon Speaker , 
4.2 The C ommittee is satisfied with the  commendable job that the B oard is doing save for 
the uncer tainty created  by lack of a substantive CEO.  
 
3.0 RECOMMENDATION S OF THE COMMITTEE  
On our recommendation as a committee ;   
a) That the Acting Chief Executive Office be confirmed to the position for a term of six 
years upon approval by the  County Assembly to enabl e the B oard carry out its 
mandate with certainty;  
Among the recommendation s; 
b) That there is need to employ more staff in the medical sector;  
Finally H on Speaker ; 
c) The County Assembly to consider and adopt this report.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you, as it is a M otion you have a 
seconder, Hon. Amir Thoya . 
September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika nimesimama kuunga mkono ripoti 
ambayo imeletwa hapa Bungeni . Ahsante sana.  
(Question proposed)  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fad hili Mwalimu) : I propose a question that the M otion be 
debated in this H ouse. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
What was the concern Hon. Mary ? 
Hon. (Ms)  Akinyi : My concern is that the M ember who stood up to second the 
Motion which was tabled is not even a M ember of the Ad  hoc Committee that  was my worry.  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Mary the Motion is in front of 
the House it means that any M ember of this Hon House can second.  
(Applause ) 
Yes Hon. Kibwana you have any input?  
Hon. Kib wana Swaleh : Hon. Speaker mine is just to sincerely thank the M embers 
for having going through this report and the compiling and  those who are also working close 
with t he A d hoc C ommittee.  
Hon Speaker this is s omething very important to the M embers and it  is open to 
discuss the report ; mine is to just  to emphasize on the issue making sure that this report is 
being fully implemented.  
Hon. Speaker an office of that magnitude needs to work with all the powers given  
according to the County Government A ct so t hat if a person who has been working as an 
acting capacity as a CEO and such environment will need fully mandate to work.  
Hon. Speaker the issue of recruitment is  very important for our County especially the 
bigger M ember , not necessarily a Member even th e Chair of the Health they are facing a lot 
of challenges which we need somebody like Mr. Mbaya who has been working for many 
years . 
So Hon. Speaker the issue of recruitment in different areas mine is just to clarify  to 
the M embers to make sure that at lea st this report is debated, thank you.  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Sarah Nyamvula ? 
Hon. (Mrs) Nyamvula : Thank you Mr. Speaker, before I give my submissions I want 
first of all to kindly be allowed to point out somethin g very important  on this report.  
September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  I know its passed by time but it’s something that should be brought to your attention 
so that  next time the gender composition of this subcommittee   is lacking ;  if you look at it 
the C ommittee comprises of six and they were all of the s ame gender that means something is 
amiss . 
Mr. Speaker it ’s very serious the Kenyan constitution is very clear that 30  per cent 
should be represen tative of opposite gender so as that opposite gender can be represented ; it’s 
not for the sake of being in a C ommittee but it’s for the sake of your voice being heard that 
your decisions your voice and your opinions are heard . 
So that is something I just wanted to point out, thank you Mr. Speaker as for the 
report I support the report it’s just that they are a few words missing like the first introduction 
we are not consis tent in saying Mombasa County Public Board where we should have Public 
Service B oard, it is just consistence in the typing and whether the confirmation of this 
gentleman Mr. Mbaya will make any dif ference . 
I don’t know whether the six years are mandatory or what , thank you.  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Se rah six years is in the County 
Government A ct, yes Hon. Mary . 
Hon.  (Ms) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, first and foremost I would like to 
congratulate the A d hoc C ommittee which has brought us this report ; what only I would like 
to comment on this report if you come to the finding and observation, you’ll find that there is 
no place they have mentioned any person living with disa bility in wh atever they have 
indicated here.  
So mine is just to support this report but they should look in to the people who are 
recruited at least we should have some people living with disabilities. Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon Mary.  Hon Mary I 
think you are aware that the H ead of communication in the Governor's office Mr. Richard 
Chacha is somebody from that community so it is something that the committee needs to  
point out but in future they will rectify  that but am sure the County Public Service Board 
have put in to consideration in employing people with disabilities. Yes Hon Patrick Simi nyu. 
 Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity.  Mr. Speaker I 
would like to congratulate thi s Ad hoc Committee  for an elaborate report and next time I 
would like a Member like Hon Karume should be consider ed in such committees so that 
people who are challenged can be incorporated in such a report ...... 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker from the recommenda tions am happy and if it is going to be 
implemented and the issue  of women have been highlighted out we have been having many 
people in the coastal region in the hospitals wards and people were complaining but  we have 
discover ed that there are other struct ures that one doctor can serve a thousand people and it is 
very challenging and if this board is not given any opportunity to employ especially those 
areas that are in need we are going to see change that we  have never seen in this County.  
 Mr. Speaker I s upport this report because it is going to do good to the County. Thank 
you. 
 Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon Amir Thoya . 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii.   
September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kwa kuunga mkono ripo ti ambayo imeletwa na 
Kamati , provision  hii ni provision  muhimu kwa sababu hata ukiangalia ripoti kama 
ilivyosomwa na Mwenyekiti inaonyesha kwamba Bodi hii ni bodi ambayo ni uti wa mgongo 
katika kazi nyingi za serikali yetu ya Kaunti . 
 Masuala yote Mheshim iwa Spika yanapita katika bodi hii, masuala ya uajiri kwa 
wauguzi katika hospitali zetu , masuala ya mawaziri na Ward administrator s zote yanapitia 
katika kitengo hichi . 
 Kwa hivyo ni masikitiko kwamba imechukua muda ripoti hii ilikuwa inatakikana ije 
mwaka  mmoja ama miwili iliopita sasa m adamu imechelewa Mheshimiwa Spika kwetu kama 
Bunge tuweze kuiunga mkono tuweze kupitisha ili tuhakikishe kwamba Chief Executive  
Bwana Juma Mbaya ameweza kuchukua kiti chake , kwa hivyo hivi sasa ni Mwenyekiti 
mshikilizi . 
 Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika naunga mkono maana ni mambo mengi ambayo 
ameweza kuyafanya hata kabla hajatawazwa rasmi nashukuru lakini tuweze kuchukua fursa 
hii leo tuweze kupitisha ili aweze kutawazwa rasmi kama mkuu wa kitengo hicho. A hsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika. 
 Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon Karume . 
 Hon. Karume:  Thank you very much Hon Speaker for according me this 
opportunity , I rise to support this report as my fellow colle agues. 
 The report is very good , however Mr. Speaker Sir Hon  Mary and Hon Patrick 
Siminyu have said that they need people living with disability and requested on 
representation on the Ad hoc committee but the constitution is very clear on this that such 
committees to consider such issues addressed . 
 Also the provisio ns of the representation of the people living with disabilities because 
we are talking of something which is constitution al and the constitution itself speculates 
clearly  on issue s touching on people living with disabilities so this is one of the core mand ate 
of the County Public Service Board . 
 So Mr. Speaker I would want to point out that one of the important thing s that I have 
said in this report is of course touching on the preparations of reports and submissions of the 
same in the County Assembly , it's the core function of this County Public Service Board . 
 I refer this Honorable  House to County Government Act  section 69 (1b) which talks 
about preparations and submissions of reports . 
 I am not sure if the committee sided with the similar report and then  these reports 
again refers to the same report of course I refer to section 59 (3) wh ich also talks about the 
report.  
 What need s to be incorporated in those reports , and this is where Mr. Speaker Sir I 
would have want ed to be part and parcel of this commi ttee because such as those things will 
not be going missing in this very important report because if you refer to the County 
Government Act that section that am pointing out and I just read for the purpose of this 
Honorable House to confirm County Governme nt Act section 59 (3) it reads the report under 
sub section 1d shall contain the persons appointed including gender, persons with disabilities, 
persons from the minority and marginalised community . 
 So Mr. Speaker am really grateful that this report we hav e never heard that these 
reports have never been presented in this Ho use and all reports have been presented , such 
concerns have been included and the reason as to these is that am answerable to my 
constituency and normally on the daily basis how many as t he County Government have 
employed from the disability fraternity as their representative s, I really have something to tell 
them so I would really request .         
September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6  
 Hon.  Karume :…Mr. S peaker I would really request that as we give them a positive 
note for t he good job well done of which I also agree and share those statements but then I 
would really  require and request this able Honorable H ouse through our able chairperson of 
Committee of L abour  to ensure that the County Public Service B oard in whatever they  do in 
terms of recruitment they make sure that they include persons living with disability.  
 Lastl y, I understand other than the C hief officer who has been in an acting capacity all 
that time, and I still believe also the chair that is madam chair is sti ll acting if am not wrong: I 
don’t know whether she has ever been confirmed and if she isn’t confirm ed I would really 
request this Honorable H ouse to coordinate with our county president so that to make sure 
our esteemed lady is also confirmed.  
 We make s ure that things move in the right direction. With those very few remarks I 
would like to rest my case Mr. Speaker.  
 Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon Jimmy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Hon S peaker for allowing me to air my views 
with regar d with the report at hand.  
 Mr. Speaker I wish to state that I support this report by th e committee that was headed 
by H on Tom Ogalo with regard to the C ounty Public S ervice  Board.  
 Mr. Speaker I wish to concur with the recommendation of this report that  there i s a 
need to have a substantive Chief Executive Officer to the Public Service B oard. 
 As you know Mr. Speaker this business of acting or acting capacity has got some 
limitation on the person or the holder of that docket because when you are on an ac ting 
capacity there are so many things that you are not able to execute due to the fact that you are 
not a substantive holder of that office , therefore we should not be keeping people in an acting 
capacity for too lon g Hon Speaker like we do at present . 
 Therefore I support the idea of confirming the holders of the office to that position so 
that to enable him to execute his duties for its mandate as required by the position and as 
required by the law.  
 Hon Speaker however as regarded in recommendation (b)  of the report which states 
inter alia that there is a need to employ more staff in the medical sector , as much as I would 
like to support that point I would also like to point out that there are many other more 
departments that require more staff.  
 At th e moment there has been a lot of retirement of staff in the department and no 
replacement for the positions there many very important or key position that need 
replacement at the moment therefore as we urge the vote to increase the staff in the health 
sector we should also consider other departments which have forwarded their requisitions for 
the request of field positions to be also considered to be allowed to employ people to f ill 
those positions. Thank you Hon Speaker I rest my case.  
 Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon  Kibwana respond to the 
Motion.  
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker , once again mine is just to 
appreci ate the contributions from the Members. Hon  Speak er what was said by Hon Saad was 
quite clear , very positive .   
 I think when you look at this report it is not over detailed showing how many and 
what type of people have been employed but for the information of this Honorable House, the 
September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7 detailed report concerning the number of people who have b een employed and the evidence 
whether people living with disability and other cases , the issue of gender . 
 Hon Speaker I just want to inform my colleagu es that the report is with the Clerk and 
it is a very open report.  
 I would urge our able Member Hon Karume who has also requeste d we include in 
future for any Ad hoc Committee , it is also open  to any Member to look at the report and you 
find that as we had said earlier that the law as per the new constitution the matter of gender 
balance which includes pe ople living with disability.  
 Hon Speaker the report is with the Clerk so the Member who will be free…….  
(Interruption ) 
 Point of order!  
 Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon  Karume?  
 Hon. Karume : Thank you  Hon Speaker am rising on the point of order . Since in my 
understanding the report is not supposed to be with the Clerk it is s upposed to be submitted to 
the House for discussion….  
(Applause ) 
 So I think the Member might be misleading this House.  
(Applause ) 
 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : I think Hon Speaker I was just trying to  explain and 
elaborate a point what I was saying is that when you look at this report, it was only looking 
on how the CEO and working and it was also looking at it from the acting capacity so the 
committee was not looking at how many people have been emplo yed within the County 
government .  
 So I was trying to give some insight on the issues that have been raised and are not 
contained in this report but are contained in another report whi ch was not the mandate of this 
Ad hoc committee . 
 I think that  was what I was trying to explain Hon Speaker , so mine was just to thank 
Members for cont ributing and I think this able House will be able to intervene where 
necessary.  
 I would like to thank the Members again for giving their input and hope tha t this Hon 
House would be able to accept and implement this report. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Hon Members we have 
exhausted debating this issue before the Assembly it is upon Members to go through the 
report and  it is upon whoever wis hes to g o through that report from the Service board.  
 The report is with the Assembly, that Clerk of that Committee or the Chairman of that 
committee will be contac ted to give that report to the Service board that report is with us and 
any Member who is wi lling to go through that report can do so at his own willing time to go 
through that report.  
 Hon Members much has been said and Hon Members I have  also recommended that 
let the Table Clerk g o with to communicate with the Clerk that in future no Ad hoc 
comm ittee shall approved without considering the gender balance and the disability factor .  
(Applause ) 
 So the Table Clerk will write to the Assembly Clerk on this issue. Hon Members I 
would li ke to put a question that this House adopts the Motion of the report  by the Public 
Service Board.  
September  28, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       111 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 8 (Question put and agreed  to) 
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT  
 The House has adjourned until tomo rrow 2:30pm  in the afternoon.  
                                                              
The House rose at  3:20pm.  
 
 
 
  