October 1 9, 2021                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           111 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic vers ion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
 Tuesday , 19th October, 2021   
The House met at 2:51p.m. 
 
[The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Have your seats  Honourable  Members . 
Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
IMPLEMENTATION STATU S OF AUTISM SPECTRUM  DISORDER (ASD) 
 
Yes Hon ourable  Salim  Kalume , Chairper son Committee on I mplementation.  
 
The Chairperson, Committee on Implementation (Hon. Kalume ): Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Tuliandika barua kwa Katibu wa Kaunti , nafikiri  kwa sasa twaomba utupatie 
muda kidogo kusudi aweze  kuitayarisha, k wa hivyo tunaomba utupatie muda kidogo . 
 
  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : For how long  should the  Assembly wait  
for that report ? 
 
Hon. Kalume:  Nafikiri hata w iki mbili.  
 
The De puty Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon ourable  Hamida, do you have 
anything to say before…  
 
Hon. Noor:   Mr. Speaker, I  woul d like to report …[inaudible ]… because  we informed  
the f ellow Member  that this was a very serious issue with us in the society because  of the 
COVID -19 has been with us here and you know that we are in our…  [Inaudible ] …. I do not 
understand how the word emergency has been taken here and I would  like your guidance on this 
Honourable  Speaker . Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank  you Hon ourable  Hamida . So 
Honourable  Salim  Kalume  two weeks as per the Hon ourable  Member who brought this 
statement  is too long  considering the days that the report was suppose  to reach the floor of the 
House … 

October 1 9, 2021                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           111 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic vers ion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 [Consultations]  
 
 Than k you. Salim Kalume  considering the days the  statement was brought before the  
floor of the  House , so this Assembly will give your Committee one week and remember it is an 
urgen t issue so please you and your Committee make sure that in a week 's time you bring back to 
this H onourable  House a report that the Honourable  Member plus the House will be satisfied. 
Make sure you get the County Secretary and bring back to this House a credible report.  
 
The Chairperson, Committee on Implementation  (Hon. Kalume ): Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika lakini ningependa ku kuomba jambo moja uelewe kwamba hii ripoti inatoka 
kwa Katibu wa Kaunti  na sisi Kamati tunawategemea wao . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I have directed that you  as a Committee 
make sure you follow up the matter  and in a week 's time you bring back a  report to this House.  
 
The Chairperson, Committee on Implementation  (Hon. Kalume ): Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
REPAIR OF FAULTY RA MP AT SHIKA ADABU HE ALTH CENTER  
 
Chairperson Committee  on H ealth, Hon ourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya or any other 
Member from Health Committee . Yes Hon ourable  Murfadh Amur I understand  you are a 
Member.  
 
Hon. Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , our report has not yet been received 
by the committee Mr. Speaker  if we get up  to next Tuesday will follow it up Mr. Speaker, we 
were expecting it but it has not passed to the office of the Clerk.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Amur , you 
also remember that Hon ourable  Mwalimu Mgwisho has been waiting for thi s report so make sure 
that as you said in next week Tuesday you will have the report with you. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Honourable  Members , the House stands adjourn ed till Tuesday 26th October, 2021 at 
10:00 a.m. 
 
The House ros e at 2 :57p.m . 
 
 
 
 
 