November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 26th November, 2019  
The House met at 3:22 p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub  Ebrahim  Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated . Yes Clerk. 
 
STAT EMENTS  
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT  BY HON . MWALIMU MGWISHO , MCA SHIKA ADABU ON WHEN 
SHIKA ADABU HEALTH C ENTRE WILL BE OFFICIALLY OPENED  
 
 Yes Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi Mgwisho , please request for your S tatement.  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speak er Sir, i seek to know from 
the Chairperson, Committee  on Health on when Shika  Adabu Health Center in Shika  Adabu 
Ward will be opened bearing in mind that the residents have to walk for some kilometers in 
search  for a health centre yet the above mentioned hospital is done in  terms of  construction. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu. Yes Chai rperson Committee  on 
Health?  Vice Chair Hon. Fatuma Mote?  
 
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Spika. N ingependa kumfaham isha 
Mheshimiwa m wenzangu ya  kwamba aweze kutupati a muda kulingana  na hivi sasa kama 
anavyoju a kwamba Kaunti  hivi sasa haina fedha , kwa hivyo ni ngependa aweze kutupatia muda 
kisha baada e tutaleta jibu. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ch arles Kitula.  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i nafikiri Naibu Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya Fedha labda hajasoma Taarifa  wala haelewi anachoongea katika Bunge hili 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa Mwalimu Hamadi amesema jengo liko tayari al afu yeye 
ana nguvu gani kusema Kamati  haina pesa  wakati hakuna circular  yoyote  imetoka katika Wizara  
yetu kusema kuwa Kaunti  haina pesa.   

November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Kwa hivyo tafadhali  asipotoshe Bunge hili kuongea maneno ambayo hakuna barua imekuja 
katika Bunge hili ama Memo yoyot e kutoka County T reasury kusema kwamba  Kaunti  haina 
pesa, jengo liko tayari , swali lililoulizwa ni kwamba, ni li ni hospitali itafunguliwa? Basi!  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fatma.  
 
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Sijapoteza Jum ba hili Mheshimiwa 
Spika ; katika utaratibu hospitali kufunguliwa ni lazima kuwe na vifaa na iwe na madawa, si 
mahali pa kuchezea kamari pale, ni mahali pa kuhudumia wananchi. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
Spika sijapoteza , sijapotosha Bunge hili h iyo nataka Mhesh imiwa Kitula kwanza afahamu na pili 
nasema watupatie muda kwanza alafu watapata jibu muafaka. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Fatma. Yes Hon. Mwalimu.  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , kitu ambac ho ningeomba 
kujua, amesema tu apatiwe muda lakini nataka kuju a kwa hiyo K amati ama kwa huyo Naibu 
Mwenye Kiti  ni muda gani ambao ataka yeye apatiwe.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Mheshimiwa Mwalimu labda hilo swala lako, hiyo hospitali 
ishajengwa, labda uu lize in more details . 
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Mheshimiwa Spik a hospitali imekwisha miaka 15 iliyopita 
mpaka sasa hivi  bado  haijafunguliwa . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh , Chairman is it true that the 
hospital. .. 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I  wish to stan d with my 
Vice Chair supporting  her response on the issue. Hon. Speaker I  think my colleague , a friend of 
mine is eager  to see the facility  being opened as soon  as possible but Hon. Speaker I want to 
inform this Hon ourable  House that th e facility is among the facilities  that will be opened by the 
His Excellency the G overnor.  
 We started with Chaani  which was opened  then we wanted  to open Vikwatani but because 
of some logistic s it did not happen so I  think  giving us more time will give the right position 
Hon. Speaker because ours as a C ommittee is to oversight and seeking correct information . So 
rather than misleading this Honourable  House by giving a date that maybe in future when he asks 
again we will not  be able to open it ...,  
 So I think the r ight thing is that you give us more time and he is lucky because otherwise if 
you open  the facility  before ... I think nobody could have take n that advantage because the facility 
could have been opened during Hon. M adundo’s time but because w e want to uplift to be a L evel 
Three facility  Hon. Speaker not on ly a Health Centre but a L evel Three facility so I ask my 
colle ague to be pat ient enough and he will be the Master of C eremony during that opening of 
that facility.  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana. So we give you, I think we are 
going on recess next week so most likely when we come back from the recess during the first 
week you will have the answer with you , right? 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I think that is the right position.  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So C lerks , the first week. Thank you Hon. Kibwana. Yes 
Clerk, next order?  
 
MOTION  
 
Yes Hon. Majority Leader, Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
The Leader o f Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika kwa heshima yako na kwa 
heshima ya  Bunge ningependa kuuondoa huu M swada kwa sababu kuna  mawasiliano ambayo 
nayangojea na mpaka sasa haya jafika. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika itakuwa ni makosa tu ahirishe 
vikao  bila ya sababu n a sababu ilikuwa ni  mawasiliano  tupate  rasmi  mpaka sasa hatujapata . Kwa 
hivyo ningependa ku defer  hii Motion  kwa siku ya leo. Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Labda ufafanue ni  mawasiliano  kutoka? Ni ya nini 
mawasiliano ? 
 
The Le ader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika kuna  taarifa  ambayo 
inatakikana  Wanachama  wawe wataenda Nairobi kwa BBI launch  kesho lakini taarifa rasmi  
hatujapata kwa sababu hili ni Bunge hatuwezi kupelekwa na magazeti, hatuwezi kupelekwa na 
porojo za mitaa ni. Bwana Spika nilikuwa nangoja  taarifa kwa maandishi  ambayo kesho naweza 
iweka kama  ushahidi , kwa hivyo Bwana Spika vile hatujapata  taarifa kwa maandishi  ndio 
nimesema wacha  tuendelee  na Bunge letu kesho . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi  Musa. Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker I think that is a Motion , 
it is us M embers who are going to decide whether we are going to adjourn or not so the best 
thing for him , the Leader of Majority it is to bring that Motion  and let the M embers decide . 
Maybe we have our own way of going out on the issue so I think let  us debate it and agree if we 
decide to go  we will decide Hon. Speaker and this is my position.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes thank you H on. K ibwana. Yes Hon. Shebe Ath man?  
 
Hon. Shebe Athuman: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti Kiongozi wa W engi Bunge ni pindi alipokuja na hoja hii n i maana alikuwa tayari 
ashapata maelezo kamili na habari . Kwa hivyo mimi namshanga a yeye ku tangulia kusema kuwa 
mpaka hivi sasa kuwa hajapata kuwa safari ipo ama haipo , aidha labda katika muktadha wa 
kutojielewa Mheshimiwa Mwen yekiti ama namna gani . 
November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 Maadam  kuwa hoja hii Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa W engi ashaileta katika Bunge na hili 
ni Bunge, Bunge la sheria kwa hivyo mimi ningependelea hoja iweze kuendelea aidha watu 
watakwenda ama hawatakwenda manake naona  tayari ishaingia tusiwe tukawa tumia pia wino na 
karatasi kimakosa.  Kwa hivyo naomba chini ya himaya yako heshima ilikuwa ni utaratibu 
utumie ku pitia Bunge lako Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti aidha taarifa ilikuwa ije rasmi kupitia kwa 
Karani wa Bunge  na Spika lakini leo hii taarifa sawa imeingia k wa Kiongozi wa W engi lakini 
hakuna confirmation  kuwa hii safari haipo . Kwa hivyo sisi twajua safari ipo...  
  
(Laughter)  
 
Kwa hivyo hivi sasa ni muhimu hoja iendelee Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ndio tuweze 
kujua kwa hivyo Bunge hili litaweza kupitisha ikiwa safari hakuna Mheshimiwa. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe. Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir it is indeed very sad to wake up for such ... I can say a 
dark day that i s how I can describe it. Mr. Speaker Sir this one is a M otion th at has already been 
put in the O rder paper and it is very sad to realize that the people who are suppo sed to 
communicate actually have misled this particular House . This is  because am sure that before this 
Motion was put o n this P aper there was communication and then the same people have turn ed 
the infor mation upside down and Mombasa C ounty is a very big s takeholder when it comes t o 
matters concerned with that of  making of the law and so on and so forth . And this is a very 
important thing that Mombasa County should not be left out Mr. Speaker Sir , being that our 
Governor is the Deputy Leader of the largest party in Africa I think Mombasa County would 
have been given first priority to be in that summit. Mr. Speaker Sir to me I can just say that it is a 
sad day and it has happened like this Mr. Speaker Sir , indeed it is sad. Thank you Mr. Speaker 
Sir. 
 
The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim. Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker indeed I want to stand with the Leader 
of Majority; one because he is the author of the Motion and it is not the first time that  we are 
seeing withd rawal of a M otion . Any author of the M otion can decide to withdraw it anytime he 
feels that it has not have the threshold of going through this House.  Mr. Speaker I can see 
Members have already prepared for something that they have not been maybe communica ted to, 
so let us go by the Leader of Majority tomorrow we are having a sitting so that we can serve the 
people of Mombasa and if there was arrangement for us to travel then the Leader of Majority 
should have communicated like that . So if the Leader of Maj ority has said that there  is no 
communication  for us to go to Nairobi there must be an official communication even from the 
Governor himself, so if t here is no information from the G overnor or from Nairobi, how  do we 
travel to Nairobi? W ho is inviting you to Nairobi? S o we should be here serving the people of 
Mombasa because we have not received an official communication to go to Nairobi and the 
logistics are not there and the Leader of Majority is right Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mimi ni taarifa  tu manake naona kuna kutoelewana 
baina ya sisi viongozi hasa ingekuwa bora Kiongozi wa W engi aweze kufahamisha Bunge hili ni 
kwa nini Mswada huu  umeingia katika Order paper  bila ya kupa ta confirmation ? Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika ningesema ni makosa Jumba 
hili tulipeleke kama jungle  House ! Ni kweli nimesema Procedural M otion  iwekwe nikingojea 
mawasiliano  na nafikiri tulikuwa na House Business  jana ndio tukakubaliana hivyo lakini 
nisingependa kupotosha hili Bunge…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But maybe if I can correct you on that Hon . Majority Leader 
I do not think  this Motion needs to pass t hrough the House Business and for your information 
Members it is any Member it is not Majority Leader . So if you look at Sta nding Order 28 it is 
very clear, i t does  not say the Majority Leader ; any Member , “A M ember at any time for reason 
stated seek s leave to move that this County Assembly do now adjourn or adjournment on definite 
matter of urgent County importa nce". S o Hon. Members it is clear that any Member can rise for 
the adjournment b ut you have to have a reason so that is why I think the Hon. Majori ty Leader is 
saying that it is not confirmed to him those reasons may be that is why he said he cannot mov e 
that Motion but if any Member wants to move that M otion, you can raise and move the M otion. 
There is no problem and we can continue , the M embers wil l want the adjournment to go on , it 
will go on. So yes I think ... Hon. Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think you articulated very well but our concern 
or my concern is what is at stake for us in terms of BBI ; in relation that we are going ther e and 
be informed because it will be very sad if at all our fellow ... this Bill is going to be passed by this 
House but it is just very sad when you leave the leaders that are going to discuss that Bill in this 
House and take the Wananchi and we cannot be taken for granted. We need to get this 
information very clear and that is why we felt that the discussion abo ut this Procedural M otion 
was to proceed but if at all there is enough grounds so be it but it was very good that we  know  
what is the pos ition if w e don’t go to Nairobi! B ecause we can miss Nairobi, we can miss 
information and t hen we are told we passed that M otion. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Thoya are you in suggestion that the House go for 
adjournment until next week?  
 
Hon. Thoy a: Whatever I was saying the debate was to proceed and when you give the 
green light for the debate to proceed I am at liberty to give what is in me but because you have 
not given the go ahead we cannot discuss the same. Thank you . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): But again as I told you Hon. Thoya it is you Members who 
have to propose that, it is not me to give the way ; it is upon you M embers. The Standing Order is 
very clear  and the Hon. Majority Leader  did not propose for the adjournment so he seeks leave to 
remove the adjournment. So yes Hon. Thoya? Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it is 
evident that the Procedural M otion was coming from the Leader of Majority and the Leader of 
Majority represents the maj ority party in this Hon ourable  House. Mr. Speaker we would like to 
hear from the Leader of Majority; is he opposing the BBI ? That is why he does  not want this 
Motion to proceed or he does  not want the Motion proceed on his own thinking. I want the 
Leader o f Majority to come clear Mr. Speaker. Thank you . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili. Y es Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker the Hon. Majority Leader has said clearly for him to 
move such a M otion he must have got a communicati on, and  since he did not get communication 
he cannot bring any issue that has no evidence no r supporting evidence. Mr. Speaker we cannot 
just adjourn but there must be a reason for adjournment. Thank you . 
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Am ur communication  is there in all newspapers I 
think not unless may be you have not read the newspaper. I think for the last two days we have 
been seeing that and…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon. Murfad Amur : With all due respect Mr. Speaker , this is a House of laws ; unless 
we receive either in your office or Clerk to the Assembly receive s communication officially that 
has been forwarded to you then when you communicate to us that is an official communication 
through the Majority Leader. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Amur I still disagree with you because not unless 
may be you are asking that communication for some other reason which may be I do  not know 
you can explain them to me but if the issue is concern about Mombasa people and you as Hon. 
Member  as Hon. Thoya said you need to go to Nairobi and hear the concerns about the BBI.  I 
myself heard  the P resident , His Excellency Uhuru Mu igai Kenyatta talking about the issue and I 
saw it in the yesterday newspaper and today’s newspaper that tomorrow there will be the 
meeting for the BBI so I do  not know which other communication is that you want so that you 
may be informed that tomorrow there will be that meeting. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker when we are chosen we are more than 47 millio n in 
Kenya and when we are ch osen like here we are 30 or 42 M embers we are representing 1.2 of 
Mombasa  on behalf of those who have been chosen . Although we wanted to be there but the law 
does not allow all of us to travel , may be the expenses but those who  are going are represent ing 
Mombasa people. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So there are people who will be going?  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  (Off Microphone) .   
November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay from the same House?  
  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  (Off M icrophone)  but village elders and other people Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But as far I am concerned as the Speaker I have not seen 
anyone bringing any letter of notification to my office that they are going to Nairobi. So.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  That is okay Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  since there is no 
communication , again that is it is your ruling there is no comm unication to you to allow your 
Members to travel. Then no M ember should travel.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes becaus e I think the Standing O rder is very clear that if 
any M ember wants to leave or travel anywhere they have to notify me but as far as I know, I 
have not seen any notification . So yes Hon. Nyiro.  
 
 (Applause)  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker I…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Murfad?  
 
Hon. Amur Murfad:  Mr. Speaker with all due respect if there is no communication from 
the Chair, even if I have brought any communication if it is not through your office I want to say 
it openly here, I am not travel ling without your authority. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur. Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker I do not think this calls for debate but because we are 
discussing you have talked about the President. The Presid ent indeed has communicated to all 
his County Commissioners and sent official information to his Commissioners to attend.   
We are an Assembly and we ought to have also received information from our President 
who is our Governor inviting us to the same ven ue. So because we have not received that 
information Mr. Speaker that is why the Majority Leader has said that he has not received the 
official communication from wherever he receives the information for us.  
So because of that even if there was an invitat ion on a private manner may be towards me, 
direct to me by a rea DCC. Maybe if I was to travel I was to tell you, b ut now officially to this 
Assembly if we have not received any information then we cannot travel Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Than k you Hon. Nyiro. Yes Hon. Moraa.  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker;  I just want to give a comment that I think the 
Majority Leader brought or rather organized for the Motion to be in the Order Paper with an 
assumption . 
November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 He hoped  that arrangements were bei ng made for this Hon. Members to travel for the 
launch of BBI which of course has been on air for some  time, and it was common knowledge 
that as Hon. Members we would have been organized for through prior arrangements to attend it 
because that is a nationa l issue and we represent citizens of this County. But it is unfortunate that 
the communication never came through you so that the Majority Leader could know in advance. 
And therefore him coming here to ask for withdrawal of the Motion is very much in order  and I 
do support it, if there are people…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Who have been i nvited, I think those are under dealings which are not acceptable.  We 
should all be invited if possible or majority of us. Thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwanza kwa heshima yako 
tusingependa kuweza kuongea jambo hili kinyume na sheria. Nimeanza kusema k wamba ni 
jukumu la Kiongozi wa Wengi kutoa muelekeo h apa. Kiongozi , Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
wanaongea  kuhusu BBI, wakati hata katika Order Paper  hakuna suala la BBI hapa ; ni yeye 
kuweza kutupatia muelekeo, je h aya mapumziko  ilikuwa ni saba bu ya BBI au labda Kiongozi wa 
Wengi alikuwa anatupangia safari ya kuenda West Pokot y a kuenda kutoa pole. Lakini sasa 
tukianza kuongea BBI bila hata kupata taarifa kutoka kwa Kiongozi wa W engi, yeye ndio 
atuambie confirmation  ya barua ni gani na sababu gani Procedural Motion imeingia katika 
Order Paper  ndio tuweze kujua kujadili nini, laki ni hivi sasa tunaanza kuongea mamb o ya BBI 
kabla Kiongozi wa W engi kutuambia confirmation  kuwa ni ya nini? Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
muelekeo wako naomba utuelekeze.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti. Maelezo tu ; isitoshe 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  hii si mara moja si mara mbili  lakini wasema mfanya kosa hajatenda 
kosa bali arudiapo kosa ndio kafanya kosa. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wewe ndio Kiongozi ama 
ndio Rais wa Bunge hili la Mombasa . Kwa hivyo taarif a, maelezo yeyote, waraka wowote, 
ujumbe wowote Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti inat akikana u pitie ofisi yako. Kwa hivyo ikiwa 
hakuna uwiano, iki wa hakuna muamala mzuri katika o fisi yako Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Iwe funzo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, Mheshimiwa  yeyote atakuwa hana uwezo…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro.  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Hon. Shebe is misleading the House. It is not all the information that must 
come to the Hon. Speaker. Information concerning Party issues comes to the Majo rity Leader.  
 
November 26 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          112 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
Hon. Shebe Athman:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Sasa leo Mheshimiwa wa 
Bamburi anasema taarifa inakuja ku pitia Kiongozi wa wengi Bungeni l akini haimaanishi kuwa 
Kiongozi  wa W engi Bungeni ana uhuru wa kuitamatisha ile taarifa bila ya kupitia ofisi ya 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo mimi naona kuwa hili ni kosa ambalo limefanyika,  hivyo  basi 
mimi napendekeza W aheshimiwa wenza kuwa sisi tuko hapa Raisi wa Bunge hili la Kaunti  ni 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo ik iwa kutakuwa na w araka wowote, ujumbe wowote, basi ni aula 
zaidi kupitia kwa ofisi ya Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Kwa hivyo mimi naona kama Mheshimiwa sisi ni vizuri tuwakilishe wananchi wetu 
kama kawaida badala ya kuenda mapumzikoni kwa muda mchache . Kesho nikikumbuka 
Mheshimiwa Spika taarifa ambayo maelezo ambayo natarajia katika kikao cha kesho kwangu na 
kwa wakaazi wa Mombasa Mheshimiwa Spika ni muhimu sana, k wa hivyo kwa maoni yako 
niko chini ya himaya yako kuomba Bunge hili liend elee na shughuli ili tuhakikishe  
tunawahudumia wakaazi wetu wa Mombasa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri)  exited the Chair ) 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) i n the Chair ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Yes the Leader of Majority , will you respond on 
your stand pertaining to the Motion.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika dini inasema ukiwa Kiongozi 
kuwa Kiongozi wa haki  Lillahi, na mimi nawaomba usiwe Kiongozi ambaye hujielewi saa 
zengine. Mheshimiwa Spika h ili jambo tumelizungumza kwa Chamber  na baadhi ya hawa 
wanaojifanya sasa wanataka kwenda ndio waliokuwa wanasema kuwa hawataki kuenda kwa 
sababu afadhali wafanye mikutano kuliko kwenda pahali bila mas lahi. Sasa inabidi muelezewe 
maneno ya ukweli. Kwa hivy o Bwana Spika mimi nimesimama wima, mimi ndio mwenye Hoja 
na Hoja hii naitupilia mbali kwa sababu sijapata  mawasiliano ya kuweza kufanya Waheshimiwa 
wasafiri, kesho mtu akija safiri halafu apatikane  kwamba ulipelekwa na barua gani? Aseme ni 
Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi ? Natupilia mbali Hoja yangu na huu ndio mwisho hak una mwengine 
anaweza kuniambia…  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you , the Leader of Majority. Hon. 
Members not unless that there is any other Me mber who is willing to bring  back the Motio n is at 
liberty but in the mean time the Motion will stand as the way Hon. Mwidani, Majority Leader has 
stated and we proceed with the Business of the day. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members there being no other Business the House stands adjo urned unt il tomorrow, 
Wednesday at 10:00 a.m.  
 
The H ouse rose at 3: 54p.m. 