November 27, 2019               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       113 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wedn esday, 27th November , 2019  
The House met at 10:40a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharu b Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Hon. Members you may be  seated? Serjeant-At-Arms, 
please ring the bell for ten minutes ? And please give me the register  there . 
(Quorum bell is rung ) 
 Yes Clerk , confirm if there is quorum . 
(The Clerk confirmed the quorum)  
 Thank you Cler k, next Order Please!  
PETITIONS  
RELOCATION OF PERSONS  UNDER METHADONE CONSUMPTION  IN FRÈRE TOWN  
 
 Hon. Members pursu ant to Standing Order 195,  I have received a Petition  on 
relocation of persons un der Methadone consump tion in Frere town Kisauni Dispensary. Hon. 
Members pursuant to Standing Order 202 , I now commit this Petition to the Committee on 
Health Services for con sideration. The Committee shall within 60 calendar days respond to 
the Petitioner by a way of report and table the same before the floor the County Assembly, 
thank you. Yes Clerk next Order?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Spe aker. Hon. Speaker just my concern on 
what we have been given because we are about to go for a recess of wh ich the Petition needs 
to get 60 days. So Hon. Speaker the 60 days may elapse before we respond to this Petition ; so 
maybe that is my view , may be if you can allow us as we go for a rec ess you give an avenue 
for the C ommittee to continue with it s sittings so that we can be able to compile the report 
once we open the Assembly after the long recess we will be able to table the report. Thank 
you H on. Speaker.  

November 27, 2019               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       113 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana . As you  are aware I think 
when we go for long recess  the Committee does not sit  for their sitting s but in this special 
case the Committee wants to sit . You can seek for the permission from my o ffice and Clerk 
and you may sit for this Petition but otherwise I t hink you can seek for more days ; so you 
want the document to be given to you when we come back from recess? Is that what you are 
saying?  
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : I think Hon. Speaker just a con cern which I think you should 
consider it bec ause the Petition has got the timelines of 60 days, so when I am doing the 
calculation and we are about to go for a recess may be the 60 days will  elapse  without 
bringing back to table the Report to the Asse mbly so…  
(Interruption ) 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So your issue is not about the timing ; the 60 days, within 
60 days you will have the report ready with you , Is that what you are saying?  
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  No! I am saying we cannot beat the timeline becau se we are 
going for a recess which is starting from December 5th… 
(Interruption ) 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Continue Hon. Kibwana?  
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  My concern is that we are going for a recess on 5th 
December which means we are not allowed to sit as a Committee during the long recess , 
automatic ally when we will be coming back from the long recess the 60 days will elapse so 
we will not be able to table the Report to the Assembly . So I was seeking your guidance if 
you can allow the Committee duri ng the long recess be able to have a meetin g so that we 
deliberate on the Petition so  that once the Assembly is opened we will be able to table the 
Report to the House.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): That is fine . I think there is no issue on that you can do 
that so  long as you know I think every month  you should not sit more than 16 sittings. That is 
fine, so I am okay with that if you want to sit with the Committee and look into this  Petition I 
have no problem. Or else  if you want us to commit this Petition to yo u may be after the recess 
but what does the Clerk…  
(Consultation s) 
 What does the law say ? So Hon. Kibwana I think we have agreed that you can sit over 
the long recess, thank you. Yes Clerk next Order.  
PAPERS  
CONDITION O F MVITA HEALTH CENTRE  
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh , Chairperson Committee on Health services ? 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I was just consulting 
the Deputy Speaker who is also a Member of  the Health Committee . Hon. Speaker I am 
happy today that we have a  Report that I am able to lay  to you on condition of Mvita H ealth 
Centre. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
November 27, 2019               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       113 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 (Paper  laid) 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwan a Swaleh . Yes Cler k, next 
Order?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Thank you Hon. Members . This House  stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 27th 
November, 2019  at 2:30 p.m. 
The House rose at 10 :52a.m.  
 
 
  
 
 
  