October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tues day, 4th October , 2016  
The House met at 2.37p m. 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid):  Hon. M embers you may  sit, yes C lerk. 
PETITION  
        Hon. there is a petition which is coming from civil societies . 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) read)  
       "Re: people’s open letter to the lette r to the County A ssembly , we, the undersigned,        
Residents of Mombasa County, residents of Jom vu, Changamwe, Nyali, Kisauni, Mvita and 
Likoni, residents Matopeni, Dunga  Unuse, Jomvu, Kwa -Punda, Kibarani, Tudor -Moroto, 
Bangladesh, Mnazi Moja, Kisumu  Ndogo, Dongo Kundu,  Bombolulu Mbuyuni, Shau ri yako, 
Burukenge, M ishomoroni Moroto, and Bombolulu M oroto, Members of various Civil Society 
organizations and individual stakeholders in Housing and Evictions wish to formally present 
this People’s open l etter in the public interest concerning the impact of and plight of victims 
of force d evictions in the abov e mentioned slums.  
       We also want to note that the upcoming infrastructure and development projects 
earmarked to take place i n Mombasa namely:  The Mombasa G ate City Master plan that 
proposes to overhaul the design of the city, Mombasa Housing Renewal  Project, Kenya 
informal Settlement Improvement Project, Mombasa Vision 2035, Vision 2030 some of which 
have already starte d like the Dongo Kundu By Pass, The Mombasa Mariakani Dual Carriage  
way, Moi International Airport Expansion Project, Kenya  Ports Dec ongestion Project,  The 
Standard G auge Railway and LAPSET project; a ll these have already affected residents of 
some of these slums through forced evictions that have made residents experience high level 
police brutality.   
       We seek the H ouse indulgen cy to ensure you undertake your constitutional duty to 
protect the welfare of the people who voted for you.  We ask you to urgently enact eviction 
and resettlement law for Mombasa County.  
       We humbly draw the attention of the House to the following:  
1.  We draw the attention of the County Assembly that human rights violations that have 
occurred in the process of evictions that have been taking place without human rights 
compliant legal framework to guide the process of evictions.  
2. The Bill of Rights in The  Constitution of Kenya 2010 is an integral part of Kenya’s 
democratic state  and the framework for social, economic and cultural policies.  
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 3. Rapid Response Team Mombasa and in collaboration with Amnesty International 
Kenya presents the People’s Open Letter b ased on the experience of working with 
several slums in Mombasa including as earlier Dunga  Unuse, Jomvu Kwa - Punda, 
Kibarani, Tudor -Moroto, Bangladesh, Mnazi moja, Kisumu  Ndogo, Shauri yako,, 
Burukenge, M ishomoroni, Matopeni, Dongo  Kundu, Moroto and Bombo lulu Moroto.  
4. RRT and Amnesty International whom we partner with in our work had documented 
many incidences of forced evictions in slums and informal settlements of Mombasa for 
the last four years.  The research show that thousands of people in Kenya have b een 
left homeless, and vulnerable to other human rights violations including rights to 
security, privacy, health, water, sanitation, education, safe and clean environment.  
As a result of forced evictions.  
5. The forced evictions constitute to gross violation s of human rights, in particular right 
to adequate housing.  The absence of a legal framework that explicitly prohibits 
forced evictions and absence of guidelines that spell out how evictions should be 
conducted exposes people living in slums/informal sett lements to arrangement of 
human rights violations  
       We therefore demand that:  
i.  The County A ssembly of Mombasa legislate an evictio ns and resettlement procedures 
Act.  This will govern the eviction regime and contribute significantly to the 
realizatio n of the right to a dequate housing for thousands of residents in this 
County of  Mombasa.  
ii. That the County Assembly of Mombasa takes measures to put in place a temporary 
suspen sion on mass evictions in this C ounty until we have an evictions and 
resettlement  procures act.  
iii. That the County A ssembly of Mombasa upholds rights to adequate housing for all 
persons through creations of strategies to achieve low cost housing units, 
budgetary allocation for the same and involvement of public in the process.  
iv. Demand for accountability for use excessive force during evictions by government 
officials.  
       This People’s Open Letter is hereby present ed to the Assembly by Rapid Response Team 
and CSOs  involved on behalf  of the undersigned.  
       Thank you . 
       Yours si ncerely,  
       1.  Andrew Mativo  
       RRT Coordinator – Mombasa  
       2.  Jared Oget  
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3        RRT Secretary – Mombasa  
       3.  Jerusa Wangare  
       RRT Member  
(The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Mswabah R ashid)  ended reading the Petition)  
       Well M embers, P ursuant to Standing Order 194 (50 ), the Clerk forwarded the petition to 
the Speaker for tabling in the County Assembly.  
       The petition thus stands committed to the C ommittee on P hysical Planning and Lands 
and C ommittee  on Justice and Legal Affairs sin ce the matters raised touch on human rights 
which  are within the mandate of the C ommittee on Justice and Legal Affairs and Land 
matters w hich are within the mandate of C ommittee on Physical Planning and Lands.  
       Standing  Order 183 allows two  Committee s to hold joint sittings and to present a report 
within 60 days I. e, not later than 2nd December in accordance w ith Standing Order 202. Yes 
Clerk.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Zainab Kithinzi  
       Hon. (Ms.) Zain ab Kithinzi : Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. Mr. Speaker S ir I seek to give 
Notice of the following M otion.  
(Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Kithinzi read the Notice of Motion)  
       "That aware that the County A ssembly annually incurs tremendous expenditure on 
transpo rt and travelling expenses for M embers and staff ; 
       Mr. Speaker further aware that Members and staff of the County A ssembly travel 
frequently officially within and outside the County in discharge of their duties and 
responsibilities ; 
       Mr. Speaker co ncerned that these expenses could be significa ntly reduced if the County 
Assembly had welfare buses for transport and travel ; 
       Mr. Speaker sir I urge this County A ssembly to resolve that;  
       The County Assembly Service B oard to plan, budget and p urchase welfare buses for 
official travel and transport of Members and staff of the County A ssembly in order to 
minimize expenditure on the same and for prudent use of financial resources , thank you Mr. 
Speaker . 
(Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Kithinzi ended reading No tice of Motion)  
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon. Mary Akinyi . 
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir I have a statement on stat us of gratuity 
remittances for Members.  
       Mr. S peaker I wish to bring to the attention of this Hon.  House a bout the status of 
gratuity of Members of County A ssembly . 
       Mr. Speaker  during our team building with C ounty Executive at Swahili Beach H otel in 
Kwale County it was b rought to our attention by the County Executive Committee Members 
of Finance confirmed to us that the gratuity funds for the past three years will be disbursed to 
the respective institution . 
       Mr. Speaker I humbly request the department concerned to bring before this Hon.  House 
a detailed statement on the disbursement of the funds in question , thank you Mr. Speaker . 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Fadhili what is it ? 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, mimi nimesimama na statement , tumeona 
Bwana Marwa akiingilia kazi ambazo si zake Mheshimiwa S pika.. . 
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Fadhili please wait first, yes Hon. 
Mary just brought a statement and I want to ..., in this statement she wants to know the sta tus 
of gratuity . 
       So I think this is a matter co ncerning finance so I call the Finance C hair to bring a 
detailed report on the status of gratuity so am  giving two weeks to bring the R eport . 
       I know the F inance is not around so am giving two wee ks to the Finance Chair to bring 
before this H ouse and tel l us the position of gratuity, y es what is it ? 
       Hon. Amur : Yes Mr. Speaker S ir. 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Go on . 
       Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker I want to  believe that if the Executive M ember is not around it 
doesn’ t mean the office is not around, the information can be obtained from the department...  
(Applause ) 
       because Mr. Speaker if we wait for the Executive M ember I always say that Go d forbid if 
he dies today this  Assembly or the departm ent should not work Mr. Speaker ?  
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5        We need answers for questions ; as such Mr. Speaker we have only nine months here, 
after nine months our fate will be known , we need to know the issue has be en brought to this 
House several ti mes and it is high time people be answerable to the ques tions that are brought 
to this H ouse. 
       Mr. Speaker we cannot be taken for granted for issues that are pertaining to our welfare , 
thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes I  understand but there is a procedure  
they have to summon their officers and we have to give them enough time to prepare , so I 
think two  weeks is the standard in this House , we give them two weeks it is enough he can 
arrange himself.  
        Hon. Amur : Mr.  Speaker with all due respect he has given a statement, what we are 
crying about is the timeline that she gave when we had that meeting , until today nothing has 
taken place . 
       Mr. Speaker the M embers have only nine months , after nine months we do not want to 
come here at the corr idors only to beg for our money , this concerns our welfare Mr. 
Speaker ... 
(Technical hitch ) 
       Mr. Speaker we are not begging but the promise that was given that things will be 
finalized ; now we are becoming beggars, be gging people; this is our right . 
       So we need to be given a final date that if the person cannot deliver Mr. Speaker then 
they do not need to be there. Thank you . 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Amur I think you have heard the 
Chair, you know all the process, you know the procedure how we give these officers two 
weeks, we will wait for the response they have been summoned, you have been a C hair at one 
time you know how this works.  
       Hon. Amur: Mr. Speaker I am not saying no, the reality is  this issue was deliberated and 
she was supposed to respond to it and it has more than two months and we are wa iting for 
that reply . 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I am repeating as the Chair man I am not 
siding with the officer , I am pitting with Chairman F inance so  if the Chair F inance cannot get 
those people today it is upon him to put these people on the table , I want to give him enough 
time. Clerk?  
(Loud c onsultations)  
       Members just one minute , yes what is it?  Yes Hon.  Simi nyu. 
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6        Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker this is a burning issue and M embers are concern ed… Mr. 
Speaker I think two weeks is a long time by Wednesday we can have this process going on 
because this issue we have discussed for days and we don’t have answers and as Hon.  Amur 
said an office is not a person . 
       Mr. Speaker there are people who are working and so we need this report as soon as 
possible Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Simi nyu our concern is the 
Chairman ; our concern is not the people , can the C hair ok , is the C hair if he can give the 
report in one week?  
       Hon.  Chairman there is a problem here and we want know how long you are the C hair, I  
give you two weeks but M ember s say the two weeks is to o long , no they say you are too fast 
you can do it in two days. They say you are too fast.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: No sir it’s not okay M r. Speaker because we know the 
Executive M ember is not around , so Mr. Speaker we need time to seek finance directiv e then 
I will report.  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay am giving you two weeks, is that 
okay.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Mr. Speaker that will be okay.  
STATEMENT  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Maimuna?  
       Leader of Minority Hon. Maimuna Salim : Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama hapa kwa 
jambo la  kusikitisha ; sisi kama binadamu na W aheshimiwa tunatumia maji lakini leo nas ikia 
kwamba kuna maji tayari yalikuwa yana kitu katika maji.  
       Kwa hiyo nilikuwa na omba Kamati  ya Biashara iweze kuita hawa wafa nyi biashara wa 
kampuni hii ya Coca -Cola waweze kutuambia kile kitu kilichoko ndani kwa sababu ni  
madhara kwetu sisi Mheshimiwa S pika. 
       Kwa hivyo nilikuwa naomba ya kwamba kupitia kwa B unge lako kuangalia hali.....  
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Order! Order! Members Order 
Members !  
       Leader of Minority Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Kupitia kwa heshima yako ...  
(Interruption ) 
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mhes himiwa Fadhili what is it? 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili sit down don 't interrupt a statement .  
       Leader of Minority Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Mheshimiwa S pika kupitia kwa kiti chako 
afya za binadamu ni muhimu na maji ndio kitengo muhimu cha afya ; ikiwa leo tumenunua 
maji kwa kampuni kubwa kama ya Coca -Cola na tumeweza kupata kitu am bacho kinaweza 
kututatiza kimaisha . 
       Kwa hivyo ni vizuri ya kwamba Kamati  husika na hao wafanyi biashara wachukue hiyo 
chupa ya maji na wawaite hao wahusika ili waweze kutuambia kwa s ababu haya ni madhara 
kwa watu wa B ungeni.  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you. She has presented her 
statement but we are not discussing that ... 
(Interruption)  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Point of Information . 
       The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : We are not discussing a Statement . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Point of Information . 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy, Order Members !  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : M heshimiwa Spika mimi sipingi lakini hii statement 
inatakikana iingie kwenye Public Health  na sio kwa Trade . 
(Applause ) 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Mary just one minute .  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiw a Spika hata wi ki 
iliopita pia M heshimiwa Onje alipata kitu kama hicho ambacho kimepatikana kwa maji, 
tukaenda mpaka ofisi ya Public H ealth tukawapatia hiyo chupa na hicho kitu amba cho kiko 
ndani ya chupa, wakasema watatupa ripoti mpaka leo mpaka kesho hawajatupatia ripo ti… 
(Loud Consultations ) 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members one meeting, thank you. Yes 
what is it Hon.  Fadhili?  
       Hon. Mwalimu :  Mheshim iwa Spika mimi ningependa huyu M heshimiwa aliyetoka 
kuongea atueleze yeye alipoenda kwa hiy o kampuni, alienda kwa ruhusa ya nani haswa? Kwa 
sababu njia inayohitajika ni ipi?  
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 8        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members let’s put this to rest, let’s have 
one sitting I put this matter to the right procedure , I take this matter to the C ommittee on 
Health and bring the report in two weeks, Committee on health?  
(Noise)  
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker last week when such things happen ed one of our M embers 
reported it to the H ealth department.  
       It is now the mandate of the H ealth Commit tee to go and seek how  far the matter has 
taken place because  it was reported , and again Mr. S peaker KEBS  (Kenya Bureau of 
Standards) what are they doing for such things to appear in masses Mr. Speaker?  It is a 
concern Mr. Speaker to our healt h; this water  can kill somebody .  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I have already rule d on this 
matter, yes Hon.  Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Point of Information . 
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza kabisa nasikitika ikiwa jambo hili 
kipindi cha kwanza lilitokezea na likapelekwa kwa W izara ya afya na halijaonekana lolote.  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Point of order Mr. Speaker . 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Order Members, yes Hon.  Fadhili what 
is it?   
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika Kamati hii ya Afya isihujumiwe kwenye B unge 
hili; hii leo umetoa taarifa ya kuwa K amati  iwajibike kiasi cha wiki mbili .  
       Mheshimiwa S pika nimetangulia kusema kuwa wakati ambao kilipatikana jambo kama 
hili nimesema wale watu  ambao walifanya au waliofuatiliza jambo hili hawakulifuatilizia 
kibunge .  
       Kibunge Mheshimiwa S pika ni k ama hivi ulivyotoa uamuzi wako K amati ifuatilize lakini 
mtu asisimame kusema K amati ya Afya haikuwajibika.  
       Mheshimiw a twajali afya za wan anchi wetu; twajali maslahi ya wananchi wetu na hio 
Mheshimiwa Spika yaweze kudhuru wananchi wetu; h apa kuna chupa moja ambayo 
imeonekana na pamba ndani yake na imefungwa na ni kampuni kubwa kama kampuni ya 
Dasani.  
       Mheshimiwa S pika wiki iliyopita p ia imesemek ana kumekuwa na jambo kama hili, mimi 
nasema Kamat i hii isihujumiwe la zima  Kamati isihujumiwe. .. 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I have put this m atter to rest.  
(Loud c onsultations ) 
October 4, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 9        I have said the C ommittee on He alth to take the matter an d report within two weeks, yes 
Clerk.   
(Loud c onsultations ) 
       Members Order! Members Order!  
(Loud c onsultations ) 
       Members this House stands adjourned until tomorrow morning . 
The House rose at 3.07pm.  
 
 