November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday , 27th November, 2019  
The House met at 3:00 p.m. 
 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Abdallah Amur ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): Hon. Members we may be seated. Yes  
Clerk? 
 
STATEMENTS  
MISCONDUCT OF PERSON S UNDER METHADONE CONS UMPTIO N AT THE  KISAUNI METHADONE 
CLINIC  
 
Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to 
know from the Chai rperson, Committee on Health on  whether this Committee is aware of 
misconduct of pe rsons under Methadone consumption at the Kisauni Methadone Clinic in the 
following ways;  
i. Persons under Methadone continue abusing drugs at Frere Town School ground 
which is being used by school pupils and as a result parents and teachers have 
observed stra nge behaviour from pupils , 
 
ii. Persons under Methadone consumption have turned to be a big sec urity threat to 
the society since they snatc h phones and threaten residents , 
 
iii. Whether this Committee is aware of tireless efforts by residents who have always 
been give n empty promises by the Department and at the moment have vowed to 
paralyse operations at the Clinic until the Methadone Clinic is transferred to another 
place.   
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amur) : Thank you Hon. Char les Kitula. Chairm an 
for Health Hon. Kibwana?  
 
(Silence)  
(Hon. Kibwana Swaleh walked in the Chambers)  

November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  Hon. Kibwana? Hon . Kibwana there is a statement b y Hon. Charles Kitula, do you 
have any reply or you need...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Spea ker I  think I  will be 
unable  to give a comprehensive response  on this  issue , so I just ask my colleague in this 
Honourable  House t o give me more time so that I can co me with a good response. Thank 
you. 
 
The Temporary Sp eaker  (Hon. Amur) : Hon. Kibwana exactly how long do you 
want? Because the Assembly will be heading for recess soon and this is a burning issue. So 
how long do you think, next week will it be possible?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Baya:  Maybe I just get direction because today we were given  a 
Petition  and when I loo k at this Statement it is also on the same issue raised here today. So if 
it is the same issue I think we were given an opportunity  to sit within  the period so that at the 
end of the long recess  we will be able to respond. I think that is what I  can get f rom this 
Statement. It  is the same issue that  is happ ening on the issue of Methadone ; and so if it is the 
same issue Hon. Speaker I think I will not be able to give it before we go for recess , my 
friend will  have to  wait for me until we c ome back after the long recess. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amur) : Thank you , that is acceptable. Yes Clerk?  
 
LIST OF PENDING BILLS  FOR FY 2017/2018  AND 2018/2019  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Am ur): Yes Hon. Bwire?  
  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika , Mheshimiwa Bwire amepata 
dharu ra  ameniomba niweze kumsomea taarifa yake kwa ruhusa yako . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amur) : Okay Hon. Member on behalf of Hon. 
Bwire you can continue.  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to 
know from the Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations on the list of 
pending Bills for FY 2017/2018 and 2018/2019 . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amur) : Chairman Finance?  
 
(Silence)  
 
Any Member ? Vice Chair? Member of Finance ? Please note that Hon. Bwire seeks to 
know, are you in position to answer now?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : I have to rise because the Chair and the Vice Ch air are not 
around , but I think I can assure you that it is our mandate and also an opportunity  also to 
interrogate the Execu tive Member for Finance on  this issue. So maybe you give us time so 
that we see but I will be unable to state clearly when we are g oing to give it to this Assembly.  
November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Please do so Hon. Kibwana on 
behalf of the Committee. Yes Clerk?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Taarifa! Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti swala hili la ma swala ya F edha  mimi kama Mheshimiwa wa Frere Town 
nisingependa kwa maoni yangu i weze kuchukuliwa n a Kamati ya F edha  kwa sababu Kamati 
ya F edha  kwa Bunge hili inafahamika kwamba kuna ushirikiano mkubwa na  Wizara  ya 
Fedha . Maswala ya pending bills kwa m aombi yangu ingetengezewa kama Kamati ya Ad Hoc 
waweze kuchunguza Waziri  na kutuletea orodha  ya pending bills zote za FY 2017/2018 na 
2018/2019 lakini kwa maoni y angu sina imani kama Kamati ya Fedha  italeta mapendekezo 
yanayosta hili katika Bunge hili.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amur) : Hon. Kitula since the issue was brought by 
Hon. Bwire and you are reading on behalf it will be wise if the Chair or the Vice Chair could 
have been here so that we hear from them and then if so you have any doubt then we will 
decide then when we reach at th at stage if we will appoint an Ad Hoc Committee but in the 
meantime let us he ar from the Committee first before we jump the gun. Please give us up to 
next week so that the Chair or Vice Chair can express what they can say Hon. Kitula. Are we 
fair enough Hon. Kitula? Is it acceptable by you?  
 
(The Chief Whi p (Hon. Kitula ) nodded) 
 
Okay Clerk , next Order?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Hon. Ahmed Sa lama, Chairperson Lands and planning?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nimesimama hapa mimi ni 
Mwanakamati  wa hiyo Kamati ya Ardhi. Ningependa Mheshimiwa Spika Jumba hili liweze 
kutupatia muda kuhusiana na hii Taarifa  ambapo tukienda lik izo tutakaporudi tutakuja na 
majibu kamili.  
 
(Consultations)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Hon. Leila you stood on behalf of 
the Committee , when do you think you will reply to the Statement?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Taarifa Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti? 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Yes. 
  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) :  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hii Taarifa  nilileta wiki 
mbili zilizopita na Mwenyekiti wa Kamati hii akaweza kuomba Bunge hili apatiwe wiki 
mbili ili aweze kuleta hayo majibu na ilikuwa ni kitu  cha kwenda VOK na kuja kuleta Ripoti 
yao katika Bunge hili. Lakini la kushangaza leo Mwanakamati anasema apatiwe muda 
mwengine , wa nini Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  wakati swala hili ni kwenda VOK na  kuja 
kuleta mapendekezo kwamba je hayo maduka ya nayojengwa wamef uata sh eria au la?  
November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 Angalia hata Vote Book inasema kwamba alipatiwa  muda wa wiki mbili Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ; waliomba wiki moja Spika akawaongezea w iki nyengine moja kwa hekma ya 
Spika, sasa leo hii akiniambia kwamba waongezewe tena muda nina shangaa ndio maana 
lengo langu kuu leo hii kusema kwamba hizi Kamati zetu za Bunge Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti 
nyingi hazifanyi kazi  na ni wakati saa hii wa  kuweza kuwajibika , hata nina imani leo 
Mheshimiwa Leila hata hajui kuhusu hiyo Taarifa  yeye anaona kama inaulizwa leo hajui 
kama inastahili kujibiwa.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Yes Hon. Leila, can you respond?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Mheshimiwa Spika katika swala hilo ilikuwa tulikalie na hatuja kaa 
kusema la  ukweli. Kwa hivyo linahitaji uchunguzi sana ukiliangalia Mheshi miwa S pika mimi 
ningeomba tu huo muda ; bado naomba Mheshim iwa aridhie huo muda tukienda likizo 
tukisharudi tutakuja na majibu.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Hon. Leila I am giving you  up to 
next Tue sday please make sure that the Statement is brought back by next Tuesday before we 
go for recess. Is it clear?  
 
Hon. Nyache : Sawa Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY THE LEADER OF M AJORITY HON . MWIDANI ON STATE OF THE 
COUNTY ADDRESS BY H .E THE GOVERNOR HON. HASSA N ALI JOHO  
 
Hon. Hamisi Musa, Leader of Majority?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiw a Mwenyekiti nafikiri Taarifa  nambari 10  
iko kimakosa kwa sababu tayari Kiongozi wa Wa lio Wengi  aliweza  kujibu Taarifa  hii. 
Ahsante . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Thank you . Yes Clerk? Hon. Kitula 
I unde rstand that there is a written Statement that is supposed to be addressed in the 
Assembly.  
 
(Consultation s) 
 
Then the House is satisfied that it was done last week, isn’t it? You read it for the 
purpose that is in the Order paper, it will be wise.  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula): Mr. Speaker , reference was made to the matter above 
and the letter Ref: CAM/CAC/CO -CORR/VOL -II/198 dated November 21st, 2019.  H.E the 
Governor has always been committed to the adherence of the laid down legal provisions 
more particularly section 30 (2) (K) of the County Government Act , 2012.   
November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  On the basis of this commitment, H.E the Governor shall be able to fulfil  this mandate 
of the State of the County address immediately after recess.  I take this opportunity to thank 
you for the good work you are doing for the people of Mombasa County and wish you the 
best as you proceed on recess.  Yours Joab Tumbo.  Ag. County Secretary  
 Thank y ou, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Thank you Hon. Kitula. Members 
the response  has been done or read by Hon. Kitula , are you comfortable with the response 
before we rest the matter? Is the House satisfied? Thank you, next Order?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Any information regarding ..., any Member with any information on behalf? Yes Hon. 
Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi nasha ngaa Kiongozi 
wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  hayuko lakini Naibu  yuko na yeye amenyamaza Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti. Tunashangaa mbona amenyamaza.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Deputy, you a re there and you are 
just quiet , Is there a Deputy officially, I want to confirm th at? Was it official?  
 
Hon. Member : Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : If it yes then you take the place of 
the Majority if he  is not in the House. Please Hon. Nyiro?  
 
(Consultations)  
 
Members may I ask ; was Hon. Nyiro officially endorsed by this House? Was it in this 
floor  before we assign him the position? Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . I think Hon. Speaker we should 
follow the procedures ; I will be happy if my brother is elected the Deputy Majority but we 
may end up misleading this Hon ourable  House, it will be like a drama that we allow someone 
to be Deputy while it is not official . So also to give us the opportunity to ask the office of the 
Leader of Majority beca use it will proper  if he is not around, I think he could give out the 
response on this issue . So I think it is something that the leadership of this House should 
consider if somebody is not around the office is still there, so I think we should not mislead 
this House. I would wish a s I say he is a colleague but maybe it will go against our rules and 
procedures. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana. Then I 
defer this iss ue until next week . Next order Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6 Hon. Prischillah Mumba? Any Vice Chair? Any Member of the Committee, any 
Member of the Committee again? Yes Hon. Kibwana, are you a Member of the Transport 
Committee?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Yes? 
  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Mr. Speaker I want to state clearly that the Chair  is admitte d 
at the hospital and the Vice Chair is not around ; and I want to confirm that we have not 
received  the response on this issue , that is my statement. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Hon. Kibwana on behalf of the 
Committee if the Chair is not in, the Vice Chair is not in but a Member of the Committee is 
in, it is upon the Committee ... the Chair does  not go with the office, the Vice Chair does  not 
go with the office, any Member can respond . So I will request you to be informed that by 
next week Tues day this Report should be landed in this Hon ourable  House. Thank you, are 
we clear? Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Hon. Prischillah again?  Yes Hon. Kibwana.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Hon. Speaker again as a Member of Transport Committee 
we have not received  any response on this issue so give us more time as usual so that we see 
how we can reply bac k. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad  Amur ): Hon. Kibwana, did this Hon ourable  
House or the Committee send any letter to the Department ?  I want to know that first, did you 
send any letter to the Department as a Committee ? 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  I can confirm  that we sent the letter to the Department.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad  Amur ): What about the reply ? Can any 
Clerk of your Committee confirm that you have received any reply?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  That is what I have said it earlier that we have not recei ved 
any reply bu t we have sent a letter to the Department for reply.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad  Amur ): Send her a reminder and if the 
response is not  available then you summon the Head of the Department, am i clear?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  I think the let ter that was sent was through the Executive 
Member.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad  Amur ): In the absence of Executive 
Member, the office is not empty Hon. Kibwana. The Chief officer of the Department is there, 
I ther efore request on behalf of the Department, the Chief Officer can respond to issues that 
have been brought in this House, there fore make an effort to bring a Report by next week 
Tuesday Hon. Kibwana.  
November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, but I think … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : I have given the di rection, next 
week Tuesday at 2 :00p.m that Report should be in this House, failure to that you  will be 
allowed to summon the Department ; either the Chief Officer or any other person, Thank you.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Most o bliged . Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) :Yes Clerk. Yes Hon. Thoya ? 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa nataka Taarifa  kutoka kwa Kamati ya Maji 
na ningependa kama pengine wana  ufahamu. .. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad A mur) : Is it an urgent Statement?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  It is more than urgent because ni mahali maisha ya mtu yalipotea na 
kwa sasa hivi haijulikani itaend a vipi, ningependa kuweza hiyo Kamati kama wana  ufahamu 
kwamba pale Birikani , mtaa wa Birikani kuna zile chamber  ama visima vya Mombasa Water  
ambapo watoto huenda wakacheza na vile visima huwa viko wazi na wiki iliyopita kuna 
mtoto ambaye alikuwa akicheza hapo akitafuta maembe alizama na akafa na kwa sasa hivi 
kuna mipango ya mazishi lakini ni kama ambaye Momba sa Water  wanajaribu kutelekeza 
hiyo na ikiwa vile visima viko wazi  ni matarajio kwamba watu wengi watazidi kuzama 
hususan watoto wa Kibarani  na maeneo ambayo yako pale. Je, wana ufahamu wa hilo na 
kama wana ufahamu, ni mipango gani ipo ya kuweza kusimama na ile familia na kuna 
mipango gani ya kuhakikisha kwamba vile visima vitafunikwa ili tusiweze kupata maafa zaidi 
na nasema hiyo ni dharura kwa sababu sasa hivi mwili huo uko mortuary  pale Makadara  na 
familia hiyo haina mbele wala nyuma na Mombasa Water  ni kama ambaye wanatelekeza 
wanasema  hatuna jukumu.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Chairman Water, Vice Chair. Yes 
Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho.  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika, hizi ni habari ambazo 
nazisikia sasa hivi kutoka kwa Mwanakamati mwenzangu wa Kamati ya Maji  ambaye 
ametuletea sasa hivi , kwa hivyo itabidi tufanye utafiti ili tuweze kupata jibu muafaka. 
Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : Hon. Mwalimu, would you may be 
be kind enough on behalf of the Committee to seek or to go and see the Mombasa Water 
people so that at least the family can be assisted somehow for the burial , at least for the 
Hospital may be to seek a waiver or something like that , can the C ommittee do that at least to 
help the family so that they can even be given t he waiver since it was something that was not 
expected by the family, are you in a position to do so?  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mwisho:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, i will try my best to do so. Thank 
you. 
November 27, 2019                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      114 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 8  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Murfad Amur) : So Hon. Thoya you will 
communic ate with Member Hon. Mgwisho so that you can help each other so that the family 
can get assistance , am i clear? Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members the House stands adjourned until Tuesday 3rd December, 2019 at 
10:00a .m. 
 
The House r ose at 3:25p.m. 
 
 
 
 