October 27, 2021                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         115 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
 Wednesday , 27th October, 2021   
The House met at 2:34p.m. 
 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You may resume your seats M embers. Hono urable  
Members , welcome to our afternoon session once again . Yes C lerk?  
STATEMENT S 
GARBAGE PILE  - UP AT MICHELENI COLL ECTION POINT IN KIPE VU WARD  
Yes Honourable  Faith Mwende MCA Kipevu Ward?  
[Silence ] 
Yes Honourable  Kitula?  
Hon. Kitula : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika nim esimama kusoma kwa 
niaba ya Mheshimiwa  Faith Mwende, ikiwa utaniruhusu . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : It is okay , I have the communication.  
Hon. Kitula : Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand  pursuant to Standing Order 41(2 )(c) to reque st for 
a statement from the Chairperson Committee on Environment, Waste Management and E nergy, if 
he is awar e of the uncollected garbage  at Mcheleni c ollection point , which causes a health hazard 
to the resident s and when will the garbage be collected . Thank you Honourable  Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Honourable Kitula on behalf of 
Honourable  Faith . Yes, C ommittee Chair on E nvironment?   
[Silence ] 
Vice-Chair?  
[Silence ] 

October 27, 2021                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         115 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Any C ommittee Mem ber? Since there i s none to respond , Clerk kin dly note that it will 
be tak en to the House Busine ss for more consideration. Yes C lerk?  
STREET LIGHTS IN KIP EVU WARD  
Once again Honourable  Faith Mwende MCA Kipevu Ward . Yes, Honourable  Charles 
Kitula?  
Hon. Kitula: Mr. Speaker , I stand to p ursuant to Standi ng Order 41(2)c)  to request for a 
statement from the Chairperson C ommittee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works  
whether she is  aware of the lack of street light s in Ki pevu Ward for the past three  years and what 
plans does the County g overnment has  to rem edy the situation . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Honourable  Kitula Charles , on 
behalf of Honourable  Faith Mwende . Yes Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure 
and Public Works ?  
[Silence ] 
Any quick re sponse from the Vice -Chair?  
[Silence ] 
 Any Committee Member? Yes Honourable  Majority Leader?  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker S ir on behalf of the C ommittee 
and a Member of Transport  I would request to be given at least two weeks so that we can come 
with a response  of this statement . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Honourable  Musa Mwidani Hamisi 
on behalf of Committee on Transport . Yes C lerk, kindly take note in the next two weeks they will 
bring  the response on the same . Yes, Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON IMPLEMENTA TION HONOURABLE 
SALIM KALUME ON IMPLEMENTATION STATU S OF AUTISM SPECTRUM  DISORDER  
 Yes Honourable  Salim Kalume , Chairperson Committee on Implementation , give the 
response please.  
 Hon. K alume: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir , I wish  to give the following 
statement response on a statem ent raised by Honourable  Hamida Noor Ali, on the 18th August 
2021 during on the 85th Sitting on Implementation  Status of  Recognition of  Autism  Spectrum  
Disorder in the County . Mr. Speaker Sir , the County Secretary  through his letter with reference 
number replied to this matter on 19th October , 2021. That the recommendation for the recognition 
of Autism Spectrum Disorder in the County shall be implem ented in this financial  year in 
collaboration with D epartment of Health and Education . For reference please find the attached 
letter . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
October 27, 2021                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         115 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you  Honourable  Salim Kalume . Kindly 
make sure you supply the C lerks with a copy of the response.  
Hon. Kalume: Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Since the author of the statement is 
not within I  think she will be served with the response . Yes C lerk please?  
RESPONSE TO STATE MENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON HEALTH , HONOURABLE KIBWANA 
SWALEH  ON REPAIR OF FAULTY RAM P AT SHIKA ADABU HEA LTH CENTER  
Yes Hon ourable  Swaleh Baya Kibwana , Chairperson C ommittee on Health?  
  
[Silence ] 
 
 The Member Hon ourable  Murfad?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker , I rise to respond to the 
request  that was brought in this House about Shika Adabu Dispensary . Mr. Speaker , we have 
receive d the response from the D epartment of H ealth Ms. Pauline D . Odinga. T he letter was 
received and th e Committee has sat and went through it. Mr. Speaker , I wish to say that Shika 
Adabu Dispensary Mater nity Block Likoni Sub -County Reference i s made to your core 
respondent REF/CAM/CAC/COR/VOL108 5th August , 2021  regarding the above subject matter. 
Mr. Spea ker Sir , the Department  of Health services is currently mobilizing  staff to start offering 
maternity  services at the new maternity  block ground floor . Mr. Speaker Sir , the design work s for 
the ra mp, boundary  wall and house s gets the cost estimate has been finalized ready for tendering 
process in this financial year 2021/2022.  Upon completion of the construction of this work , the 
second floor of the new  building  will then be fully utilized, s o Mr. Speaker  it is about the 
tendering now, anytime the tender wil l be advertised so that it be fully functional . Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Mr. Amur for that response ; if the 
author of that statement is not within , I think you will also serve the C lerk with a copy of the 
respon se plus Honourable  Mwalimu you also kindly serve him with a copy of the same . Yes, 
Clerk? Yes Honourable  Amur?  
 
GROUNDING OF FIRE FI GHTING SERVICES DUE TO LACK OF FUEL  
  
Hon. Murfad Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to bring an urgent issue in this 
House ; this is a time bomb Mr. Speaker;  the department of Transport and  Infrastructure  are sitting 
on a time bomb ! As we speak all our fire engines have no fuel; God forbid Mr. Speaker if any fire 
break s out within Mombasa County we will be faced with a situati on that , no fire engine can 
reach at the sight in  time because  all the cars are gr ounded because there is no fuel . Mr. Speaker , I 
want to be o n record that in a scenario that fire breaks out somebody should be responsible for 
loss of property and damages w ithin the department because this House always allocate s money 
in each department , a full  year budget.  
October 27, 2021                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         115 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 It is very sad Mr. Speaker today to be told that the departme nt has no fuel and the cars are 
on the ground,  staff are not working but playing draft at the yard there. So I want it to be in record 
in a scenario God forbid , any fire breakout somebody should be held responsible . Mr. Speaker 
thank  you. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Honourable  Swaleh , what i s 
your concern?  
 
Hon. Kibwana S waleh: Thank you Honourable Speaker.  Mr. Speaker when I just 
entered the chamber I was wondering whether the one who is chairing .. who is in the plenary … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are out of order ! Honourable  Kibwana, 
resume your seat you are out of order!  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Honourable  Murfad , I heard 
your issue now where are you directing it? Kindly make use of your mic rophone . 
 
Hon. Murfad Amur: Mr. Speaker I wanted  it to be directed to the D epartment of 
Finance and T ransport , other than that I want the Minister  in charge to be held responsible incase 
of any fire breakout to be responsible for an y loss of damages of properties . We have given them 
enough budget full year , but it is sad today that our  fire cars are just sleeping with no fuel ; let it be 
in record that I have reported this matter and somebody must be  responsible . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Amur do not  rush into conclusion 
before  we establish where the problem is. Now that you have directed the statement to two 
departmental C ommittees , I will also therefore ask the two D epartment s mention ed; that is 
Trans port and Finance and P lanning , Finance your role is to ensure or to actually look if there is 
money or no money, no you will have …. 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker , I do not say that am trying to 
dodge things but this is a House of laws, y ou just come verbally and then you want things to be 
taken  action, how Mr. Speaker? I agree maybe things are not in that position , but this is a House 
of laws. You know we have to come with something written so that it can be discussed.  Mr. 
Speaker we cannot  move issues in this scenario , okay now you know i t has to be taken to the 
House B usiness for the allocation, now by what ? So I do  not deny but actually it has not followed  
the correct way, it could been a written a statement , so that now it can now be seen as something 
on the act of l aw, so I do  not deny but actually we should sometimes follow the laws . So Mr. 
Speaker to me by saying Finance C ommittee to take it on air ; I think that is not in order,  I do not 
deny maybe things  are not the way he i s saying bu t actually everybody  knows that , this is a House 
of laws, you know we have papers here.  
October 27, 2021                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         115 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 So Mr. Spe aker mine is to request the Honourable  Member to come up with a statement 
and we shall take some necessary action , but if I come and say , “Hapo nje watu wamepigwa 
dafrau gari hazionekani na hakuna kitu ambacho  tumekipata ", anyway I think I cannot deny your 
decision .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I think the Majority Leader is in order , what  is 
your take Honourable  Amur before I make a ruling  on this?  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker this came as a surprise , before I even  entered to this 
place , this is when I got this information and I went so as to ascertain and give evidence to it ... 
even the department concern ed has written to the Minister of Finance requesting the funds  but 
why should we wait for the … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Amur , is there evidence showing 
that the department ... 
 
Hon. Murfad Amur: Yes Mr. Speaker , I will supply  evidence next Tuesday with a 
written document in this House .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Then kindly do it . 
 
Hon. Murfad Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Bring evidence  where the D epartment wrote to 
the Department of T ransport .  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur: I will do Mr.  Speaker , thank you . 
 
The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Bwire) : Yes but meanwhile I think it has been captured 
by the Hansard  and I will request that you do a small write  up on the same and supply  it to the 
Clerks so that they may have something to write as suggested by the Majority Leader . Thank you 
and also your claim is o ne of the grave lines that the Department wrote to the Department of 
Finance and they never responded. If they also have that evidence also supply so that by the end 
of next week or  in the course of next week... , Majority Leader when  are you planning to respond 
back once you are supplied with that write up?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : I think Mr. Speaker to be on the very good 
position  let us have the written format and then we  shall know when are we going to respond .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I am directing Honourable  Amur to make sure 
that before the end of today , he has that statement in written  form.   
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker when the statement is ready I 
think we shall slot it in  the next House Business  Committee . 
 
October 27, 2021                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         115 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 Hon. Murfad Amur: Mr. Speaker with due respect this was an urgent issue , that is why 
I brought it in the House but before I brought it in the House I had consulted the Speaker of the 
day so that I be allowed to say it but all the writing work I promise this Hon ourable  House by 
next Tuesday with all the evidence Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Hamisi the issue came to my 
attention and I gave an order on it to appear before this af ternoon session , so I do  not think if it 
will be fair enough to not work on it until we have the next sitting . So kindly with due respect I 
was expecting that maybe if you get that statement in written form like you have suggested , 
because it ha s already c ome before the House  you can act upon it as a D epartment  with 
collaboration with the other ... your counterpart Honourable  Prischilla Mumba and her team if you 
do not mind  so that before you report back we also make sure that Hon ourable  Amur has supplied 
the othe r evidence that he has claimed. So  I  am giving you two weeks I think it will be fair 
enough . 
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Most obliged Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Y es Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , there having be no any other business , the House stands adjourned 
until 2nd Tuesday November , 2021 at 10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 2 :54p.m  
 
 
 