December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 3rd December, 2019  
The House met at 2:57 p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes C lerk?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON LANDS AND PLANNING 
HON. AHMED SALAMA ON CONSTRUCTION OF SHOP  OUTLETS IN VOK  
 Chairperson , Committee on Lands and Planning Ahmed Salama?  
(Silence)  
  The Vice Chair? Any Member from that C ommit tee?  
(Hon. Nya che rose)  
 Yes Hon. Leila?  
(Hon. Nyache read the response to Statement on behalf of the Chairperson)  
 Hon. Nyache:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  i beg to read the response to 
Statement on construction of shop outlets in VOK.  Mr. Speaker Sir, a request  for statement was 
made in the County Assembly on Wednesday, 6th November, 2019 during the 101st Sitting, 
seeking to know whether the County g overnment was aware of the ongoing construction of shop 
outlets in VOK area on your way to Kisauni Polytechnic , opposite VOK S ocial Hall.   
Mr. Speaker Sir, the C ommittee on Lands Planning and  Housing wrote to the Department 
of Lands, P lanning and Housing vide a letter of reference Number CAM/CAS/CO  - 
CORR/VOLII/185 dated 7th November, 2019 who then responded as attach ed. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.   
 
(Hon. Nyache continued)  
 

December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2   The s ite inspection was ordered by Dr. June Juma M., C.C. Officer, Lands 
Planning and Housing Department and was c onducted by Arch. John Kinuthia.   
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Yes Hon. Charles K itula?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ndie nili yeweza 
kuuliza Taarifa  hii na kusema kweli nimeridhika na majibu, kwa hivyo haina haja Mheshimiwa 
kuendelea kusoma nimeridhika na majibu.  
(Applause)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles but i think procedure the Hansard 
has to capture the response,  yes but still the H ansard has to capture the response, just continue 
Hon. Leila.  
 Hon. Nyache:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. The inspection was ordered by Dr. June Juma M., 
C.C. Officer, Lands Planning and Housing Department and was conducted by Arch. John 
Kinuthia, Ag. C.B.I and Mr. Felix Dindi, Building Inspector.  
OBJECTIVE OF THE INSP ECTION  
 The objective of the inspection was to determination the legality o f a structure stand ing 
on plot N o. IMN/11175. This was to be achieved by establishing the following:  
I. Whether or not the development h ad been approved by the County g overnment;  
II. Whether or not the development was constructed according to the approved 
drawings;  
III. Whether or not t he development has encroached on to the road reserved.  
OBSERVATIONS  
 The following observations were made:  
i. The structure is a one -room building of approximately  3M X 3M standing on plot 
No. IMN/11175, and owned by one Mr. Mohamed Hassan according to an employee at the 
premises, a Mr. Rueben Chuma.  
 
ii. The structure is new, complete and operational acting as a water filling station, as 
shown in the attached photos.  
 
iii. It was not possi ble to immediately establish  whether or not the structure h ad been 
approved by the County g overnment since the owner was not available at the time of inspection 
to respond to the issue and we could not demand for proof of approval from the people on the 
ground since no building works were being carried out during the time and the structure is 
complete.  
 
iv. On the issue of encroachment on to the road reserve, a casual observation seems 
to indicate that the structure lies within the confines of an old existing perimeter wall . 
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 This could mean that the building in question lie s within the plot boundaries. 
However, this can only be established through a survey by a qualified surveyor.  
ACTION TAKEN  
The C.B.I issued a notice to the owner demanding that he presents this office all 
development approval documents relating to this str ucture on 3rd Dec, 2019 at 9 :00a.m. 
CONCLUSION  
The legality of the development can only be determined after the period given for the 
production of approval documents has elapsed, Thursday 3rd Dec, 2019 and after a survey has 
been conducted to determine the  plot boundaries . 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
        We recommend that in the event the building lies within the road reserve, the owner 
shall be ordered to demolish it;  whether or not he presents approval documents. If it lies within 
the plot boundaries but the deve lopment had not been approved, he shall be ordered to regularize 
the structure through the due process. If the structure had been approved and lies within the plot 
boundaries, then no further action shall be taken Hon. Speaker. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Leila. Yes Clerk, next Order?  
(Interruption)  
Yes Hon. Samba. Are you on a point of information, yes?  
Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker , as I was going through the R eport, I think the Hon. 
Member who asked for this  Report, the Report that the D epartment has given, I don’t know who 
is supposed to respond on this, point about observations point number 3.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :Which R eport now?  
Hon. Samba:  This S tatement r esponse.  
The  Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry?  
Hon. Samba:  State ment response, response to the S tatement.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : For which Statement?  
Hon. Samba:  The one she has read.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay.  
Hon. Samba:  Yes. 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So what is your concern?  
    Hon. Sam ba: My concern is the response ; that is why I have taken the House to 
observation number 3.  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4      It was not possible immediately established whether or not the structure had been 
approved, my concern is, who is supposed to establish? They  are the ones who  are sup posed to 
establish.  Whenever a S tatement has been requested from this House we should be given a full 
detailed report so we are now given another chance for them to go and e nquire w hoever will 
come up with a full  detailed information until 3rd ...whereby we  were supposed to be given full  
detailed  information because this is a D epartment so this is response . I don’t think whether it is 
only whoever has requested for the S tatement has accepted but it is not convincing. Thank you 
Hon. Speaker.  
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fadhili.  
      The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker am a Member 
of Lands Committee and it is clear in our R eport , the issue of that Hon. Member from Tudor 
raising has been responded by  the action taken.  Mr. Speaker it was  not possible for us to get the 
document while the owner of that building was not around and we could not establish if as stated 
in this R eport ... if the development had got, the structure had all requirements that are required. 
So Mr. Speaker we have given the owner up to 3rd of December, 2019 to bring the documents 
and as in our conclusion we clearly stated what will transpire if the owner does not produce 
whatever that is required to produce to this Committee and the executive wing. T hank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Faith.  
Hon. Mwende:  Thank Mr. Speaker.  I kindly request the Hon. Member who was reading the 
response to substantiate the meaning of CBI. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speake r (Hon. Khatri) : County Building Inspector, thank you Ho n. Faith. Yes Clerk 
next Order?  
(Interruption)  
Are you on a point of information?  
Hon. Bwire:  Yes, Hon. Speaker the response is quite good but under observation II. The 
structure is new , complete and operational acting as a water filling station as shown in the 
attached photos. In my report Hon. Speaker, I don’t have the photos so that was just my concern 
that there are some photos attached to the response but nowhere to be seen.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khat ri): Thank you.  
(Interruption)  
Are you again on a point of information Hon. Samba?  
Hon. Samba:  This response , I think approval is not done on air and any structure that.. . 
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So what is your point of informatio n? 
Hon. Samba: My information is am reacting to the Statement.  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Under which S tanding order?  
Hon. Samba:  Am not on a point of S tanding order, am on a point of information.  
      The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So do you know that when you rai se in t he House you need to 
quote the S tanding order, It is very clear in our S tanding order.  
Hon. Samba:  A point of information Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : To who?  
Hon.  Samba:  To Hon. Fadhili who was reacting to the issue that has raised.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : And what is the information about?  
       Hon. Samba:  Information is that Hon. Speaker  every County approval is done by the 
Department so the D epartment should be aware of each and every development that is tak ing 
place. P rior to th at they should have every detailed information whenever they are going on the 
ground they should be aware that this thing we are the ones who did the approval not that they 
have to give them time and do what? But they are the ones who are doing the approva l so they 
have to give us full detailed information in the House. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Samba. Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I’ll first 
respond to what wa s raised by Hon. Bwire. Mr. Speaker we tried to photocopy the photos but 
unfortunately they were so dark that we  could not attach them to this R eport , but i am assuring 
this House that the photos are there and we can circulate to the Hon. Members. And Mr. Speaker 
to the point of Hon. Samba there are many constructions that are going on in this County, some 
are legal  and some are illegal and as a D epartment they cannot determine if this structure that is 
constructed has got all the required documents and not  unless the contractor is asked to produce 
or the owner of the structure is asked to produce . So Mr. Speaker that i s why we told the owner 
of the h ouse to produce the required documents on 3rd of December ; and  if he will be unable to 
present that is when t he D epartment will be aware that the construction was illegally constructed 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili. Yes Hon. Juma?  
Hon.  Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, am also on a point of infor mation. I ha ve just 
been amused by the response of the Deputy Speaker saying that the onus of the pro of is on the 
land lord and my opinion is that the o nus is on the D epartme nt. Mr. Speaker, being that the 
Statement has been brought to the D epartment and  the D epartment is the issuer of either this plan 
or either approval . So it is in the means of the Department to say whether this plan has been 
approved or not and whether it’s actu ally on the road reserve or not;  it’s not upon the contr actor 
or the Land lord to the o nus or the burden of proof h as shifted because this is the government we 
are talking about!  
The g overnment cannot say the information is with so mebody else because we are the 
government, so it is in our place to give that information and the right to in formation is 
guaranteed in the C onstitution under Article 35 Mr. Speaker . 
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  So the o nus is on the g overnment to give that information and not to shift the burden and 
say that there are other ill egal and legal so it’s for the g overnment to tell us is this part of the 
legal or is that construction illegal. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amriya. I think Hon. Fadhili you have 
taken note on that so while you are bringing the issue again, make sure you have all the answers 
for those issues w hich have been raised. Yes Clerk next order?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON REHABILITAT ION WORKS  ON 
DRAINAGE SYSTEM IN M KOMANI WARD  
 Yes Hon. Prischilla Mumba. Chairperson Transpor t, infrastructure and public works.  
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. S peaker. W ith due respect I think according to this 
rehabilitation we haven’t got any response yet on my hands so I can’t talk about anything for 
now.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry, you don ’t have the S tatement?  
 Hon. Mumba:  I have not received a ny information about any response so i can’t talk 
about anything for now.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Do you know what is the issue?  
 Hon. Mumba:  It’s about drainage system in Mkomani Ward.  
 The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : And you wrote to the D epartment.  
 Hon. Mumba:  Yes. 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : They have not give you the feedback.  
 Hon. Mumba:  Yes. 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : When are you expecting to get the feed back?  
 Hon. Mumba:  Honestly Hon.  Speakers , its them now to give me the respon se. 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But you know we are going for the long recess.  
 Hon.  Mumba:  Yes I know that.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So how will the residents of Mombasa get their service 
delivery if you have b een asked this S tatement for the last ... is it one week or two weeks?  
 Hon. Mumba:  May be I follow up by tomorrow morning then by afternoon i respond.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : And do you know this is the second time again you have 
been saying that you d on’t have the response? I t’s not the first time right? So it looks that there is 
a problem there with the Department, right?  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7    Hon. Mumba:  Maybe.  
   The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So please Hon. Prisc hilla since we know that tomorrow we 
are going for a long r ecess make sure you bring the S tatement tomorrow, please? ! Thank you. 
Yes Clerk next Order?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON DEMOLITION IN TUDOR WARD  
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ) left the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Prisc hilla Mumba?  
Hon. Mumba: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Swali hili la  ubomoaji  la Wodi ya Tudor  
nilizungumza na wahusika katika Idara  hii ya Uchukuzi  lakini wakaniambia kuwa hili jambo 
haliko katika Wizara  yetu kwa sababu maaskari wako katika Wizara ya Ugatuzi . Kwa hivyo ni 
vyema tunaomba kwa unyenyekevu Mheshimiwa ali yeuliza swali hili akajaribu tena kuuliza 
katika Wizara hiyo ya Inspectorate  ili apate  kuelekezwa kwa njia muafaka ndio aweze kuweza 
kutatua hii shida yake aijue ilianzia wapi.  Lakini nimeambiwa maaskari sasa hivi ambao 
wanafanya hiyo kazi wako katika  Ugatuzi , kwa hivyo ninaomba maelekezo ama tue lekezwe 
vyema katika Jumba hili. A hsante Mhes himiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker it is very unfair , I ask ed this Statement around two months 
ago I think if Hansard can capture me well, I asked it about two months ago and I brought it even 
before t he House and for the first time the Speaker was Hon. Khatri and then for the second time 
you were the one who presided over. So I don’t know when actually it is supposed ... or the time 
frame, duration that the Committee is supposed to respond to a Statemen t, reason being that the 
issue that I brought  was urgent and it was like an emergency.  
So I don’t know since we are breaking tomorrow ... I don’t know what will transpire in 
between because I asked for this thing ; I have been doing follow up maybe if you c an give a 
directive on this so that my Tudor people can feel at least they are fairly represented when  it 
comes to issues to do with Statement response. T hank Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Consultations)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Chairlady  Transport, Infrastr ucture and P ublic 
works we heard your response but as the House I directed that you are the one who is supp osed 
to report back to this Honourable  House and you have clearly said t hat the issue is not from your 
Department . I think it could be wise if you pr esent to this Honourable  House a written re sponse 
as per this S tatement that it is not from ..., it is from that S tatement so that the House may look at 
how it is going to direct to the  other required or responsible C ommittee and the Hon. Member 
will have a lso a copy to have in his office to show that he has been following up this issue and 
the directions from the House might change or you will be supp osed to work with the required 
Committee or the responsible Committee to fast track the issue in Tudor W ard. 
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 Hon. Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kulingana na vile nimezungumza na ni 
Wizara  ndio iliyonieleza itabidi niwashu rutishe wanipe maand ishi ikiwa wataniruhusu katika 
Nyumba hii tukufu niweze kuyaleta hata kama ni kesho saa nane na kuthibisha kuwa wamesema  
hili jambo haliko mikononi mwao. Ahs ante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker it is quite fun ny so we should  wait for the response for the 
Department that clearly s hows that they are not involved, w hy can’t ... I am just pleading with 
you through your Chair  that you may delegate another C ommittee ... maybe the supposed 
Committee that they are claiming to be responsible to do that work for the interest of the Tudor 
People. That is my request through you r Chair.  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There is no problem Hon. Tobias , the directions 
will be given of this Hon ourable  House or whoever who will be sitting in this Hon. Chair by 
tomorrow after getting that written response . So we will direct the responsible C ommittee to 
work and we understand that we are going for a  recess but we will direct the C ommittee to work 
upon that issue s o that your people are pleased with the kind of work that you are doing for them.  
Hon. Samba:  Than k you Hon, Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
(Interruption)  
Before we proceed to order number 10, I see Hon. Bwire is up! Yes what is it?  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I had asked for permission for y our 
offic e to allow me read my S tatement. Hon. Speaker Sir I seek to know from the Leader of 
Majority par ty if is aware that former CEC M embers whose contracts had come to an end as on 
12th November, 2019 as officially communicated to this House on Tuesday 19th November , 2019 
are still using County g overnment vehicles.  
Mr. Speaker Sir I am concerned that the use of g overnment vehicles is cost to the Tax 
payers and this is a cost that tax payers should incur when they are getting services, any person 
who is not in th e office should not be a burden to the tax payers.  Mr. Speaker Sir in his response 
I would wish the Majority Leader to indicate the measures that the County Government will 
undertake in order to address the above named issues.  Hon. Speaker that is my state ment, thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes the Leader of Majority or the 
Deputy Leader of Majority?  
(Silence)  
Now that the Statement was directed to the Leader of Majority and the Leader of 
Majority is not arou nd; I can see the Le ader of M ajority is not around but we will communicate 
to the office of the Leader so that we get a response from the office of the Leader of Majority. 
Yes Clerk?  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 MOTION  
ADOPTION OF REPORT OF  THE VETTING OF NOMIN EE FOR POSITION OF C OUNTY SECRETARY 
MR. DENN IS LEWA  
 
Vice Chairperson Committee on Appointments, Rules and P rocedures H on. Hamisi Musa 
Mwidani or any M ember from that Committee?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker I am a M ember of that Committee and  therefore I 
wish to present it. I n the morning  I did lay ing of the Paper and now I want to put the M otion Mr. 
Speaker Sir on behalf of both Committees.  Mr. Speake r, I beg to move the following M otion;  
That this House adopts the report of the vetting of Mr. Dennis Lewa to the position of 
County Secretary laid on  the table on Tuesday, 3rd December, 2019 at 10:00 a.m.   
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
Hon. Murfad Amur : I ask Hon. Shebe Athuman to second it Mr. Speaker. .. 
(Consultations)  
Mr. Speaker I am sorry he is not a  Member of the C ommit tee, therefore I call upon Hon. 
Amriya Juma Boy to second.  
Hon. Amriya Juma : I second Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I n ow propose a question that the 
Motion on adoption of the report on vetting of Mr. Dennis Lewa to the posit ion of County 
Secretary be debated in this Honourable  House . 
(Question proposed ) 
Hon. Bwire  
Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker I do respect your ruling but we need to be so fair when it 
comes to matters pertaining  to the interest of Kenyans and the people we represe nt. Hon. 
Speaker.. . 
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Bwire the S tanding orders are very clear 
and if you are up on division there is a number that requires you to stand up on division so that 
we proceed to voting or counting. Hon. It is supposed to be ten Hon. Members…  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Bwire:  But why division Hon. Speaker when the voice of people are for Nay?  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Speaker heard the ay es and you are 
protesting that it is the Nay who had the day?  
Hon.  Bwire:  Yes.  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So as per the Standing  order it is supposed to be 
ten? Five? O kay thank you it is supposed to be five Hon. Members who will be up and request 
for a division so that we proceed with the voting that you are re questing . So not unless five of 
you or you want us to proceed in voting we can proceed in voting.  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . Just like I said I respect you r ruling and I had no 
intention of calling any voting Hon. Speaker , my interest was on your ..., I mean was on what 
side carried the day and Hon. Speaker the Hansard is ..., I mean we are on record and if our 
Hansard is clear or has no problem then the Nay must have carried the day but whichever  way 
the way you will rule out H on. Speaker we will co mply. Whichever way you feel like but the 
interest of the people we serve Hon. Speaker must be a priority in this Hono urable House.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Bwire. Hon. Bwire as I said we 
are guided by the Standing orders and it is  not the Hansard that captures the Ay es and Nay s of 
this Honourable  House but it is the Speaker who decides what he has heard from this Honourable  
House ! So if the Speaker heard on the negative side of your response then you are supposed to 
stand on divisi on, after division that is when we are going to proceed with either voting, counting 
or whichever way that the House will rule.  
Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker as much as the Chair is the one to decide but you have to 
decide according to the ground and the mood o f the House. You cannot decide otherwise Hon. 
Speaker when the mood o f House is of the other opinion;  I am informed Mr. Speaker and I am 
engaging you in a sober way. I don’t entertain any. .. I am just engaging you Hon. Speake r 
considering that I am also a Member of the Speaker’s panel.  
(Consultations ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So Hon. Members I think the issue is clear and 
we still have a space ... the M otion will proceed to be debated when voting time comes and you 
know that you have the numbers wh en we put question , that is when we are going to know who 
will take the day. So Hon. Amur proceed.  
Hon. Murfad Amur :  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to believe each and 
every Member has a copy and if you allow me Mr. Speaker..  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Ath man, just let Hon. Amur! He   is on the 
floor let him proceed.  Hon. Amur , proceed ... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Mheshimiwa Spika tafadhali naomba kwa heshima yako nataka 
kuongea kitu kimoja siko kwa kupiga kur a ama kuunga mkono ama kupi nga. Naomba 
Mheshimiwa Spika unipe fursa tu kidogo niongee jambo moja alafu watu waendelee. Tafadhali 
kwa heshima yako.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just let Hon. Amu r to start debating his M otion 
then we will let you to in form the House.  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker first I want to ask  your 
permission since all the M embers have been given copies ; other than going through the whole 
Report I may decide with your permission to do the highlights on intro duction part, observation, 
recommendation and conclusion . Mr. Speaker, if I will be allowed through your Chair othe r than 
to go through the whole R eport.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur it is a time now that yo u explain to 
the House why the C ommittee came with recommendations that the said person is, if approved is 
going to be t he County Secretary of this Honourable  House . So it is not that you are supposed to 
read the whole R eport but try and convince this Hon ourable House why the C ommittee h as 
concluded to this person , so you can look at the observations or whatever that you want to say 
and convince the Hon. Members in front  of you.  
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I will start by saying this  is the R eport on 
the vetting of Mr. Dennis  Benjamin Muganga, Nominee for the position of County Secretary. 
Mr. Speaker Sir the Committee comprises of: The Chairman , Hon. Aharub Khatri who is the 
Speaker of the Assembly, Hon. Hamisi Musa Vice Chair, Hon. Amriya Boy Juma Member, Hon. 
Fadhili Mwalimu  Member, Hon. K ibwana Swaleh Member, Hon. Moha med Hatimy Member 
and Hon. Murfad Amur Member.  Mr. Speaker the Committee Secretariat M embers were: Mr. 
Salim Juma , the County Assembly Clerk, Dorothy Auma Director Legislative, Abdallah Khamis 
Lead Committee Cl erk, Leila Mosseen Committee Clerk, Fi ona Nzaro Legal Counsel, Nasra 
Omar Hansard Officer, Mwinyi Sudi Commissionaire, they were present on that particular day.  
Mr. Speaker Sir the Committee mandate and scope: The Committee on Appointments, 
Rules and Proce dures was appointed by the County Assembly to carry out vetting of appointees 
under section 179 (2) of the Constitution and other laws, to consider amendments to the Standing 
Orders and other related matters and make appropriate recommendations to the Coun ty 
Assembly of Mombasa.  
Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to go direct to the Introduction: Mr. Speaker Sir the Nominee Mr. 
Benjamin Lewa Muganga , that is number two was communicated by His Excellency the 
Governor vide his letter to the County Assembly Clerk Ref.  Msa CG/APP/CECM/1/243 dated 
11th October, 2019 pursuant to S ection 6 (3) of the Public Appointments (County Assemblies 
Approval) Act (No. 5 of 2017).   
Mr. Speaker Sir pursuant to S ection 7 (5) of the Public Appointments (County 
Assemblies Approval) Act (No. 5  of 2017) the vetting meeting was advertised in The Standard 
newspaper on 14th November, 2019 and was conducted on Thursday 21st November, 2019 as 
amended . Members, there  is a typing error that is reading 31st and therefore Mr. Speaker I wish 
to clarify th at there was a typing error it is 21st Thursday, 2019. Members of the public were 
invited to submit memorandum on the s uitability or otherwise of the candidate and also attend 
the vetting meeting Mr. Speaker Sir.   
Mr. Speaker Sir the Committee complied wit h all necessary requirements of the law with 
regards to the vetting including notifications of the candidate and members of the public on the 
vetting, allowing public access to the vetting hearing meeting, receipt of adverse submissions 
and allowing the no minee to reply to adverse submissions raised against him.  Now am going to 
Observations Mr. Speaker Sir No. 8: The Committee on Appointments is mandated under 
Standing Order 42 (1) to vet officers pursuant to Article 179 (2) of the Constitution or any other  
legislation.   
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12 Mr. Speaker Sir still under observation and findings Number 9 Section 44 of the County 
Government Act (No. 17 of 2012)  establishes the office of the County S ecretary in each County 
who shall be the Head of the Public Service and Secretary to  the County Executive Committee. 
Section 44 (2) (a) of the same law provides that the holder of the position shall be competitively 
sourced from amongst persons who are university graduates with at least ten years experience in 
administration and managemen t. 
Mr. Speaker Sir under same observatio ns and findings Number 11. The C ommittee 
received only one letter contesting the suitability of Mr. Dennis Benjamin Lewa Muganga to 
hold th e position he was nominated of County S ecretary, by one Kelvin .N. Inanga dat ed 20th 
November, 2 019, a self proclaimed public interest activist. He had two main objections, first that 
the nominee never applied and was never shortlisted for the job and that he was a relative to His 
Excellency the Deputy Governor.  
Mr. Speaker Sir Num ber 12. The Committee noted under Section 7 (10) of the Public 
Appointments (County Assemblies Approval) Act (No. 5 of 2017), any person may, prior to the 
approval hearing, submit ... I want to repeat the word submit a sworn statement or affidavit 
contestin g the suitability of a candidate to hold the office to which the candidate was nominated . 
Mr. Speaker, he did not adhere to that instead he submitted an unsworn letter with no supporting 
evidence ; nevertheless, under S ection 8 (a) of the same law, the Comm ittee is required to 
consider the procedure that was used to arrive at the Nominee including the criteria for short  
listing the N ominee and promised to do so at the meeting to safeguard the public interest.  
Mr. Speaker Number 13. On the allegation by Mr. Kelvin Inanga gave in his letter that 
Mr. Dennis Lewa Muganga did not apply for the position of the County Secretary, the 
Committee established from the Chief Executive Officer of the County Public Service Board 
who was present a t the vetting meeting that the N ominee applied for the position when it was 
advertised in 18th October, 2017 and was subsequently shortlisted Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker I now go to Number 15. Since Mr. Kelvin Inanga did not submit any 
documentary evidence or proof to support his alleg ations, the Committee finds no basis to pursue 
or admit them as the law requires that a person does so. Mr. Kelvin Inanga who was present at 
the vetting meeting was informed accordingly by the Committee.  
Mr. Speaker that is Number 16 . The nominee submitted  replies to the written 
questionnaire provided for under the First Schedule, Section 7 (9) of the Public Appointments 
(County Assemblies) Act (No. 5 of 2017) and also attached his Curriculum V itae and supporting 
testimonials. He also submitted  originals of  his National ID, P assport, academic and other 
certificates to the Committee during the vetting meeting. The Committee asked further relevant 
questions seeking clarifications on the foregoing and was satisfied by the replies given by the 
Member.  
Mr. S peake r Sir now I wish to go to c onclusion . Mr. Speaker Sir the conclusion that the 
Committee came out is that the Committee having considered the credentials, experience, 
suitability and abilities of Mr. Dennis Benjamin Lewa Muganga , His Excellency the Governor s’ 
Nominee for the position of the County Secretary in the County g overnment of Mombasa and 
having ensu red that the right procedure for his nomination were complied with and he qualifies 
for the posi tion.  
Pursuant to S ection 9 (2) of the Public Appointmen ts (County Assemblies) Approval Act 
(No. 5 of 2017) he is satisfied with the same and recommends to the County A ssembly to 
approve him for appointment substantively to that position Mr. Speaker Sir.  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 The Committee at its sitting on Monday, 2nd December, 201 9 considered the R eport and 
approved the same and resolved to recommend to the County Assembly for adoption Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
Mr. Speaker Sir the r ecommendations: That pursuant to S ection 9 (2) of the Public 
Appointments (County Assemblies) Act (No. 5 of 20 17), the Committee recommends Mr. 
Dennis Benjamin Lewa Muganga and  His Excellency the Governors’ Nominee for the position 
of the County Secretary in the C ounty  government of Mombasa who the C ommittee has vetted 
satisfactorily be approved for appointment su bstantively as the County Secretary.  
Mr. Speaker Sir that this County A ssembly RESOLVES to adopt this R eport and the 
annexed minutes of the proceedings of the Committee recommendation and adoption of the 
report.  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
(Applause)  
The D eputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker f or according me the opportunity.  Mr. 
Speaker I wish to state tha t the candidate or the present N ominee is a very diligent man with over 
15 years work exper ience from 20 05 to date as a C onsultant . Mr. Speaker, he has worked for 
different multi agents ; both local and international, he has worked for t he World Bank, for 
DANIDA as a C onsultant, as a policy expert, at Jumuiya za Kaunti ya Pwani, he has ex emplary 
academic qual ifications.  Mr. Speaker the candidate actually has Masters Degree in policy from 
South Africa , yes he actually has a second Master s in also policy ; the candidate also has a 
Degree from Kenyatta University, he has a D iploma from the same Kenyatta U niversity . 
So Mr. Speaker the candidate in my view , I think is the similar opinion of the rest of the 
Members of the Committee that the N ominee is up and equal to the task , the C ommittee had 
successfully conducted the interview and it was not very easy for the cand idate but he managed 
to sail through . This is  because of his demeanor  and because of his experience as a consultant 
over vast years ; from 2005 and we are in 2019 Mr. Speaker , so I want to convince the Members 
of this House that the candidate per say is fit  for the job description at hand . Actually he  is 
overq ualified because he has worked for the World Bank with no complain ts, he has worked as 
an expert with the Jumuiya za Kaunti ya Pwani, he has worked in very different places over 15 
years and I think he is up and he is the guy for this job. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fatuma Mote?  
Hon. Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii.  
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nitaongea mambo mawili ; matatu muhimu kulingana na R ipoti 
iliyoletwa ya Bwana  Lewa.  Kwanza kabisa ningependa kwa kueleza Jumba hili kwanza Bwana  
Lewa ni Mkenya, vile vile ni mkaazi wa Kaunti ya Mombasa na la tatu ni mpiga kura wa 
Mombasa na la nne vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika ukiang alia katika shahada  na Diploma  ni zile 
ambazo zil ioweza kukubaliwa na Bwana  Matiangi . 
Kwa hivyo sina shaka na Ripoti iliyoletwa na W aheshimiwa wenzangu , mimi nakubali 
mia fil mia na nina hakika Mheshimiwa Spika ataweza kuhudumia Kaunti ya Mombasa 
ipasavyo.  Ukiangalia vile vile Mheshimiwa naregelea tena ; kulingana na kisomo chak e 
Mheshimiwa Matiangi hana tash wishi nacho , sijui sisi ni kina nani wa kuweza kupinga. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ath man Shebe?  
Hon. Shebe Athuman: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. N afasi hii japo imechele wa 
kidogo lakini nasema imechele wa imefika ; mimi kwa hakika Mheshimiwa Spika sina mchango 
wa kuongeza ama wa kupunguza katika hili suala lakini nataka kuon yesha kwa sababu dada 
zangu W aheshimi wa wenza hapa wanakanganyika na mimi sana wanashindwa huyu 
Mheshimiwa wa Jomvu Kuu ni kivipi mbona hatumuelewi lakini labda tu niwapatie ufunguo . 
Mheshimiwa mimi naishi vipi , naamini vipi, na haya maisha yangu ndio ya taniongoza !  
Mimi naamini ukweli na hak i na sipendi mimi kuweza kupata mtu ambaye hajanipa 
taarifa nikakurupuka nikatoa uamuzi ambao huenda ukam uangusha, ni mtu nina misimamo 
wangu, ni mtu ambaye naongozwa na uad ilifu, naamini ukweli na haki.  Ukweli ni kuwa 
Mheshimiwa Spika hoja hii ambayo ilik uwa imeletwa mbele na Mwakilishi wa  Kiongozi wa 
Wengi katika Bunge  yeye kapendekeza ku wa mimi niweze kuunga mkono , wazee kuunga 
mkono ama niweze kuruhusu hoja iendelee lakini kwa uadilifu wangu , kwa sababu Mheshimiwa 
Mwenza heshima kama mzee wangu pili ha kunishauri lakini ukweli wa mambo hoja hii nilikuwa 
naiua moja kwa moja .  
Nataka tu iingie kwa kumbukumbu lakini out of respect  na principles  zangu na 
misimamo yangu ya kisiasa na utenda  kazi nasema that is not the right thing for me to do . Ndio 
maana nikac helea na nikaweza kumwambia Mheshimiwa Mwenza kuwapendekeza Mheshimiwa 
Mwenza mwengine aweze kuendelezesha hoja kwa sababu misimamo yangu na nashukuru 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti umenipa heshima ingekuwa umenifanyia dhulma kubwa kama 
ningetoka hapa ikawa nimenya maza lakini nashukuru kupitia himaya yako umeweza kunipatia 
nafasi kuweza kuangazia hili suala nafikiri Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sote hapa tuko hapa 
kuwakilisha wananchi we tu, sote tuko hapa kuhakikisha yule mwananchi na wale watu ambao 
wanataka watumikie wan anchi kule waangaliwe vile vigezo ambavyo vinastahiki kisheria 
waweze kupatiwa hizo nafasi kuweza kuhudumia.  
Kwa hivyo kuna wanaounga mkono, kuna wanaopinga na huu ni uhuru na uwezo na ni 
heshima hili Bunge kuhakikisha kuwa zile sauti za wachache pia kuna uwezekano zinaweza 
kuwa washindi na kuwa kuna siku zile sauti za wengi zinaweza kuwa washindwa na ndio 
msimamo wa kidemokrasia ya siasa ya nchi yetu. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi nashukuru 
umen ipatia fursa ya kuangazia wala W aheshimiwa wenza msinielewe vibay a tafadhalini that is 
Hon. Shebe Athuma n Salim aka Mukono Power Principle . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moha med Moha med? 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa aliyetoka kuzungumza 
hajasema kama ameipinga  au ame iunga mkono ? 
Hon. Shebe Athuman: Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, Mwenyekiti Mwenza wa sarafu 
natangulia kusema nataka niweze kubainisha bayana ... kwa hivyo mimi katika  hili suala nafikiri 
Mheshimiwa  Mungu amekupa hekima ndio maana tumekuwa na ima ni na wewe k uweza kupata 
hicho K iti. Kwa hivyo sauti iliyopita hapa kabla ya hoja kuendelea ilikuwa ni wale wachache 
waweze kuzingatiwa kidemokrasia kupata ushindi lakini ushindi huo umekuwa ushindwa 
haikuwezekana , kwa hivyo mimi niko na wale W aheshimiwa wachache amba o waliweza 
kupitisha ushindi ambao umekuwa washindwa.  Kwa hivyo kwa ufupi Mheshimiwa hoja hii 
sitaweza kuichangia kwa sababu nina vigezo vyangu sitaweza kuzungumza kwa hivyo hili 
suala…  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15 (Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?   
 (Laughter)  
Hon. Shebe Ath man:  Mheshimiwa ninakuomba unilinde, nakuomba unilinde 
Mheshimiwa…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
Hon. Omondi: Yes Mr. Speaker Sir I have just risen  on a point of information to the 
House . Mr. Speaker Sir the Member that is speaking is really audibly speaking we are getting 
him but again I think the message he is giving he has to substantiate that message when he says 
that washindwa na washinda wamekuwa washindwa . Mr. Speaker Sir I don’t unders tand what he 
has communicated because  I have been in this House since this matte r came up and indeed your 
honourable ruling was very much in line with the rules and procedures of this House . Mr. 
Speaker Sir you said if there  is a M ember who purports that the Ayes or even the Nays you must 
have mislead any of them but they still have the right to move on and we do the counting . I think 
that was very clear but if he keeps on repeating that saying that the washindwa walikuwa 
washindi na washindi walikuwa wash indwa  Mr. Speaker Sir I think we are misleading and again 
this is a very important matter which we have to discuss, summarize  and come to a conclusion. 
Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay noted. Yes Hon. Members ? Yes Hon. 
Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athm an Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika uongozi ni 
dhamana na tutaenda jibu kwayo kama si kwa wananchi ba si mbele ya Mwenyezi Mungu hali 
kadhalika sitaki niwe mnafiki jumba mbovu liniangukie . Twakumbushana pia kwamba 
mojawapo ya majukumu am a vibainishi vya unafiki ni hiyana unapoaminiwa na kupewa 
dhamana ukilikengeuka basi hiyo ni dalili ya unafiki na una fiki wa viongozi Mheshimiwa ni 
mzigo mkubwa , kwa hivyo mimi binafsi unafiki siuwezi nanyanyuka kusema kauli yangu 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Mheshim iwa Spik a yamenukuliwa na kwa sauti na H ansard yetu imewekeza ya kwamba 
msimamo uli kuwaje na maamuzi yamekuwa vipi!  Mheshimiwa mimi nina mambo mawili ama 
matatu yanayo niacha niipinge R ipoti hii ; simpingi aliyependekez wa Bwana  Lewa isip okuwa 
Mheshimiwa Spik a napinga R ipoti hii , kwanza natamba kwa mawanda ya ufasaha mchache nilio  
nao katika K anuni za kudumu za ibara ya 185 Mheshimiwa Spika ambayo ibara hii 
inazungumzia…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Order! Hon. Fatuma ! 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ibara hii Mheshimiwa Spika inazungumzia kuundwa kwa 
Kamati iliyotekeleza jukumu hili kwa mujibu wa ibara 185 . 
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
16 Mheshimiwa Spika natilia shaka uhalali, usawa, uhalisia wa Kamati ilio  endesha jukumu 
hili kwa sababu idadi ya watu iliotaj wa kati ka hii isizidi watu sita!  Kamati ilio  endesha hii wako 
saba. Pili katika composition  ya watu waliotajwa katika Kamati hii sivyo ilivyowekwa 
Mhes himiw a Spika. T atu kwa kuwa mimi ni M wana  harakati, Mwakilishi ambaye najali masuala 
ya utetezi wa haki wa kijin sia Kamati hii pia Mheshimiwa Spika haina usawa wa kijinsia kwa 
hivyo kuendesha jukumu hili kwa muji bu wa mahaba na mapendekezo ya Katiba ya Mwaka 
2010 K amati hii haipaswi kuwa kutekeleza jukumu hili.  Mheshimiwa Spika…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There  is a point of information .  
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker it  is very sad, very sad to  my colle ague, a learned 
person; this C ommittee was appointed when the Committees were appointed before we took over 
this Assembly nobody raised an iss ue of the Committee , we have been vetting M embers since we 
were elected nobody has raised any issue . Only for this issue Mr. Speaker somebo dy today is 
raising in this Honourable  House to say that he has no confiden ce with the composition of the 
Committee , where was he all t his time as a learned friend?  Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith Mwende before we move on to 
Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon.  Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am surpr ised for the Hon. Member to say  no 
one raised this concern , I remember very well claiming the Standing Order 185 in this House and 
it is in the Hansard record so we raise d the concern but they were not considered Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Musumba Raphael?  
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri: Mheshimiwa sijamaliza . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri , proceed .  
Hon.  Athman  Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  Mheshimiwa nimenukuu hapa 
nikasema nitatamba na Mheshimiwa sijaona kigezo bado natamba .                       
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri proceed?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa. Mheshimiwa nimenukuu hapa 
nikasema nitatamba na Mheshimiwa sijaona kigezo bado natamb a na kwa ufasaha ama wana  
falsafa  wenza waliosoma kitabu  cha riwaya ya Kusadikika, kuna mahali inasema , “siku za 
kuheshimu watu kw a sababu ya mvi zinafika tamati”  na kwa mantiki hii, wengine na mvi wao 
Mheshimiw a Spika naona hawana sababu bali  wao pia  heshima i tupuliwe mbali kwa kusimama 
na Hoja na vinukuu ambavyo havijaenda shule . Mheshi miwa Spika natamba na naregelea 
ilipotangazwa nafasi hii ambayo  ndugu yangu Dennis  Lewa leo  imeletwa  kujadiliwa kwa 
kumbukumbu zangu ilikuwa bayana kwamba County  Service Board  ilikuwa imevunjwa na kwa  
kanuni za competitive process  ya ua jiri lazima swa la hili lipitie kwao na katika R ipoti yao 
wamenuku u ya kwamba  waliita Chief Officer . Chief O fficer  ni mwajiriwa  mdogo…  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
17 (Interruption)  
            The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Hon. Members consult  on a low 
tone. 
            Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Mheshimiwa Spika mimi natamba,  nina uwezo wa kuitoboa 
toboa Ripoti hii kiufasaha , ninao na kama mtu ana duku duku na H oja anyanyuke alafu twende 
mmoja mmoja yule ambaye ana hisi ana kitu ya kuninuku u nacho anyanyuke .   
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Moha med Moha med, yes what is it?  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika  nafikiri rafiki yangu , ndugu yangu , 
Mhes himiwa mwenzangu anapotosha N yumba hii . Ku appoint S ecretary  ni majukum u ya 
Gavana ukisoma kwenye  sheria ya  serikali za Kaunti yaani County Government Act  Gavana ana 
uwezo w a kuteua jopo la kuweza kuangalia kazi ya ku teua Secretary . Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hon. Mwamwiri proceed?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesema nitatamba , na nitatoboa. Kwa 
sababu hajanidhihirishia ya kwamba kulikuwa na Public Service Board iliyoundwa  japo 
anaegeza ya kwamba  County Government Act i nampatia uwezo Mheshimiwa Gavana kuteuwa 
Jopo la kuendesha la kuendesha jukumu kwa dharura.  
Kwa hivyo mimi bado natamba, niko pale pale na kwa mantiki hii yeye ameafiki pia 
hakukuwa na County Public Service Board wakati swala hili likitendeka. Kwa hivyo ni ko haki, 
niko sahihi na nitaendelea kutamba Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sina shida ; naregelea ya Bwana Lewa, sina shida na vigezo 
vyake vya ki elimu japo kuna sifa nyengine zime pendekezwa hapa ambayo mimi kama mwanati 
na mfuatilizi wa karibu wa masuala yanahusu Pwani hii, amesifiwa ya kwamba alikua katik a 
Jopo la kusimamia masuala ya Jumuiya ya Pwani.  
Mheshimiwa Spika mtu asije hapa na ngonjera za Jumuiya ya Pwani, iwapi? Ni  natija 
gani ambayo Jumuiya ya Pwani imefanywa leo kwa hawa waliowekwa ka ma technocrats ? Ni 
lipi ambalo watasema tume achieve  sisi kama Jumuiya ya Pwani?  
Kwa hivyo hio kufanywa kigezo Mheshimiwa Spika ni ndoto za mchana za kupotosha 
watu, labda kwa wasiofuatilia masuala ya kiuchumi na kisiasa haswa ya Mwambao hii. Lakini 
kwa wa ledi, wanati su ala hili si kigezo na kumwekele a Bwana huyu ni kumpotezea sifa tu ya 
kwamba amekuwa katika Jumuiya ya Pwani na Jumuiya ya Pwani haina hata mtoto wa paka 
kuonyesha kwamba hapa tumefikia kama Jumuiya.  
Kwa hivyo Jumuiya bure, majukumu yaliyoka bidhiwa baadhi ya watu bure , hivyo basi  
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naregelea kwa mujibu wa kanuni, kwa mujibu wa ibara 185, napinga 
Ripoti hii kwa sababu walioitengeneza hawako katika nafasi muafaka kwa mujibu wa kipengele 
hichi cha kutekeleza Ripoti hii. Ahsant e Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I do not want to actually pop holes on what the Member 
has said al though I had some issues on these  deliberations, but because of time I want  to be very 
much categorical . 
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
18 I want to say that I have read this Report which has been committed to this House by the 
Committee on Appointment s which is mandated to do  this work under Section 44 (2) and Mr. 
Speaker Sir I am satisfied that one Mr. Denis  Benjamin Lewa has been appropriately nominated 
to this particular position pending today’s nomination. And some of the issues that I want to raise 
why I really supported ; one is on integrity issue.  
Mr. Speaker we all understand that integrity is one o f the measure s that should be taken 
into consideration when you are appointing one in a public office which Mr. Benjamin Lewa has 
proved that he has no integrity issues , and therefore he qualifies to s it in that office. I want also 
to laud this partic ular appointment or this Nominee on the issue  of academic credentials. Mr. 
Speaker Sir when I looked at his CV, I am convinced that indeed this particular Human Resource 
will do us good in that particular office. As you know we have been having most of the  issue s 
with our CECs , sometimes the communication does not reach this House at the right time and we 
have been having a lot of challenges. But I am sure that Mr. Dennis Benjamin Lewa who is 
pregnant of information  being backed by his academic standards wi ll be able to deliver on this.   
Mr. Speaker I want also to point out the capacity of this particular individual ; generally  
when you look at the qualifications, skills, suitability, they are overwhelming. The background is 
he is a Kenyan, all those qualifica tions amounts to a ti ck. And therefore, look at his principle of 
Economics, he seemed to be one who has a lot of experience in various field s when we collect all 
this together we say that Mr. Benjamin Lewa has the capacity of indeed holding this office, to  
run it well on the administration issues and all other relevant issues that may come in that 
particular office.  
I therefore say Mr. Speaker let us not always bring issues where issues are not supposed 
to be brought ; let us say no when it is no and say ye s when it is yes. On this one, Mr. Dennis 
Benjamin Lewa ... I thought the Members of this House would Hono urably  raise up and support 
this particular one to hold this particular office. Having looked at all the Sections that hav e been 
presented by this Report , and also I do not want to doubt our Committee, the Committee on 
Appointment s which also has a Hansard wh en you look at this composition  it has very 
experienced Members, we also have the constituent of this Committee, we have people who are 
informed with is sues of law like Hon. Amriya Bo y Juma who is also here. Mr. Speaker Sir them 
having agreed and vetted Mr. Benjamin and agreed on him I am sure he has hit 90  per cent  to 
hold this particular office , therefore, Mr. Benjamin Dennis Lewa is qualified to hold office. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.     
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Faith?  
Hon. Mwende : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa  hii. Naona tushaongea 
tukamaliza  yote yaka isha yenye imebaki ni kupitisha twende nyumbani . Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Rosemary?  
Hon. Mukavi : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Mr. Speaker let 
me applau d the seven Members  who s at down and created this Rep ort; looking  at the credentials 
of Mr. Dennis I am quite satisfied in my mind he is very capable to run that  docket  of County 
Secretary . Mr. Spe aker I want to support it fully ; when I look at his credential s suita bility , ability  
and integrity we also hold t his... so I stand to support.  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
19 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Bwire?  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker this should go to all of us that 
ideologically we do differ for the interest of the common mwananchi  we represent and every one  
of us wishes this County to prosper. And the prosperity of this County will depend on who is 
delivering the services to the said mwananchi , and therefore Mr. Speaker we all call upon both 
County Assembly and Executive to make sure that we employ the right people at the right time 
to offer the right services.  
Hon. Speaker I have no doubt Mr. Benjamin Dennis Lewa mentioned in this Report is 
well educated , but my concern and I heard Hon. Hatimy referring  to H. E the Governor has the 
powers to constitute a Board to vet a Member. But also Hon. Speaker let us not forget that th e 
County Service Board mandates ; its core mandates is to vet a ll the employees of the County 
government apart from the CEC Members. And I wo uld wish to know from the mover of the 
Motion if indeed the Board was constituted and maybe the names of Board Members who 
approved Mr. Dennis as a suitable appointee, then from today going in future we would wish to 
ask for a proper process of any employe e that int ends to be employ ed by this County 
government, be it Executive wing, be it the County Assembly wing so that we get prop er people 
to perform the duties.  
Otherwise Hon. Speaker I have no much to say but I would wish to call upon the Hon. 
Members t o embrace those Hon. Members with different opinion from theirs ; we all serve the 
common mwananchi . My opinion should not be castigated or taken otherwise as if me or 
somebody else does not wish well for this County and  the leadership of this County governm ent. 
We all love H .E the Governor and we would wish whoever comes to offer services to be 
somebody who is up to task so as to help H .E the Governor and the entire government deliver 
better services to the people who elected us as elected and special ly elected  leaders. Otherwise 
Hon. Speaker I beg to support the Repo rt. Thank you.    
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy then I call the mover to 
respond.  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika naf ikiri so te 
tulikuwa w akati tukim chunguza  Bwana  Dennis Lewa na kulingana na stakabadhi  zimekuwa  
wazi kuwa County Secretary alikuwa vetted  na K amati ambayo ilikuwa imekuwa appointed  na 
Governor chini ya Kifungu  44 ya sheria za Kaunti . 
Jambo la pili kuwa Public Service walitan gaza kwenye magazeti kuwa k una hiki kiti na 
watu wakatuma maombi na hiyo ilani  iliwez a kuletwa mbele yetu tuliuliza na tukapatiwa na 
tukaonyeshwa kuwa  yeye ni kati ya wale waliotuma maombi ya hii  kazi.  Kwa hivyo mimi naona  
kuwa  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti h akuna  dhambi zozote zilizofanyika  katika kufuatilia hii process  
na pia nataka kumwambia Mheshimiwa  mwenzangu kuwa sisi tunaheshimu  maoni ya wenzetu , 
isiwe kuwa wewe utakuw a ukae mtu akae afikirie vyengine . Kila mtu ana haki kufikiria vile 
anavyo fikiria na kila  mtu ataona vile anavyo  ona. 
Kwa hivyo tusichukuane ati kuwa wengine wamepinga  ikawa  kutaingia chuki wala 
kusema hawa ni wapinzani wala nini ; kila mtu a na fikira zake na nataka kuregelea ya kuwa 
tunaheshimu  maoni ya wenze tu na pia nyinyi pia munataka m heshimu  maoni yetu ya kusema 
kuwa hakuna jambo lolote lililofanywa kinyume cha sheria , na huu ndio ukweli hakuna jambo 
lengine lolote isipokuwa ukweli ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika .   
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
20 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes I call upon the mover to respond.  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker thank you once again. Mr. Sp eaker I want to 
congratulate  Members ; this is a House of law, and there is democracy , each person has a right to 
air his views and I want to thank them  for that. Mr. Speaker this Hon ourable  Hous e did receive a 
letter of communication from  His Excellency the Governor to this House as per the law and that 
procedure was followed. On receiving that letter, the Clerk of the Assembly forwarded it to the 
Hon. Speaker and the procedures were followed . When you go to introduction No.2, the 
nomination of Mr. Dennis Benjamin Lewa Muganga was communicated by His Excellency the 
Governor vide a letter to the Clerk of the County Assembly Mr. Speaker.  Here is where t his 
House was given the mandate ; and then i t was brought into this House and Chair on that 
particular day appointed the same to the Committee. I want to say it clearly without fear or 
favour, I am a religious person and I cannot be a double dealer, let  us call a spade a spade. If 
somebody deserves th is Mr. Speaker, why me as Hon. Murfad Amur should object him 
because….  
(Applause)  
He is Mr. Lewa and I am Hon. Amur, he is a Christian and I am a Muslim, I am of that 
caliber Hon. Speaker. I want to be clearly captured, I  am not a tribalist , but I am doin g wh at my 
conscious  is telling me  is right. Mr. Speaker I want to thank the Members and I want to believe 
this person will bring a change in ou r County ; as you know today there  are more than 300 
workers who have not received their renewal of contracts, this only because there is no County 
Secretary in place.  
Therefore for us to adopt this Report and agree that this person is capable, maybe some of 
our few brothers and sisters will get the renewals of their contracts and their daily bread from 
today will  continue. I want to thank the Members , and I want to say this person is a Kenyan, a 
voter of this County and Mombasa has no bias Mr. Speaker ; we have every tribe, every Member 
in this Mombasa County. It is the only County that has all the tribes from Keny a; I want to repeat 
all the tribes are included in our leadership , in our positions , in every particular department . With 
these few remarks I want to thank the Member s and I believe they will adopt and approve it.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applaus e) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Members . Hon. Members  I now 
stand to put a question that Pursuant to S ection 9  (2) of the Public Appointment s County 
Assemblies approval Act number 5  of 2017 , the Committee recommends Mr. Dennis Benjamin 
Lewa Muganga, the Governors  nominee  for the position of the County Secretary in the County 
government of Mombasa who the C ommittee has  vetted  satisfactory  be approved  by this 
Honourable  House as the Count y Secretary . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
(Background consultations)  
December 3 , 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         11 6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informatio n 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
21 Yes Clerk? And Hon. Members I also put a question in  adoption of this R eport of the 
vetting on  Mr. Dennis Benjamin Lewa Mugambi . 
(Questio n put and agreed  to) 
Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Having there  no other B usiness the House stands adjourned until Wednesday 4th 
December , 2019 at 10:00 a.m. 
The House rose at 4:30 p.m. 
 
 