October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday,  6th October, 2016  
The House met at 2.44pm . 
(Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Clerk ? 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Hon. Members I take this opportunity to inform the H ouse that indeed let’s all have res pect 
to the proceedings of the House and during prayer time M embers when I say let’s pray let’s all 
pray. 
       It is not good that when we are praying others are talk ing, others are wa lking here and there 
so please M embers let’s all  have res pect to God and respect to the Honorable Assembly. Clerk?  
MESSAGES  
       Yes Clerk, M embers this is a message from the Finance department,  the Mombasa County 
Integrated Development  Plan (CIDP ) provides the frameworks and development anchorage for 
the preparation of the Annual Development Plan (ADP) and this plan is the first in a series of 
development plans that will implement the County Integrated Development Plan (2018 -2022 ). 
       This will be done through the comprehensive  interventions in partnership with our 
supportive development partners in the Private Public P artnership (PPP) engagements .  
       It is our firm belief that  this will  ultimately lead  to the realization of cre ating a commercial 
hub and a high standard of living for residents of Mombasa  County.  
       This ADP set out the strategic priorities for the  medium term that reflects the C ounty 
government’s priorities and plans for the 2017/18  financial  year, it contai ns the programmes 
/projects to be delivered with their objectives, expected outputs, performance indicators, time 
frame and the amount allocated for each project as in line with the budget estimates for the fiscal 
year 2017/2018.  
       Planning remains a key principle in the C ounty as more resources and respon sibilities are 
devolved to the C ounty government , these resources and responsibiliti es will be cascaded to the 
Sub County and W ard levels to ensure a bottom up public service delivery system.  
       It’s a message from the Executive County Finance and Economic Planning M ember and the 
Annual Development Plan is hereby submitted to the Finance C ommittee to work on it , 
further more the Budget Review Outlook P aper Policy document is prepared in line to prov isions 
of Public Finance Management (PFM) Act 2012, Article  118 (a). 
October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2        The preparations of this  County Outlook P aper continues to be a collaborative effort from an 
array of expertise of  professionals in the County T reasury ; we are grateful for their i nput, 
immense appreciation goes to the Executive Member for Finance and Economic P lanning for the  
good will and guidance provided during the entire period of preparation of this document.  
       Core team in the Accounting and B udget and Economic P lanning units spent significant 
amount s of time consolidating this policy document , we are particularly grateful to Ms.  Jane 
Githui ( Director Budget and E conomic  Planning) , Mr. Evans Kametu (UN Volunteer )  and M r. 
Affan Mohamed (Head of E xternal Economic affairs) for working tirelessly in development of 
this document.  
       That is the message from the Chief Finance and Economic Planning and this document the 
Budget Review and Outlook P aper is also committed to the Committee on Finance, any M ember 
from the F inance  Committee?  Yes Clerk . 
PAPER  
       Yes Hon. Simi nyu. 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. S peaker, i just want to take  this opportunity to thank the 
Deputy S peaker, we had challenges visiting these sites but to wards the contribution for our 
Deputy S peaker,  he gave us his vehicle  and the C ommittee was able to visit the fire station . 
       Mr. Speaker, we found out a lot of things which....  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Simi nyu do you have the P aper becaus e you 
were supposed to  lay the P aper . 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Tha t’s why I want to explain as a C ommittee, the status of the report  i was 
emphasizing because the R eport is not yet ready . 
       Mr. S peaker I wanted to explain why it is not read y, because we cannot take this House  for 
granted, the H ouse ha s to be informed as to why the R eport is not ready up to date, and there 
were logistic al problems . 
       Mr. Speaker, the D eputy S peaker contributed his car, and we found out so many issues at the 
fire station and we w ant to brin g a well elaborated Report as a Committee  so that our workers 
can have a fairness that is required so that they can give good service to wananchi . 
       I beg for more time until next week Mr. Speaker I think I will br ing a very elaborated R eport 
so that we can  move  forward as Mombasa  County, thank you Mr. S peaker S ir. 
October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3        Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : So the issue will be taken back to the House 
Business Committee and in less than two weeks the Report will be back in this Assembly, yes 
Clerk. 
STATE MENTS  
       Hon. Oswago Onje . 
       Hon. Onje : Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kunipa  hii nafasi. Mheshimiwa Spika 
kule eneo  ambao  mimi  nawak ilisha, Junda Ward kuna  barabara  iliundwa  juzi lakini  nilipokuwa  
nikitembea  kwa hiyo barabara  kuna  sehemu  ambay o naona  magari  yamekanya ga na imeingia  
chini  kwenye  hio baraba ra ya hapo.  
       Kwa hiyo  sio sehemu  moja ni kidogo , kadhaa , nyingi n dio nilikuwa  nataka  kama  
ikiwezekana  Mheshimiwa  Spika yule mwana kandarasi  ambaye  anahusiana  na ile kazi ni vizuri  
aitwe  ama afuatilizwe  ndio maana  aweze  kurekebisha  yale makosa  ambayo  ilitokea.  
       Si vizuri  barabara  ambayo  ilitengezwa  na haijamaliza  miezi  miwili au mitatu  lakini  
unapop itia katika  hiyo barabara  sehemu  kadhaa  wa kadhaa  zimebomoka  bomoka  hata unaona  
hata mchanga  wa chini . 
       Kwa hiyo  kidogo  inaonyesha  haswa  vyenye  hii pesa ya mwanan chi yafanya  kazi, mimi kilio  
changu  ni lazima  huyo  mwana kandarasi aitwe arekebishe  tuone  barabara  yetu ikiwa  imara. 
Ahsante.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Com mittee of T ransport to report back to this 
House on the status of the Junda W ard. Clerk in two weeks’ time  we need the Report. Hon . 
Amur.  
       Hon. Amur:  Lakini nilipokuwa nikitembea kwa hiyo barabara kuna mahali naona magari 
imekanyaga na imeingia chini  kwenye hio barabara ya…  
       Kwa hiyo si o sehemu moja ni kidogo kadhaa nyingi n dio nilikuwa nataka a ngalau  
ikiwezekana Mheshimiwa S pika yule mwana kandarasi  ambae anahusiana na ile kazi ni vizuri 
aitwe ama af uatilizwe ndio maana aweze kurekebis ha yale m akosa ambayo ya litokea.  
       Si vizuri barabara ambayo ilitengezwa na haijamaliza miezi miwili au mitatu lakini 
unapop itia katika hiyo barabara sehemu kadhaa wakadhaa zimebomoka bomoka hata unaona 
hata mchanga hadi wa  chini . 
       Kwa hiyo kidogo inaon yesha haswa v yenye hii pesa ya mwananchi yafanya kazi, m imi kilio 
changu ni lazima huyo mwana kandarasi  aitwe arekebishe tuone barabara yetu ikiwa imara. 
Ahsante.  
October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4        Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Committee of T ransport to report back to this 
House on the status of the Junda W ard in two weeks time , we need the R eport  Hon. Amur.  
       Hon.  Amur : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Bwana S pika nimesimama hapa nikitaka B unge 
hili liweze kuweka maamuzi wazi.  
       Sisi tunajua kwamba hawking  haikubali wi, lakini ni mshangao mkubwa ambao tumepata 
tukiambiwa kuwa kuna b wenyenye fulani ambaye ameweza kupata leseni  ya hawking  peke yake, 
hii si haki kabisa . 
       Tuliposema hakuna l eseni  ya hawkers ilikuwa kwa watu wote, msumeno unakata pande zote 
ikienda mbele  inakata ikienda nyuma yakata.  
       Haiwezekani kuwa leseni atapewa mtu f ulani yeye aweza kuendelea na biashara na wengine 
wasikubaliwe kupewa leseni.  
       Kama ni sheria, sheria inatakikana iwe kwa watu wote, ikiwa ni leseni, leseni ipewe watu 
wote w afanye hawking  ikiwa ni kukatazwa basi watu wote wakat azwe, l akini ni kitu cha 
kushan gaza… am bao umekuja katika serika li yetu ya Mombasa ambao bwana f ulani amepewa 
leseni ya kuendesha biashara na watu wengine wakanyimwa.  
       Hii ni dhulma ya kijinsia M heshimiwa Spika, p ili imekuja jinsi nyengine ambayo sisi 
tunakataza hawkers , lakini sasa hawkers  wanapewa leseni ya kutumia magari yao.  
       Mtu anaenda kununua gari ya pickup  akatengeza kama stall anaegeza  barabarani ukienda 
ukitaka kumuuliza kwa  nini anafanya hivyo anakutolea ki karatasi ambacho ameidhinishwa 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Mheshimiwa S pika ikiwa tunataka hawkers  waondoke basi tuwe na mfumo wa sheria ambao 
ni kwa wote lakini isiwe discrim inatory  wengine wanapewa wengine wananyimwa.  
       Mimi ningeomba le seni hii am bayo amepewa mmoja hususan ambaye anauza rununu, 
twataka leseni ile iwe revoked  ili wawe kama wale wengine.  
       Kwa sababu kumekuwa na utapeli kwa mambo ya simu za runu nu tumeona magari 
mengi…watu il hali hawana leseni.  
       Lakin i ushahidi tuliopata ya kwamba B wana huyu ako na leseni ambayo anaitumia kuuza 
rununu baraba rani wakati wengine wamenyimwa M heshimiwa S pika.  
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba N yumba hii tukubaliane ya kwam ba hii leseni 
ambayo amepewa bwe nyenye huyu au bwana huyu iwe revoked ili watu wote wawe iwe ni 
sheria kwa wote watu na sio sheria kwa mtu mmoja. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika.  
October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5        Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur, you will sit with the Committee of 
Trade and E nergy to s hare more information with the C ommittee because it seems that the owner 
of that license, you are aware of that per son. 
       So shed more light to that Committee and the C ommittee will work on that issue and in two 
weeks time they will bring that Report. Yes Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
       Hon. Ibrahim?  
       Hon. Ibrahim  Kondo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama mbele 
ya N yumba hii kutaka kujua  hatma ya Wizara ya Michezo na J insia kutokana na utenda  kazi 
wake unavyoendelea.  
       Mheshimiwa S pika msimu uliopita tumewakilisha katika ma wodi  tofauti tofauti ; kulik uwako 
na p endekezo ambazo tulizipeleka katika Wizara ya M ichezo ili vijana wetu wasaidike na 
maswala ya michezo i kiwemo mipira, nguo za kuchezea, mipira na mengine mengi.  
       La kusikit isha M heshimiwa Spika tunamuona Waziri wa Michezo akienda katika kila Wodi  
na kutoa vitu hivi au vifaa hivi na kila tunapoenda kwa ofisi yake kuulizia hatma ya vijana wetu 
tunaambiwa hakuna pesa.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ibrahim Kondo the matter will be taken to the 
Committee on Sports and Gender and the Committee to report back to this House  in not more 
than three weeks . Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       Hon. Saad Faraj . 
       Hon.  Faraj : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I beg to move the fo llowing amended 
Motion;  
(Hon. Faraj move d Motion on compensation for  conservation of Old Town heritage sites)  
       THAT AWARE that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) seeks to encourage the identification, prote ction and preservation of cultural and 
natural heritage around the world considered to be of outstanding value to humanity. This is 
embodied in an international treaty called the Convention concerning the Protection of the 
World Cultural and Natural Herita ge, adopted by UNESCO in 1972;  
       FURTHER AWARE that the National Government has ratified the above convention;  
       NOTING THAT Old T own was officially recognized as a heritage site on the 26th of June, 
1997 under the cultural category by UNESCO;  
October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6        CONCERNED THAT the o wners of the heritage sites in Old T own Mombasa County are not 
involved in the preservation of their cultural and natural heritage nor do they get any technical 
or financial support to ensure that the sites are well protected.  
       I therefore urge the County Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
       1. The National and County governments to come up with mechanisms to  compensate 
property owners in Old T own to ensure that the heritage sites are well preserved.  
2. The compensation be between  5 to 10 per cent of the value of the property to be paid on 
annual basis.  
3. The County government to provide discount for land rates of the heritage sites with a view to 
ensure conservation of their cultural and natural heritage in line with the UNESCO g oals.   
4. The National Museums of Kenya and UNESCO be compelled to comply with the foregoing 
resolutions on compensation.  
I beg to move.  
(Hon. Faraj moved)  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Motion was debated yesterday but I think as it 
is ame nded we need to have a secondment . 
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I second the amendment Hon . Speaker . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is now time to put a question that the House 
adopts this particular Motion and to adopt the Motion as amended th e ruling of this Motion will 
sit with the Member of this particular amendment to determine or to come up with an Adhoc 
Committee to look upon this matter . 
       And the Committee should also put to consideration gender equality and as we said before 
disab ility factor should  also been considered in that Ad  hoc Committee . 
       So I put a question that the House resolves that an Ad  hoc Committee to be formed to look 
upon this . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
       So the area M ember of this area plus the move r will bring to my office the names of the Ad 
hoc C ommittee for approval thank you. Yes Hon. Amur . 
       Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker will all your respect at least you should guide us on the number 
because … the Committee M embers will come all o f them they wan t to be in that C ommittee . 
October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7        At least you should give us a way forward on how many  at least sh ould be in that 
Committee Mr. Speaker , thank you . 
(Interruption)  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : What is it Hon. ? 
       Hon. Mwinga: Mr. Speaker I  think it will be wise if Members are mentioned in this H ouse 
rather than going to your office . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I said that the area M ember plus the M over will put 
into consideration what I have said, the names will be brought to t he office and when I say the 
office it’s not me, the Speaker’s office and the y will be communicated in this H on. House after 
approval . 
       And as it is an Ad hoc C ommitte e will not take more than five Members so it is upon the 
Mover and the area Member of this W ard to bring t he names to the office of that Committee and 
Members in this C ommittee please and please work on this issue take this matter seriously 
because our people are suffering and they have suf fered enough so it is upon you M embers to 
take f ull responsibility of this iss ue. 
       Yes Hon. Hatimy, now when the  names have been brought to the office we will 
communicate in the te rm of reference of that Ad hoc Committee, thank you yes H on. 
Mwabashiri . 
       Hon. Mwabashiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, kwa heshima  zote sioni  sababu  ya majina  
kuja ofisini,  katika  hili Bunge  nafikiri  wana weza kukaa  hapa  hapa  watoe  majina  hapa  hapa  mtu 
mwengine  yeyote kwa sababu  itakuwa  si jambo la busara  labda  wewe  pia wataka  kuwekwa  
katika  hii Kamati . 
       Mheshimi wa S pika pole labda  ndio sababu  unataka  ipelekwe kwa ofisi  lakini  hata hapa  hapa  
sisi hawa  Mheshimiwa  yoyote  atakaye  sema  hapa  itangazwe  hapa  hapa  kazi ianze  mara  moja, 
badala  ya kuwa  watu  wakae wiki ijayo  badala  ya kesho  Kamati  ianze  kazi inabidi  wangojee  
Bunge  mpaka wiki ijayo week J umanne  kwa hivyo  mimi  naona  mda utakuwa  umeenda  sana. 
       Kwa hivyo kama itawezekana dakika  mbili  tatu hapa  Waheshimiwa  sote tuko ndani  hapa  
ikiwa  ni Nzai ikiwa  ni nani, tuchague  watu  watano  na sisi tulioko  hapa  ndani  si wengine  wako  
huko  kwengine  alafu  kesho  usikie  watu  wote  ni watu  ambao  hawako  katika  hili Bunge 
Mheshimiwa Spika. 
       Kwa hivyo  naomba  ikiwezekana  uchague  hapa  watano  sote twaheshimiana  na twaaminiana 
kwa hivyo  yoyote  atakaye  tajwa  katika  hii Kamati  tutamu unga  mkono Mheshimiwa spika  na 
October 6 , 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      117 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 kazi ianze  hata kesho kwa sababu  hili jambo  ni swala  nyeti kabisa aliwezi  kungoja  mpaka wiki 
ijayo a hsante . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwabashiri I respect what you have s aid but I 
have already ruled and  I said the names would be brought in this H ouse next week Tuesday 
afternoon and then i t will be communicated to this H ouse. 
       Whoever who will be in that C ommittee ; all the Members will get to know the M embers in 
this Ad hoc C ommittee and Hon. Mwabashir i in a matter of interest, you could have requested us 
and to the people concerned t o at least include you in that C ommittee but I assume you have 
requested that they include me I think they have taken that request and…  yes C lerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members  the H ouse stands adjourned till Tuesday 2:30pm in the afternoon.  
The House rose at 3.20pm.  
 
 
 