December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
 OFFICIAL REPORT   
 
Wednesday, 4th December, 2019  
The House met at 10: 50a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
STATEMENTS  
DATE OF THE OP ENING OF SHIKA ADABU  HEALTH FACILITY  
 
Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh , Chairperson Committee on Health Services. Please respond 
to this Statement ? 
 
Hon. K ibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker on behalf of the 
Committee on Health Services today we are  unable to respond to the Statement that was raised 
by my colle ague from Shika  Adabu Hon. Speaker on the date of the opening  of Shika  Adabu 
Health facility , so I think we will be able to facilitate the response after the long recess. Thank 
you Hon. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you Hon. Kibwana Swaleh. Yes  Clerk next Order?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa , the Leader of Majority Party is not around. Y es Hon.  Murfad?  
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Are you the De puty Leader of Majority Party?  
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : No Mr. Speaker  I just wanted to confirm to this House that the 
Majority Leader just called and requested me to stand for him Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker…  
 

December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 (Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes he told  you to… ? 
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir the Majority call ed me and told me to represent 
him in this House , he was waiting for the communication from the office of the Gov ernor which 
he has not receive d yet. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire ? 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker am just here to remind every Member 
that whenever we f orget to abide with the rules and regulations of this House and the law 
requires that whenever you are stepping in for any Hon. Member who is away on offi cial duty 
you just have to submit a written document e ither to the Speaker or to the C lerks . So am just here 
to confirm whether such ha s been done. t hank Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : That is under which Standing Order?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speake r not all laws are in the Standing Orders . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No but we are guided by our Standing Order s in this House , 
so am sure .  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker if it pleases you for the Hon. Amur to go on its well and good 
but as I said the other day we should have all the references . Hon. Speaker when other Member s 
step in for other Members the la tter d o confirm such communication is passed , when the other 
Members do so they get favors ! Just if it pleases you Hon. Speaker let him go on . 
 
The Speak er (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Bwire it is there in our Standing Order I think its 
41 (c) or something so that i s why I was asking you , I thought…  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Yes Hon. Amur , so did the Leader of Majority write for you the S tatement because I 
think as far  as I know we did agree that all the S tatement s should be in written . 
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker I did not receive any written communication but he 
just call ed me that  is why I thought its good for me to say it in the Assembly so that my 
colle ague does not feel that I did not do what he had requested…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But again it  is not like that Hon. Amur ; what if the Hon. 
Majority Leader comes here and say s that the S tatement response which he gave is not what he 
wanted to give to the House ! So that  is why I was asking you if you have even a written 
Statement from his office . 
December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir I just received a call .  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So he told you what ...To respond through telephone 
conversation ?! 
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : I told hi m that there  is an issue that he is  supposed to be reporting 
today and he told me that am sorry I have not receive d any communication so if you can say it on 
my behalf you can respond on my behalf that I have  not received the commu nication from His 
Excellency the Governors’ office.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur. Hon. Members I think Hon. Hamisi 
Musa the Majority Leader is not around so am going to refer this matter back  to the House 
Business so that they  can put it  for next business. Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
Hon. Shebe Athuman:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity , because I 
was the one who raise d this statement  request . I think now it is about three months ago and the  
study was conducted in conjunction  with the University of Nairobi and the County Government 
of Mombasa and the taxpayer money was used during this report ; unfortunately Mr. Speaker up 
to now the report has not been tabled in this Honourable  House and with your indulgence  of 
course…  
 
(Interrupti on) 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Shebe when you say taxpayer 's money has been used , 
are you sure about that?  
 
Hon. Shebe Ath man:  Yes Mr. Speaker , the C ounty government of Mombasa and the 
University of Nairobi ; that is why if the Leader of Majority has found it difficult to table that 
report I wish you can give me that opportunity because I have this issue of SGR it has really 
affected the County of Mombasa and I have all the necessary evidence and the report but because 
we need to follow the due process  of the law it is not upon me to table that  report but if you 
allow through your House I can always arrange and come and table that report. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker because that is an  issue with great  emergency and today is December, come January, 
February th e entire County of Mombasa is going to be a standstill because there i s a mass exodus 
of people from Mombasa to up country because of the loss of employment caused by this SGR 
thing . So I wish Mr. Speaker with your permission if you could allow me to arran ge myself and 
come up with a proper report concerning the same. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But again Hon. Shebe you are the one who asked for this 
report, and then you are the one who wants to bring the report in to this House .  
 
Hon. Shebe Ath man : Mr. Speaker am the one who asked for this report but  i have 
waited for three months. Y ou have been postponing this and you know it;  you have given them a 
benefit of doubt but it seems we are waiting forever so it  is upon me now to come bec ause am 
very passionate on this issue as it has affected my constituency and am talking on behalf of the 
people of Mombasa and Coast at large . 
December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 So Mr. Speaker the report is there but why is it difficult to be tabled in the Assembly ?! I 
wonder why is it diff icult for the Leader of Majority to table that report in the Assembly, we are 
responsible Mr. Speaker to our electorate and they are asking very har d questions about issues of 
SGR! P eople are losing job s Mr. Speaker and you know it so I don’t think it will  be a conflict of 
interest in any way the way you are putting it,  but am very much affected by this issue … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So all…  
 
Hon. Shebe Athuman:  So something must be done quickly . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So all this t ime you had the report with you.  
 
Hon. Shebe Ath man:  Yeah. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So then why did you have to b ring the S tatement . 
 
Hon. Shebe Ath man:  Because Mr. Speaker with all due respect there  is a procedure in 
this House and the Leader of Majori ty is the one who is supposed to take that report from the 
Governors’ office an d table it here in the Assembly. M ine was just to make sure I see  the report 
is it really at per ? And if it’s a different report I will be in a position to stand and say this is  not 
the fact, that  is why am saying Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . First allow me to remind my fellow Hon. 
Members that whene ver a Speaker makes a ruling it  marks the end of the debate , one;  two you 
have open ed up a debate despite you giving a ruling or directive you have allowed  the Hon. 
Member to air out his views.   
Hon. Speaker he has  just confirm ed that indeed he has a report but he brought a statement 
here asking for a response and he alre ady has a response ! So I don’t know whether Hon. Speaker 
there  is any need of him opening a debate as he already has a report that h e intended to ... so I 
think we shall just call it a day since he has a report ..., no its my view.      
   
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon Nyiro . 
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker thank you for the opportunity to make my contribution but 
firstly allow me to recognise my friend who is visiting me from Europe , my sister who is a lso 
coming to do a research in Marine B iology.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Mr. Speaker I want to assist my Hon. Member from Jomvu Kuu ; indeed it is the 
responsibility of the  government to make official rel ease of the report because the research was 
done by the University of Nairobi and the County government of Mombasa . 
December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  So it was an official research but whenever you need the report maybe you can get it 
from the researchers but the official person to do the communication is the County government 
of Mombasa because they were doing a research to  establish the effects of SGR. S o it was good 
for the information that the Hon . Member requires from this House because that is when the 
message or the report will be official bec ause it has been signed by the G overno r, it has been 
received by the C lerk of this Assembly and even by you Mr. Speaker . Therefore  the report only 
becomes official if it passes through th e relevant offices and not the K angar oo offices from the 
village ; so he is right to demand it from here because this is where the report was supposed to be 
tabled and then from ther e it becomes official so he is right to demand the report from this House 
Mr. Speaker, thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro.  Yes Hon. Shebe.  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Mr. Speaker I think this is going to be my last contribution about 
this issue and you have pretty much observed the issue which really affects mwananchi  in my 
area of jurisdiction Jomvu Kuu . I have been raising very p ertinent issues about my people  but 
really the response is not encouraging at all so am within  my right to as k; I need an o fficial 
communication from the Leader of M ajority, the report is there but it will be not procedur al to 
bring a report which the Leader  of M ajority is supposed to table in this Assembly . So this shows 
the level  of incompetence in  our leaders hip here in the Assembly , especially the leadership  so if 
am not allowed or you denied the C oasterian to know about this report Mr. Speaker, and it is in 
the public domain it will be very unfortunate.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Amur . 
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker with all due respect to my colleague , my learned 
friend if somebody it is the Majority L eader  who he should  address and  not all the M embers to 
be incompetent whereby he knows it is only one person that he is directing  the issue to ! It is not 
right to make all the M embers incompetent yet it is only the person who did not act as his 
demands Mr. Speaker. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Shebe . 
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Mr. Speak er I totally agree w ith my Hon. M ember.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you can withdraw that.  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Mr. Speaker I withdraw that but my Leader of M ajority 
specifically I have been raising this issue and it’s been a while but I think I need your indulgence 
in this issue because it’s really frustrating me , do something about it because I have been 
informed by my people there who are doing business in the issue of SGR .  
 Hon. Speaker I have all the eviden ce because they are telling me by February next year 
there w ill be a total me ss of business and these people  are the ones who are helping us through 
CSR helping our community . 
December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  So I want to know the Hon. Leader of M ajority if he is incapable of doing this tabling  of 
this report to give us the guidance because we ca nnot wait forever as our people are suffering. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon . Mwamwiri . 
  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N aomba kutaarifu J umba hili 
hali kadha lika kumtaarifu M heshimiwa wa Jo mvu K uu ya kwamba ripoti anayo izungumzia 
haina ufungamano na J umba hili , jambo la kwanza ; jambo la pili Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna 
kanuni wala taratibu ya ripoti hiyo kuletwa hapa na ku wekwa katika meza yetu kwa sababu 
kwanza sio sisi tuliotoa amri ya ute kelezaji w a uchunguzi wa swala lile . Pili ingek uwa jukumu la 
Mheshimiwa kuleta hoja kuliomba B unge hili kwa ridhaa ya Kiti chako kuunda K amati maalum 
kwenda kulichunguza hili na kulet a taarifa katika Jumba hili lakini taarifa ile M heshimiwa Spika 
haina ufungamano na  Jumba hili haituhusu ndewe wala sikio . 
 Kwa hivyo kuitaka kuileta hapa tutakuwa tunakengeuka kanuni na taratibu na hatuna 
fungamano , wala ruhusa , wala nguvu za kuijadili wala kuitolea maamuzi Mheshim iwa Spika . 
Hivyo basi  ni mwafaka angeleta hoja akaom ba K iti chako na ridhaa ya B unge hili kuundwe jopo 
maalum kwenda fanya uchunguzi wao na kutuletea taarifa . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Mwamwiri. Y es Hon . Kibwana . 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker . I don’t know what influence my 
brother has since he is sitting with the Chair of F inance on the issue Hon. Speaker , you cannot 
rubbish what this Honourable  House has found time to talk about it . Hon. Speaker I think let  us 
be practical in general issues; this is  a serious issue that even the C ounty itself is concerned 
about , even the G overnor previously complained about the SGR so I think this is a place where 
Members who have been electe d and nominated by the people  come and raise their issues so 
someone cannot ju st raise rubbish . I think you are at the right place to guide us and nobody 
should dictate you to guide you on what to rule out on this issue , so I think my friend is good in 
Swahili, I think it’s very unfair , thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Ho n. Moha med Hatimy . 
 
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Sp ika nasimama 
kuunga mkono maneno ya Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri aliozungumza ; ripoti iko chini ya Kanuni za 
Bunge  180 na inaeleza vizuri juu ya nani anaeleta ripoti na kitu kinazungum zwa ndani ya 
Nyumba hii . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Kibwana nafikiri kidogo umepotea hapo, n afikiri angalia 
sheria vizuri upate kujua ripoti inazungumzia juu ya nini.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon. Kibwana Swal eh. 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : In fact  today is a  historical day for us to see Hon. Hatimy siding 
with Hon. Mwamwiri ... 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  I think we should investigate otherwise I don’t know how long it will remain in their 
marriage but I hope very soon, thank you.  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): I think the BB I is working now ... 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 I hope the brown envelope will not move around  in this House ... 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 Yes. Hon. Nzai . 
 
 Hon. Nzai: Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving  me this chance to comment on the issue of 
SGR . It is true indeed that it’s something that affects the lives of people especially in Mombasa 
but Hon. Speaker I want to advice my fellow  Members  that once the train has left the station we 
need to look for other ways and means on reaching our destinations . I think as much as we are 
moving from analog ue to digital it’s high time people  realise some other avenues whereby to 
make their ends meet , there is no way Mr. Speaker we shall fight back to stop that train from 
continuing its journey so it’s a pity that my fellow colleague  from Jomvu is the one who is 
mostly affected because of the big companies which are going to transfer their businesses but I 
want to encourage you m y colleague  that as these opportunities leave more green  pastures will 
be back to your W ards and your people wi ll be okay.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Nzai, you are on a point of information?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker point of information I want to infor m this House that whatever 
the Member from Jomvu K uu is demanding is a rep ort which was commissioned by the 
Governor after the research , we just want that report to be tabled whatever the contents are we 
don’t care.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Hon. Members I think you are just getting it 
wrong , the issue is very clea r Hon. Shebe asked for the statement , he asked for the statement of 
the report comm issioned by his Excellency the Governor and the Majority L eader is not here to 
give the statement . So Hon. Shebe you just stood up and said you don’t need the report anymore  
you have the report ; I think that’s  what you s aid that if the Hon. Leader of M ajority is taking 
long to bring the report you have the report with you !  
 So I think the best way  is if you have the report Hon. S hebe take the rep ort and compile 
the report an d bring it as a M otion then we compile the report and bring it to the House . If you 
think there are issues wh ere this House can pass throug h that report so bring it as a M otion or 
you can sit down with the C lerks and see what  is the best way to bring it to  this House , so is that 
okay Hon. Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Yes it’s very much okay Hon. Speaker.  
December 4 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         117 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this R eport can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes C lerk, next order.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker not on the same matter , kindly there is an observat ion , not 
on this matter . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Which observation on what?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  I have come  to observe that we don’t have Deputy L eader of  Majority so 
in case o f the absence  of the Majority L eader we won’t  be able to get the statements or r ather the 
responses that we are supposed to get, that is my only observation.  So the earlier we get the 
Deputy Leader of M ajority the better.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But again the Deputy Majority L eader it is not me it is your 
party which means you ca n write to your party and ask that.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 And the C hairman of the party is there , so yes C lerk next order ? 
 
(Applause ) 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Wednesday 4th December at 2:30p .m. 
 
The House rose at 11:18 a.m. 
 
 
 
  
   
    
 