October 11 , 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is  for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tues day, 11th October , 2016  
The House met at 2.46pm . 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. M embers you may  sit down, Yes C lerk. 
COMMUNICATION FR OM THE CHAIR  
       Thank you  Member s, on behalf of the Committee on Youth I have receive d a quarterly 
Report from the department of Youth, Gender and Sports.  
       This R eport is committed to the Committee of this House and also I think Members are 
allowed to comment on this so Members take note. Yes Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir with your permission and the 
permission of this Hon.  House I wish to give a Notice of Motion on the R eport on 
commencement of drainage works in Mkomani Ward in Nyali Constituency.  
 
REPORT ON COMMENCEMENT OF DRAINAGE WORKS IN MKO MANI WARD 
IN NYALI CONSTITUENCY  
(Hon. Amir T hoya gave  a Notice of M otion)  
       Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to give a Notice of Motion of the following Motion:  
       That t his House adopts the Report on commencement of drainage w orks in Mkomani 
Ward in Nyali Constituency. Thank you.   
(Hon. Thoya ended reading Notice of Motion)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
REPORT ON DANGEROUS OPEN DRAIN IN MWAGOSI IN AIRPORT WARD  
(Hon. Amir Thoya moved the M otion)  
       Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to move a Motion on Dangerous Open 
Drain in Mwagosi in Airport Ward  in Changamwe Constituency.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Was th e report tabled?  
       Hon. Thoya:  The R eport was tabled last week Tuesday and I believe all  the Members 
were supplied the R eport . 
       So today is just to read the M otion and to be discussed before the floor of this House.      
       Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Amir Thoya for moving this 
Motion, yes any seconder?  
       Hon. Thoya:  I request Hon.  Kondo to second the M otion.  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  I second the Motion . 
October 11 , 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is  for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 (Question proposed)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It has been seconded I now propose that 
this House adopt a report on dangerous open d rain in Mwagosi in Airport Ward . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
       Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika R ipoti ambayo 
nimeomba Nyumba iweze kulijadili leo ni Ripoti ambayo ililetwa kulingana na taarifa 
ambayo ilioletwa hapa ambayo iliweza kuulizwa na  Mheshimiwa Mary Akinyi katika Bunge 
hili.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika katika eneo hili la Wodi ya Mombasa Airport kuna mtaro wa maji 
ambao uliweza kuchimbwa na kazi ile iliweza kufanywa kupitia kwa mwanakandarasi wa 
Kaunti ya Mombasa . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika  tuliweza kuwa na mkutano na Engineer kutaka kujua itachukua muda 
gani? K wa kazi ile kuweza kukamilika kwa sababu kwa hivi sasa mtaro ule uko wazi kama 
vile Mheshimiwa alivyouliza swali na alikuwa anahofia mtaro ule utaweza kuhangaisha 
maisha ya watoto na wazazi wa eneo la Mwagosi . 
       Lakini Mhe shimiwa Spika baada ya kumuita Engineer  na kujadiliana na yeye alituambia 
kwamba kazi ile inaendelea na kulingana na mwanakandarasi na ile kazi aliyopatia ni 
kwamba punde tu itakapokamilika mtaro ule utaweza kufu nikwa na utakuwa hauna hatari 
tena kwa wakaazi wa eneo la Airport . 
       Lakini ni kweli ya kwamba m taro ule hivi sasa uko wazi na Engineer  ametuelezea vizuri 
kwa sababu ya changamoto ambazo zimekumba idara ya uchukuzi na ni hali ambayo 
imefanya wasiweze kukamilisha jambo hili lakini naomba Bunge hili na jambo hili liweze 
kuzungumzwa ili maisha ya wakaazi wa Mwagosi maisha yao yasiweze kuhatarishwa na 
mtaro ambao hivi sasa bado uko wazi kwa sababu ya kandarasi inayoendelea. A hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Madundo . 
       Hon. Madundo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika,  kwa ku nipatia hii fursa ni muhimu sana 
hii hoja ambayo iko hapa kwa sababu ni muhimu hiyo kazi ifanyike haraka ili wakati wa  
mvua uki fika tusije ten a sumbua na mvua ikinyesha italeta matatizo zaidi kuliko mahali 
imefikia . 
       Kwa hivyo ni muhimu Engineer awe anachunguza sana na mara kwa mara awe anapitia 
hiyo kazi ifanyike ; hiyo ndio kazi amb ayo sisi imetuleta hapa katika B unge hili ili wana nchi 
waishi maisha mazuri ya kuwa hakuna matatiz o ambayo yatakuwa katika mtaro huo . 
       Kwa hivyo mimi yangu ni kuunga mkono na pia naomba wen zangu waheshimiwa pia 
wawe wana weza kufanya hivyo.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah R ashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili Makarani?  
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika,  mimi nasikitika sana Kamati ikiwa 
imefan ya kazi ya ke na imejieleza wazi ndani ya R ipoti yake  kuwa ilimuita Engineer  peke 
yake ilivyo ndani ya kata y a Airport . 
October 11 , 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is  for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3        Ilikuwa  ni jukumu la K amati kuenda sehemu zile kuweza kuta thmini hatari iliyoko pale ; 
nashangaa M wenyekiti anat uambia ya kwamba kulikuwa na ta bu ya fedha ambapo maneno 
hayo hayako ndani ya Ripoti .  
       Mheshimiwa S pika mimi naomba na naomba mwenye Ripoti hii a weze kuomba Bunge 
kama alivyosema. .. 
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshim iwa Fadhili Makarani you are a 
Member of this C ommittee and you signed so it is not possible for you to go against it, you 
are supposed to op pose th e recommendation of the Report in the C ommitt ee but not on the 
floor of the H ouse, you confirmed with  the Committee that you should have the R eport so 
you cannot go against in which you are a signatory.  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Tulikuwa kwa ku adopt  hiyo Ripot i… 
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : There  were no reservations from any 
Member.  
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Ilikuwa ni Kamati…  
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Madam Nyamvula . 
       Hon.  (Mrs .) Nyamvula:  Hon.  Speaker I first want to thank you for being so alert , I was 
just about to bring this on e up because according to this R eport the Hon.  Member who I have 
a lot of respect he is the one who actually proposed after the discussion was brought so I am 
just wondering this R eport . 
      According to what we are being told the C ommittee sat after the observation ; sorry in the 
Report Mr. Speaker the observations and findings are so shallow I do not understand what we 
are looking at Mr. Speaker it is  too shallow , ‘2.1: The ongoing works at M wagosi will be 
complete’ , what will be complete the whole works or parts . 
       So a few details  would have actually made this Report a R eport as it is it leaves one with 
a lot of questions as to what probably com pletion will be and then I co uld have wanted to see 
in this R eport indicating as to when this work will be finished because we are being told it is 
incomplete , when will it be done because we are expecting the short rains Mr. Speaker and it 
is to our wish that the Mombasa people are served this particular lot is completed before the 
short rains.  
       Mr. Speaker I am finding this R eport a bit shallow and it should have some more meat on 
it but looking at what the Hon.  I respect Fadhili wha t he was saying seems like the 
Committee itself did not sit and look at it and anyway the other thing the Report is not signed . 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick Muriuki?  
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. S peaker, as  a Member of thi s Committee , I think that 
Hon.  Fadhili was there, Mr. Speaker we resolved …(Inaudible )....he emphasized the dangers 
…(inaudible )…the C ommittee emphasized because of the people of Mombasa Mr. Speaker it 
is up to the Implementation Committee t o see tha t …(Inaudible )… 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Amur.  
October 11 , 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is  for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4        Hon. Amur: Mheshimiwa Spika when you are given a job because … (Inaudible )…the 
climatic conditions I want to agree with the contractor the delay …(Inaudible )... he has asked 
for certain material to arrive so that he can use it in that area so we should also consider that 
(Inaudible )….  
       The contactor has requested , has told us that he is expecting … (Inaudible )....We in the 
House have experience … (Inaudible )…our E ngineers went , surveyed and agreed 
(Inaudible )…  
       I want to agree with the contractor if you want a good job to be done Mr. Speaker let us 
be patient , let us give him the full support … (Inaudible )….but as it is we want this contactor 
to be give n more time so th at they can do what is required . Thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I see the debate has been 
exhausted because nobody is up, so that means the debate has been exhausted, M embers am 
left with no other optio n to let the mover of the Motion to reply the M otion .  
       Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, nachukua fur sa hii kuweza kuwashukuru 
Waheshimiwa ambao wameweza kupitia swala hili na kuweza kuona umuhimu kwa kazi hii 
kwa wakaazi wa k azi wa eneo la  Airport kwamba iwapo itaweza kukamilika kwa mda ambao 
unafaa basi wakaazi wa A irport watakuwa katika afueni kwa sababu yale maji ambayo 
yamekuwa yakiwasumbua yata weza kuelekezwa katika mtaro huu ili ihakikishe ya kwamba  
maeneo yale yanakuwa sawa.  
       La pili  Mheshimiwa S pika nataka tena kuwashukuru kwa sababu contractor  endapo 
ataachaliwa tu aweze ku fanya kazi ya kiholela itamaanisha kwamba wakaazi wa Airport pesa 
yao imetumika vibaya lakini nashukuru ya kwamba waheshimiwa wameona ….(Technical 
hitch ). 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you, yes Hon. Hatimy .  
       Hon. Moham ed Hatimy : Understanding order 79 , there is no quorum . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay, which Standing O rder is that?  
       Hon. Moham ed Hatimy : Am using the new Standing Order. 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk, confirm if there is no 
quorum . 
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
       Can the bell be rang?  
(Sergeant At Arms rung bell)  
       Yes Clerk can you ascertain  if there is no quorum . 
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
       Members I propose a question . 
       Yes Hon. Patrick Si minyu, what is it ? 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker there is an issue that was brought up , the issue of Standing 
Order, just a few minutes ago a Member said he has a new Standing Order and we are 
running th e House with the other Standing Order. 
       If there is a new Standing Order Members should be provided with it Mr. Speaker , thank 
you. 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Amur what is it . 
October 11 , 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is  for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5        Hon. Amur : Mr. S peaker introduction of the new Standing Orders were brought in this 
House and they were adopted by this House. 
       Mr. Speaker s o the issue of Member s not knowing that we have new Standing Orders is 
not a rising issue ; Standing Orders were taken through the Members it was a certain the  
changes were done and all the Members were taken through I can even remember  some 
members, we had expertise and they took us thro ugh and we had agreed on those Standing 
Orders .  
       Mr. Speaker, it is nothing new the adoption of the new Standing Order were done in this 
House, it's only that Members have not collected thei r copies , thank you . 
       Hon. (Ms .) Prischillah  Mumba : Mr. Speaker I just wonder why from the first place we 
are discussing about Standing Orders ; we have important issues with due we should follow 
what is inside here the matter of Standing  Order is not in the Order Paper.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Siminyu .  
       Hon. Siminyu: It concerns  because we are p art and parcel of it, and as a Member.. . 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika, mwenye ameleta hiyo Motion  there are 
no prayers tabled , hatuwezi kuijadili hapa so kupitia kiti chako naomba tuendel ee na agenda  
yetu mheshimiwa Spika. 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Well Thank you Hon . Simi nyu I have 
heard your concern, Standing Orders is part and parcel of this House , this House cannot go 
without Standing Orders so ....(Inaudible)  
(Applause ) 
       So Members as earlier said i was  supposed to give names of the Members of Mombasa  
Youth Assembly  at the public gallery.  
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid)  read names of Mombasa Youth Assembly)  
       Yes Hon.  Fadhili what is it ? 
       Hon. Mwalimu: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, niko na Privilege  Motion  ambayo kwa 
ruhusa yako ningeomba niilete kesho tukijua kuwa tarehe 20 itakuwa siku ya alhamisi .... 
       Mheshimiwa Spika itak ua kulingana na ratiba yetu ya Kenya ni Mashuja a day nilikua 
naomba tulete Motion  kikao cha siku ya tarehe ishirini iweze kuletwa mbele, a hsante . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You want to bring it tomorrow . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Yes. 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMEN T 
       Members there being no other busines s this House adjourned until tomorrow morning.  
The House rose at 3.22pm.  
 
 