December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 4th December, 2019  
  The House met at 2:46p.m.  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes C lerk?  
PAPERS   
REPORT ON PUBLIC PART ICIPATION OF THE MOM BASA COUNTY FINANCE BILL, 2019   
Yes, Chairman Budget and Appropriations. Please lay the P aper.  
(Paper laid)  
  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish to lay out the 
public partic ipation of the County Finance Bill, 2019 that this  House a dopts the Report on public 
participation of the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2019 laid on the table on 4th December 
2019…  
(Interruption)  
   The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy just the Pa per on the floor of the 
House.  
(Paper laid)  
   Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON HEALTH HON . KIBWANA SWALEH ON 
TRANSFER OF HEALTH OF FICERS AT SUB-COUNTY LEVEL  
  Chairperson Committee  on Health Services?   
  Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker .  

December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2     Mr. Speaker I want to confirm to this Hon ourable  House that I am unable to produce the 
response because we were promised  that by 3rd they will have given us the response . So I will 
ask my colleague and also the Honourab le House to give me more time until we came back from 
recess Hon. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I can see there is no reaction so we will wait for the 
response when we resume after recess. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON  PUBLIC PARTI CIPATION OF THE MOMBASA COUNTY FINANC E BILL , 2019   
  Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations?  
  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Than k you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker…  
(Interruption)  
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy be audible.  
  Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Sorry Mr. Speaker.  
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone , be audible . 
  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish  to move the 
following Motion that this House adopt s the Report of Public Participatio n of the Mombasa 
County Finance Bill, 2019  laid on the table on 4th December , 2019. Mr. Speaker I beg to move. 
Thank you.  
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I request Hon. Kibwana Swaleh to second  the 
Motion.  
  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya:  I second.  
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a question that the 
Motion on adoption of Report on Public Participation of Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2019  be 
debated in this Honourable  House.  
(Question proposed  and agreed  to) 
  Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri  Waheshimiwa  wote wako na Ripoti 
wanaweza kui angalia na kama wako na jambo lolote tuzungumzie hapa ili tuweze kuendelea na 
hili zoezi la Fina nce Bill . Mheshimiwa Spika tuliweza kufanya public participation  na kuna 
sehemu ambazo kulifanyika zoezi hilo lakini kuna sehemu nyingine ambazo hazikuweza 
kufanyika, attendance ilikuwa very poor  lakini tuliweza ku soma  zile ripoti ambazo tumezipata, 
Memora ndum s na kwenye Ripoti tumetaja vitu vyote hapa ndani.  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Kwa hivyo kila kitu kimo ndani ya hii Ripoti. Naomba Nyumba hii tupitishe hii Ripoti ili 
tuweze kuendelea  kwani kama tunavyojua kuwa kwenye mgao wa pesa kwa Kaunti ya Mombasa 
imekatwa Ks h.1.4B illioni  Mheshimiwa Spika ni sisi lazima tutafute  pesa isipokuwa  ningetaka 
kuhakikishia Nyumba kuwa hatukumshika mwananchi kabisa. Unajua Mheshimiwa Spika kuna 
vitu vile ambavyo, kuna needs na wants ; kwa hivyo zile needs  hatukuzishika , hatukuingia 
sokoni, hatukush ika vile vitu ambavyo vinamshika mwananchi . Tumeshika vile vitu ambavyo 
mwananchi si lazima navyo sana kuvitumia. Hivyo basi Mheshimiwa Spika naomba Nyumba hii 
ipitishe hii Ripoti ili tuweze kuendelea mbele na tuweze kukusanya pesa kwa Kaunti  yetu. 
Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Members , the Motion is on the floor 
of the House not unless the re is no input then we proceed i n putting the question. Yes Hon. 
Athman Mwamwiri?  
  Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa Spika nina 
machach e ya kuchangia lakini kwanza ni mshurutishe Mwenyekiti wa masuala ya Fedha na 
Mipangilio ya kwamba mbeleni akijua sheria imevunjwa atangulize kuomba msamaha au radhi 
ili tusonge mbele.  Mheshimiwa Spika Sehemu 133 ya kanuni za masuala ya fedha ama PFM, 
inanukuu vizuri mipangilio na utekelezaji wa masuala yote yanayohusiana na bajeti au budget 
timelines  na hapa japo wanati wanasema chelewa ufike ingawa ukiukaji wa sheria uko pale pale 
na ingekuwa ni ju kumu langu la kuadhibu, n ingeto a adhabu kali.  
  Mheshimiwa Spika katika Ripoti yao wameangazia mapendekezo ya waja kuhus iana na 
mabadiliko ya ada zilizo kuwa zimewekwa lakini kuna mawili au matatu kwa niaba ya watu 
ninaowakilisha na kile kikao cha maoni ya wananchi nilicho hudhuria  yalipendekezwa ingawa 
kwenye Ripoti yao sijaiona naona yamesalia kama yalivyokuwa yamependekezwa awali. 
Ambayo hii Mheshimiwa Spika itakuwa ni hujuma ya muda wetu tuliotumia kubumburusha 
watu wetu mashinani kuja kusoma na kuchangia yanayowasibu halafu lis iguswe ama 
lisinukuliwe hata moja kupewa uzingativu .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika mbeleni hawatakuwa na ari na sababu ya kuhudhuria vikao vile ikiwa 
maoni yao na mapendekezo yao ni bure na hayana nguvu ama uzingativu wowote katika Gatuzi 
letu. Nikiwa M wakilishi wao nikinyamazia hili  nitakuwa sijatenda haki na najua Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti wa Fedha mw ishowe ataniambia mapendekezo ye yote ni lazima yawe 
yameandikwa, akijua fika muda tulionao sina nafasi wala uwezo wa kuliandika hilo.  Moja 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni sehemu ya 60 katika mpangilio wa ratiba ama sehemu ya 9 ya County 
Cemetries , nambari 59 na 60 katika mapendekezo ya ada za makaburi .  
 Mapendekezo ya kule nilikohudhuria na watu nin aowakilisha  walipendekeza ada iongezwe 
kwa minajili ya Serikali yetu ya Ugatuzi kuokota mapato zaidi.  Hali kadhalika, kulinda ardhi 
kwa sababu M heshimiwa Spika ardhi haipanuki, k adri inavyotumika ndivyo inavyoisha ; kwa 
hivyo kuweka ada ya chini itapeana nguvu hata watu wa nje ya Gatuzi letu kuja kuhifadhi miili 
yao katika maeneo yetu wakati s ehemu zinazidi zikiisha kwendewako .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika itapelekea kama hatuna maziara ya mazishi tuje katika utamaduni wa 
kuchomana kwa  sababu ardhi itakuwa imekwisha; l akini kwa kuongeza ada, ingezuilia watu wa 
Gatuzi za nje kuja kutumia ardhi zetu za Mom basa.  
 Kwa hivyo hili Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa ada ipande kwa mujibu wa kikao nilicho 
hudhuria na mapendekezo ya watu wangu. Mheshimiwa Spika swala lingine nambari 627  katika 
mpangilio  ilikuwa inazungumzia box la Miraa na box la Muguka,  Mheshimiwa tumeona athari 
na changamoto ambazo vijana na jamii ya Mombasa inapitia kupitia utumizi wa masuala haya. 
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Ada iliyoongezwa bado inapeana fursa na uwezo wa yeyote kuweza kutumia masuala ya 
Muguka na mihadarati kwa sababu bado ni chini na itakuwa ikipatikana  kwa bei  nafuu 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa mapendekezo ada katika box la 
Muguka na Miraa ipande zaidi ya hii ambayo Serikali imewe keza…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Member , why are you up?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa nataka kumuelekeza mwenzangu kuwa hatujaishika 
hii stakabadhi , sisi tuko kwenye Ripoti , nafikiri kama uta refer  kwa hii Ripoti maana yake naona 
una refer kwa Bill, hatujafika kwenye Bill. Kwa hio tafadhali  tuko kwenye Ripoti.  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwir i: Mheshimi wa unayonukuu sijayaona katika R ipoti yao na ni 
masuala ambayo walipendekezwa katika kikao nilicho hudhuria na watu wangu na ndio maana 
nagusa Ripoti ya kwamba sijaona labda aniongoze…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwam wiri just refer to your R eport, 625 . 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Page 625 or No.  625?  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Item 625, in the Report 625 and 626 .  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Enhee, nimeona . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Nimeiona, nimeiona ! 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumkumbusha ndugu yangu, mwanzo 
mimi nampa pongezi kwa Likoni ni kuwa ni kwa waliofanya public participation  ikaenda vizuri 
sana…  
(Applause)  
 Na haya maneno anayozungum za angalia kwenye Ripoti ukurasa 3, bullet 13, watu wako 
walizungumza habari ya Muguka na Miraa na imo kwenye Ripoti . Kwa hivyo kwenye public 
participation  Ripoti tumeizungumza hio na tutakuja kuizungumza mbele Mheshimiwa. Ahsante.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Nimeiona kwa sababu ya muda 
nimeipita haraka haraka japo nina macho makubwa lakini nukuu nilokuwa ninaiangazia sikuiona 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hilo Mheshimiwa Spika nipongeze Ka mati kwa mara ya kwanza kwa 
uadilifu wa kuzingatia…  
(Applause)  
 Maoni ya wananchi na kuhakik isha yamenukuliwa barabara kama ilivyokuwa.  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Mheshi miwa Spika mimi ni kiumbe dhaifu  najitambua lakini siku zote nitapongeza panapo  
stahiki na nitakosowa palipo na walakini pasi kuogopa wala kutishwa nyau. Kwa hivyo kwa hili 
Mheshimiwa Spika napongeza Kamati na nauunga mkono.  
(Applause)  
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members, ok ay Hon. Member who is up? 
Yes Hon. Junior Wambua?  
Hon. Wambua: Bwana Spika nim eangalia hapa kwa watu wetu ambao wanauza 
vinywaji Bwana  Mwenyekiti  namba 924 nimeangalia walikuwa wakilalamika wakisema ile mia 
moja ni nyingi , saa hii  Mwenyekiti  naona umewawekea laki mbili sijui kama umeangalia 
tunawasaidia namna gani kwa sababu wengine  hizo ndio biashara zao…  
(Consultations)  
Nazungumzia wale wafanyi  biashara ambao wanafanya kazi kama hizi…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Hon. Members Order!  Yes there  
is a Member who is up . 
Hon. Wambua:  Tulilalamika sisi…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Order! Yes Hon. Member use 
your mic rophone.  
Hon. Murfad  Amur : With all due respect to my brother Hon. Member first he should 
declare his interest because there  is interest in it Mr. Speaker! H e should declare interest Mr. 
Speaker first before he contributes.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire?  
Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker I think it is not procedural for Members to ask a Member who 
is representing his people t o declare interest…  
(Applause)  
I believe Hon. Speaker there  is no any form that Hon. Junior Wambua signed or rather 
filled here indicating that he is running any other business ; he is a representative for the people 
of Chaani and is talking on behalf of th e people of Chaani therefore he should not therefore b e 
asked to declare any interest!  I may be doing that business but this is a House of Order , we are 
here to represent the people my business is not a business of this House. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
The D eputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Junior Wambua?  
(Laughter)  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 Hon. Wambua:  Tumelalamika zaidi wakasema ile pesa ni nyingi…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order!  
Hon. Wambua:  Na tulikuwa ... sorry!  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed. 
Hon. Wambua:  Na Spika tulikuwa tunafikiria wakati huu itaangaliwa zaidi ili 
waonekane kwamba wamesaidika lakini hapa badala ya kwenda chini naona imepigwa mpaka 
elfu mbili na ilhali ilikuwa iko juu sana , ilikuwa na pendekezo kwamba ingeshuka mpaka 50  
iweze kusaidia wananchi wengi ambao wako katika hii biashara.  Nafikiri Bwana Spika 
Mheshimiwa Bwire ameelezea zaidi ni watu wengi ambao wako pale nje ambao hawana nafasi 
ya kuingia hapa ili waweze kuzungumza na kueleza kinaga ubaga kwamba hii itatoa watu wengi 
katika biashara, yatakuwa ni makosa sana watu wakianza kwenda kotini wakisema wanaumizwa 
na tuna wakati hapa mwafaka tunaweza kuifanyia marekebisho ikaweza kusaidia watu wengi 
ambao wanafanya hiyo biashara mjini Mombasa.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwal imu) : Hon. Members I now call upon the Mover of the 
Motion to respond.  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza nataka kupongeza zile sub 
Counties  zilizoweza kufanya public participation  kwa kuweza kufanya public participation  
iliyoleta mazao.  Na pili Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumwambia rafiki yangu , ndugu yangu aliye  
migrate kutoka Kongowea kwenda Changamwe kuwa hakuna malalamiko yoyote tuliyo  receive  
sisi kusema kuwa ile pesa ni kidogo ingekuwa tumepata maandishi tungeyaangalia lakini sisi 
twasema kun yamaza nikukubali.  
Kwa hivyo ile mumenyamaza inamaanisha kuwa mumekubali ile kwa hio  Mheshimiwa 
Spika na pia nataka kumwambia rafiki yangu ambaye leo Kibwana amesema kulikuwa na 
handshake  Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri kuwa malalamiko walioleta wao ya magari kupita kw enye 
cess pia tumeweza kuangalia na pia tukasikiza malalamiko yao, pia tumeweza kuondoa na 
kusema kuwa yakifika cess yatakuwa ni flat rate … 
 
(Applause)  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri kwa mara ya kwanza  sisi kama Kaunti Finance 
Bill ilifanywa na Member s na Non-Members ; tulialika Members  wale Members  walioweza 
kwenda Eldoret kwenda kwa  michezo ya CASA  na wale Members  waliobakia Mombasa 
tuliweza kukaa sote na tukaenda through  hii stakabadhi  tukakubaliana . Mheshimiwa Spika  
tulikuwa karibu Members  24 tulika a na tukaenda through  hii Bill na tukakubaliana sote kuwa 
hivi tulivyofanya ni sawa na tumemaliza na nayo.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru na 
naomba Members  tupelekeni hii R ipoti ili tuweze kwenda kupitisha Bill na tuweze kuokota pesa 
za Kaunti Mheshim iwa Spika. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Silence)  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now stand to put a question that 
the Motion on the report on public participation of Mombasa County Finance Bi ll, 2019 be 
adopted in this Honourable  House . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
Yes C lerk?  
BILL  
MOMBASA COUNTY FINAN CE BILL, 2019  
Yes Hon. Moham ed Hatimy?  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker , Mombasa County 
Finance Bill, 2019 be now read a Second Time and I request your Chair Mr. Speaker that this 
House to dissolve to Committee of Whole House. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Silence)  
MOMBASA COUNTY FINANC E BILL , 2019  
SECOND READING  
(The Clerk read the Bill for the second time)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members as per the request of the 
Chairman Finance and I can see there  is no reaction on the Second Reading so the House moves 
to the Committee of the Whole House . 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
Order of the C ommittee read  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) e xited the Chair)  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
 (The Temporary Speaker (H on. Bwire) in the Chair ) 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members welcome to the Whole  House 
Committee. Yes Hon. Mohamed Moham ed Hatimy?  
(Silence)  
Kindly Mheshimiwa  use your mic rophone.  Serjeant-At-Arms?   
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you  Mr. Chair.  Mr. Chair I wi sh to give the following 
Notice;  notice is hereby given that the Chairman, Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriation intends to move the following amendments in respect to the Mombasa County 
Finance Bill, (No. 4) of 2019 at t he Committee stage on Wednesday 4th December, 2019.   
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Mr. Chair (1). Clause 15 of the Bill is hereby amended by including the following after 
the full stop…  
 
(Interruption)  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Hati my just a moment I consult the C lerk, just a 
moment please…  
(Consultations ) 
Hon. Members we were consulting and we h ave arrived on a solution. Yes C lerk?  
(The Clerk read Clause 2 of the Momb asa County Finance Bill, 2019, Clause 3, Clause 
4, Clause 5, Clause 6, Clause 7, Clause 8, C lause 9 ) 
Hon. Membe rs I now propose the question that C lause 3 to Clause 9 be part of the Bill . 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
I now put ..., any concern from any Member before I put a question? Members seem to be 
in agreement ! Allow me now to put a question that Clause 3 to Clause 9 be part of this Bill . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
Yes Clerk?  
(The Clerk read Part 3, Clause 10, C lause 11 ) 
Hon. Members I now propose…  
(Silence)  
I now propose a question that Clause 10 to C lause 11 be part of the Bill . 
(Question proposed and a greed to)  
Any input? Any reaction  Hon. Members? Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mwenyekiti.  Mwenyekiti sehemu ya 10 (1) i nasema 
malipo yote ya serikali G atuzi yatalipwa moja kwa moja kupitia benki , hali kadhalika kupitia 
njia ya kielektro niki. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tukizingatia ya kwamba kuna mazingira mengine 
ya kulipa hayapo moja kwa moja kiukaribu na masuala ya benki wala malipo ya kielektroniki na 
kama tumepiga marufuku suala la kulipa pesa ya moja kwa moja naona hii itakuwa ni fursa y a 
ugatuzi kupoteza baadhi ya pesa . Hali kadhalika kufungua mazingira ya ufisadi kwa sababu 
kama mtu hana pesa kwa simu atajitetea kwa kile alicho nacho na kwa ofisa mwenye atapokea 
hakitafika katika akaunti ya serikali .  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, angalau ile fursa iko ya kulipia na kwa kupata risiti rasmi 
kuashiria kwamba malipo fulani yamefanyika bado ingekuwa ni fursa kwetu tungeongeza pesa 
lakini kwa hizi njia mbili pekee yake kwa mtu akipatikana  pengine  katika suala la off load  
anashusha na hana pesa kwa s imu na hawezi enda mpaka cess, hawezi enda  mpaka benki 
atajitetea.  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 Hii itafungua fursa ya kupoteza pesa hali kadhalika kufungua njia za ufisadi lakini tukiwa 
na vitabu rasmi vya risiti hata wakipokea cash lakini imenukuliwa bado ni mchango na ni faida 
kwetu kama G atuzi, huo ndio mchango wangu Bwana Mwenyekiti. Ahsante.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri.  
The reaction from the Committee concerned ; the Chairperson, Hon. Member s who are 
the Committee Members?  Hon. Kibwana you happen to be a Member of Finance, are you aware 
of the concern raised by Hon. Mwamwiri? Can you kindly come up again Hon. Mwamwiri? 
Hon. Mwamwiri , I said can you kindly come up again . 
(Silence)  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Chair . I think I just want to inform my colle ague 
who is a good contributor one thing that we tr y to avoid i think C hair you should also give me an 
ear. 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Bwire) : Just go on Honourable.  
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:   I want you to capture what am replying back. The Chair , i think 
i just appreciate what my colleague has contributed but i want to inform him that the world is 
changing and we are trying to avoid the issue of corruption . Hon. Chair , why we define that it 
has shown us that the increase of collection through electronic ... the Mpesa, when it comes to 
oversight role it is also easy for us in terms of follow up . So i think Honourable  there are very 
few people currently ... even the social support funds  that the national government  gives to the 
elderly  is disbursed through that s ystem Hon. Chair , so i think this is a method that has been 
derived  so as  to reduce ... as much as we cannot eliminate corruption but this one has really 
worked out for those people who ha ve been getting the cash because it is easy  for the money to 
be lost when it comes to cash especially when it is bulky money . So i think through this process i 
hope every Kenyan around who is in business has a phone which is easy for him or her to use , 
also using the bank i think is the safe way Hon. Chair, i think that is what i can say.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. A ny other input or rather reaction?  Hon 
Members now allow me to put a question that; C lause 9, 10, 11 be part of this Bill . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes Clerk?  
(The Clerk read Clause 12, Claus e 13)  
 Hon. Members I propose the q uestion that Clause 12 to 13 be part of this Bill.  
 Any reaction? Input? I t means we are in agreement , i now put a question Hon. Members 
that C lause 12 to 13 be part of this Bill.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes Clerk.  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 (The Clerk read Clause 14,15, 16) 
 Hon. Members i need you to be alert so that you capture everything that is happening. 
Hon. Members allow me to propose that Clause 14,15, 16 be part of this Bill . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Any reaction? Any input? A ny amendment Hon. Chairman? Hon. Ch airman Hatimy any 
amendment on C lause 14, 15 and 16?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Clause 15 of the Bill is hereby amended by including the 
following after the full stop and jumping a line provided that the fees charges levy and pe nalties 
charged and applicable to the Mombasa County Department of Health S ervices for the year 
2018 -2019 shall be valid and continue to apply and be payable until otherwise amended, thank 
you Mr. Chair.  
 The Chairperson (Hon. Bwire) : Who is your seconder Hon. Member?  
(Hon. Kibwana Swaleh seconded  by bowing)  
 Thank you.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Maybe i explain to Members. T his is a schedule, Mheshimiwa 
hii ni  schedule ambayo ukiangalia huoni vitu vy a health ndani hapa kwa sababu hichi kitabu 
kilikuwa ni kikubw a sana na kusema kuingia gharama ya ku chapisha  na hakuna mabadiliko 
yoyote yaliyofanyika 2018 -2019  tunasema schedule  ile ya health  inabakia vile vile ndipo tunaleta 
hii amendment kuiweka ndani ya  hii, kuwa itakuwa inaendelea watu kuchajiwa kwa mujibu wa 
ile 2018 -2019  kwa sababu tusipoiweka Mheshimiwa itaonekana ile 2018 - 2019  imekuwa 
repea lled alafu watu watakataa kulipa pesa . Kwa hivyo tumeitowa kwenye 2018 -2019  tumeileta 
kwenye 2019 -2020 . Ahsante Bwana  Mwenyekiti . 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you.  Any reaction?  
(Silence)  
  I now put a q uestion Hon. Members that Clause 15 be part of this Bill, as amended . 
(Question p ut and agreed to)  
 Yes Clerk?  
(The Clerk read the Schedule)  
 Hon. Chairman .  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Chair. Kuendelea kweny e notice  niliyopeana 
number 2 that the entire schedule fees charges  and penalties from the County D epartment of 
Health Services be inserted at the end appended at the end of the Mombasa Health Act , 2018.  
Tunajaribu Chair  nikielezea Members kuwa mwakani Mun gu akipenda tunataka kutowa tusiwe 
tena na hii kitabu cha Finance Bill  na kurasa  zote hizi .  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Mheshimiwa Chairman  tunataka kutowa kila kitu kiende kwa Wizara  yake, kama issue  ya 
finance , mambo ya health  iende kwenye Act ya trade , mambo ya trade  iende kwa Act ya Trade , 
mambo ya Wizara  kila Wizara  itakuwa imebeba mambo yake. Hichi kitabu kitakuja kitakuwa ni 
kifupi sana Mheshimiwa Chair  kwa hivyo naomba Members  tukubaliane ili tupate kuendelea 
mbele. Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 The Chairperson (Hon. Bwire) : Thank yo u. Hon. Members i now propose a q uestion 
that Schedule 2 be part of this Bill as amended.  
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Shukran Bwana Mwenyekiti  na pia number tatu  nataka 
kusema the entire Schedule to the Bill i s deleted and replaced to the new schedule annexed 
hereto . Kwa hivyo ile itakuwa deleted  na itaingia kwenye hii mpya Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , 
ahsante . 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy . Hon. Members i now propose 
a question that Schedule n umber 3 be part of this Bill as amended . 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 Hon. Members allow me now to put a Question that Schedule number 2 and 3 be part of 
this Bill as amended, will as many as of the same opinion say Aaayee  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Hon. Members we are done with Whole House C ommittee and we are reverting back to 
plenary.  
(The Chairperson (Hon. Bwire) exited the Chair)  
PLENARY RESUMED  
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) in the Chair ) 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You may be seated Hon. Members. Hon. 
Mohamed Hatimy you kindly report to this House what transpired.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nachukuwa fursa hii kupongeza 
Wanachama  ya kuwa wameweza kupitisha hii Bill bila ya shida yoyote na twaomba  Nyumba 
sasa i pitishe hii Finance Bill  na tusome the third reading . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed. Yes Clerk?  
  
 
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 MOMBASA COUNTY FINANC E BILL , 2019  
THIRD  READING  
(The Clerk read the Bill for the Third Time)  
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) exited the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE CO UNTY ASSEMBLY  
 Yes Chief Whip Hon. Charles Kitula? A Member of the Servi ce Board Hon. Murfad 
Amur.  
 Hon. Murfad  Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir, on behalf of the Chief W hip i wish to move the 
Motion of adjournment of the C ounty Assembly . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Murfad  Amur,  proceed.  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Spea ker Sir.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Move your M otion so that you get a seconder . 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Motion of the adjournment of the Assembly Mr. Speaker Sir.  
That pursuant to the provision of Standing order 25 S ub Section 3, this House adjourn 
until Tuesday 11th February, 2020  in accordance with the County A ssembly calendar Mr. 
Speaker Sir, thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Hon. Swaleh Kibwana.  
 Hon. Kibwana Baya : Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. S peaker i think since we are 
following the calendar i do support.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that the M otion on 
adjournment by Hon. Mur fad Amur be debated in this Honourable  House.  
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 Yes Ho n. Murfad Amur.  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I want to congratulate the Members f or 
accept ing; it is that calendar of this Honourable  House that we are following and therefore every 
year when it comes to end of December normally the House  goes for recess Mr. Speaker so. .. 
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 (Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire.  
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker i also want to have a rest and mix up with the people of Junda 
but i want to do it under clear circumstances . Hon. Speaker  it is just the other day we were told 
that we do not have a calendar and i now wonder on which grounds are we adjourning, have we 
published that calendar? Do we have i t? I remember Hon. Speaker you ordered that the Clerk of 
the County Assembly been asked to bring that calendar that was published contain ing the 
business of this House H on. Speaker. I just want to go home but i would wish to go under clear 
circumstances. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika ile calendar  nililetewa nik aingalia 
nimekubali kwa hivyo Bunge liendelee.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire.  
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker whenever the Chair gives a ruling, it affects the entire House 
so to my knowl edge that calendar was to circulate to all Members because it is a concern to all 
Members. I don’t think Hon. Speaker if it was to be taken to ... I don’t know whether the 
directive ... and i don’t think the di rective was so specific that  Hon. Hatimy was to be served with 
that calendar.  The Hon. Members were concerned and an issue th at was raised Mr. Speaker was  
that which  affects the interest of all of us so can we just also be served with the same calendar so 
that when I adjourn here, I adjourn with a cale ndar,  and now Hon. Speaker not later!  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri ruling  ilitoka kuwa ilikuwa 
nipatiwe ile calendar  na mimi nilionyeshwa na kama anataka mwambie Mheshimiwa kesho 
ukija kwa ofisi y angu nitakuonyesha.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Murfad Amur.  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker it’s high time we have been 
working from January and it is time to go back  to our electorates so that we can at least serve 
them for a short period so t hat at least they can feel the M embers they elected are seen  at the  
grass root level. It will also give us time to be with our families and even may be to celebrate 
with our brothers  and sisters during this festive  month because  as Muslims we normally celebrate 
during Idd and this is high time  as our  brothers and sisters in Christianity religion are also going 
to be having their festival . Mr. Speaker,  we therefore wish them well and also to have an 
enjoyable festival. Thank you v ery much Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh.  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I was just listening to 
my friend here speaking nicely about the recess;  as m uch as we accept the recess  as Members of 
the County A ssembly of Mombasa but we have some reservation s. Hon. Speaker my reservatio n 
is that we must be active as M embers during recess and the County must create some activities 
that we will reach our people , it is not an issue of just  going home and rest ing watching  
Television or watching football , it is mingl ing with the community or electorate . So I want the 
Service B oard which is our board that look s after  our welfare to see how we can interact with the 
community. We also urge all t he programs including other activities that have been reach ed in 
our community to be roll ed out during this recess.  
 Hon. Speaker our offices should not be a place w here the doors are being closed; k indly I 
think I don’t know how people will celebrate whe n at the moment they  have not received their 
salary!  This is a very serious issue , anything we should not just be happy here when outside you  
are really crying Hon. Speaker! S o as much as we are following  the calendar which is procedural  
for us but I think  the leadership of the Honourable  House or this Hon. Assembly should look into 
our welfare not only the Members only but even the staff . I think Hon. Speaker when we look at 
other s currently we have heard about the issue of pending bills that  we are not re ceiving any 
money s o I don’t kno w how we are going to celebrate as we don’t know how we are going to 
interact with the community . We hope that ... I think through this recess ma y be the leadership of 
this Honourable  House will look into our affairs. Thank y ou Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa Spika nichukue 
fursa hii awali ya yote nimshukuru Rahmani Aliyetuwezesha mimi na W aheshimiwa wenzangu 
kutamatisha awamu hii y a mwaka huu wa 2019 tukiwa wazima wa afya na ngaa wenye furaha . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika m engi yamepita lakini wakati umefika kwa W aheshimiwa kurudi 
kukutana na familia tukizingatia takwimu tulizozipata juzi za idadi ya watu  Mombasa bado tuko 
na idadi ndo go. Pia Mheshimiwa S pika katika kipindi hiki kitapeana fursa kuwajibikia maswala 
ya kuongeza idadi hali  kadhalika Mheshimiwa ni fursa pia ya kukutana na wan anchi wetu 
kukusanya yanayostahiki kuja kuyatengenezea kanuni muafaka tutakaporudi mwakani na zaidi 
ya yote pia ni fursa kwetu sisi W awakilishi pamoja na W afanyi  kazi ndani ya likizo hii kupata 
angaa wasaa wa  kufanyiwa masomo zaidi ili kuboresha uwezo tulio  nao katika kupigania na 
kucha ngia maswala muhimu yanayohusu G atuzi letu la Mombasa.  
Mheshimiwa S pika kadha lika tutaafikiana ya kwamba miongoni mwa watu watakaopata 
uvuli siku ambayo kutakuwa hakuna kivuli isipokuwa kivuli cha Mwenyezi  Mungu ni kiongozi 
muadilifu na hili Mhe shimiwa liwe muongozo kwetu na M ungu atujaalie sote pamoja na K iti 
chako tuwe tumeyateke leza kwa uadilifu na tutayatekeleza mbeleni hali kadhalika yawe ni ya 
uadilifu kuweza kupata radhi na baraka za M wenyezi  Mungu si tu kwa wananchi Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
Mheshimiwa S pika kadhalika nishukuru Waheshimiwa wenzangu katika B unge hili kwa 
kipindi hik i tumekuwa tukijadili na kuchachawizana kuhusu maswala muh imu ambayo 
tumekuwa tukipinz ana kihoja ama kimaoni l akini wale watumwa wa lugha ya K iengereza 
wanasema disagree to agree  na katika mchezo huu hautaki hasira kwa hivyo kwa yaliyopita 
hayakuwa upinzan i, hayakuwa ushindani bali ni moja wapo ya  kuwekana sawa na kukuza 
serikali yetu ama kuwajibikia watu wetu wa Mombasa.  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 Kwa hivyo M heshimiwa S pika mchezo huu hautaki hasira na hatutarajii kukutana na 
hasira  hizi miongoni mwa Waheshimiwa mashinani. Mheshimiw a Spika nikiongezea kutoka 
nikinu kuu maneno ya baba wa demokrasia Mheshimiwa Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyerere 
alinukuliwa akisema ya kwamba , uzale ndo wa taifa uko mikononi mwa W abunge . Hii ni  kwa 
sababu wamepewa jukumu la wananchi kuwakilishia na kuwapigan ia matakwa yao na a kasema 
katika uzalendo huu kwa B unge ni  kutekeleza majukumu yao kisawasawa kwa njia mbili; moja 
kuipongeza serikali inapostahiki , pili kuikosoa serikali inapoteleza ili kuiwajibisha na kuipatia 
kuikumbusha na ku weka katika mazingira sahi hi kutekeleza majukumu yao .  
Vilevile  akasema kinyume cha hiki ni unafiki w a viongozi na ni usaliti mkuu wa hud uma 
kwa wananchi ya kwamba kwa M bunge au kiongozi kufungia jicho ubaya ama dosari 
inayotendeka na serikali yake na yeye kuamua kunyamazia au kuli mezea kwa kulinda ubinafsi 
wake peke  yake pasi kuzingatia idadi kubwa ya wale aliowapa fursa  hii ya kuwakilisha 
Mheshimiwa S pika. Sio kuwa tuishi Mheshimiwa S pika tutakaporudi mwakani  Mungu 
Akituwezesha na Insha Allah  Atatuwezesha tuliendeleze zaidi hili la  uzale ndo ili kuweza kukuza 
serikali G atuzi yetu ya Mombasa kwa kuwa waadilifu hali kadhalika wazalendo wa kukosoa 
panapostahiki na kupongeza panapostahiki.  
Vilevile Mheshimiwa S pika niwata kie W aheshimiwa wenza na wafanyikazi na zaidi 
wakaazi wa Mombasa li kizo hii ambayo itaambatana na sikukuu kadha wa kadha ziwe za heri na 
baraka na Mungu Atuwezeshe tuku tane tena mwakani palipo uzima. Ameen. Shukran.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mhes himiwa Spika nasimama 
mbele ya N yumba hii ikiwa leo itakuwa ni siku ya mwisho sisi kukutana hapa. Mheshimiwa 
Spika kwa niaba yangu na niaba ya Chama cha ODM nataka kuchukua fursa hii kuwapongeza 
Waheshimiwa…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwal imu): Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kufahamu kutoka kwa 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy ambaye pia ni M wenyekiti wa chama cha Chungwa ya kwamba alikusudia 
nini aliposema kwamba leo ni siku ya mwisho kwetu sisi kukutana Mheshimiwa Sp ika na tuna 
imani kufungwa kwa Bunge sio mwisho w a yetu sisi kukutana. Sijui alikuwa amekusudia nini 
ama tukitoka hapa tunafariki sote Mheshimiwa Spika? ! 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nafikiri nimekuwa nimesema uwazi kuwa kukutana mwaka 
huu sikusema kuwa hatukutani , ambao hawakutani ni wale wal iokwenda mbele  za haki. Kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika kwa niaba yangu na niaba ya chama cha ODM na wapongeza 
Wanachama  kwa kazi nzuri walioifanya kwenye mwak a huu uliomalizika.  
Ijapokuwa tumepambana n a shida hapa na pale nataka ku hakikishia Wanachama  kuwa 
mimi kama Mwenyekiti  wa ODM na chama cha ODM hatuchukui chuki yoyote , maneno 
ambayo yanazungumzwa hapa ndani ya Nyumba hii na nafikiri umeona kuwa tunavyozungumza 
hapa sivyo vile tulivyo nje. Kwangu mimi mtu yeyote , wakati wowote m lango wangu uko wazi 
Mheshimiwa S pika mtu yoyote mwenye na shida zake kuja kwangu tunakaa tunazungumza na 
mimi nashukuru pia kwa heshima ile wamenipatia hawa Wanachama . 
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 Mheshim iwa S pika nataka kuchukua fursa hii na ndu gu zetu wanakwenda watakuwa na 
Krismas i kuwatakia Krismasi njema wao na familia zao  na Mungu A tatujaalia tutakuja kuonana 
kwa furah a tele na hapa tuweze kuhudumia watu wa Mombasa kwa njia ya haki , ukweli na 
usawa . Kwa haya machache Mheshimiwa S pika nashukuru na nasema ahsante sana.  
The Deputy Spika  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Thoya?  
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika. Nafikiri ni kwa masikitiko makubwa kwamba 
kalenda imebidi twende nyumbani lakini kazi ambazo ziko mbele yetu ni nyingi na nikisema 
hivyo namaanisha kuna dharura la kwamba jana ndio  kuna zile fomu za kwenda sekondari au 
shule za upili ziliweza kutoka. Hivyo basi nikinukuu hapo nyuma kuna K amati ya A fya iliweza 
kupewa nafasi ya kuendelea na vikao, n ilikuwa naomba kama inawezekana Kamati ya E limu 
iweze kupewa nafasi kwa sababu itakuwa si sawa hili jambo tuje tulizungumzie mwakani , mwezi 
wa pili w akati watoto na wazazi wame hangaika ku tafuta karo. Ikiwa inawezekana K amati iweze 
kukutana iweze kusukuma b asari  hiyo ambayo in atoka itoke kwa wakati unaofaa k wa sababu 
mwaka jana basari ilipati kana kuchelewa na watoto walikuwa wameenda.  
Kwa h ivyo ninaomba kama itawezekana K amati ya Elimu ipewe nafasi ya kuweza 
kufuatilia ; najua sisi wengine tutakuwa tuko nyumbani na  tume ridhia ni swala la kalenda l akini 
swala la karo za shule ni swala ambalo laz ima lifu atiliwe kabla mwanzo wa mwaka a ma sivyo 
swala hili twazungumzia mwezi wa pili, mwezi watatu ambapo tutakuwa tumechelewa, ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
Hon. Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I have heard the previous spea kers; some 
of them giving out speeches and in my view although I agree that  all work without play makes a 
Jane a dull girl. There is also a Japanese saying that says, no gains no life but at the end of the 
day a break is very important but I thought Mr. Speaker that some of th ese speeches were to be 
given during an end year retreat, an end year team building, end year workshops as rather than us 
people s tanding here and wishing other Members a happy New Year on plenary. I think it is  best 
practise as co rporate soci al responsibility that charity begins at home ; we should have other 
avenues apart from an adjournment Motion to bid each other goodbye Mr. Speaker. Otherwise I 
am agreeable that all work without play makes Amriya  a dull g irl and I am rejuvenated to go on 
a holiday but I see that this is not the avenue to bid each other goodbye. Thank you . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon ourable f rom Kadzandani .     
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi pia mimi kusema 
kwaheri,  lakini kuna s wala nyeti limekuwa likigonga vichwa katika Nyumba hii. Maombi yangu 
nilisem a kwa sababu sije tukarudi hapa mwezi wa Februar i tukawa na shida hizo hizo tena ; kwa 
nyinyi wakubwa wa vyama hususan Mwenyekiti wa  chama chetu cha ODM na vile vyama 
vyeng ine tanzu.  
Jumba hili limekosa Minority Leader  kwa muda mrefu na tumekuwa tukipata hiyo 
changamoto  tukiwa  kiongozi  wetu hayupo basi inakuwa swala hilo ni la kupita hapa na pale.  
Tunaomba samahani munapoenda likizo hii tukirudi hapa mtuletee jawabu tupate  Minority 
Leader  na zile sehemu zengine ambazo hazina wanachini nazo zifidiwe. Ahsante kwa hilo 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17 (Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Thoya what is your information?  
Hon. Thoya:  We want the Speaker who was on floor to come clear if he is talking about 
Minority Leader or Deputy Majority Leader because he ha s said that if our Majority Leader is 
away so he should come out ver y clear if he is talking about Deputy Majority Leader or Minority 
or both? Thank you . 
Hon. Nzai : Thank you Mr. Speaker to have given me again this chance . Kiswahili is not 
my language that is why I normally speak in English in this House , i meant Deputy Majority 
Leader Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu): Yes Ho n. Prischilla?  
Hon. Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa pia mimi nafasi hii , ni nafasi 
muafaka ya kila mtu kujisem ea yaliyo rohoni kwa sababu tumekuwa pamoja kwa muda mrefu , 
tumefanya mengi ambayo ni ya  kushirikiana katika Jumba hili. Kwanza n inatoa shuk rani kubwa 
kwa Jumba hili , muda ule ambao tumefanya kazi kushirikiana kama unavyojua tumekutana na 
kumbukumbu nyingi za kukwangurana huku na huku lakini mwisho wa kwisha tuna ona serikali 
bado iko imara na Kaunti itaendelea kuwa imara na k ama wenzangu walivyozungumza na  
wakasisitiza ni wakati muafaka na ninamshukuru Mwenyekiti  wa ODM aliyesimama hapa 
kulingana na chama ambacho mimi nimetoka na ninamshukuru Mheshimiwa Nzai pia kwa 
kusisitiza majukumu kadhaa wa kadhaa kulingana na heshima ya Nyumba hii tunaju a majukumu 
ya serikali , tunajua majukumu ya vyama , tunajua majukumu ya vyeo tumekumbana na wakati 
mgumu sana wengine hapa tumekumbana na upinzani mkubwa wakati tunajadiliana katika 
maswala ya serikali na kama mtu anavyojua ukiwa una  bendera ya serikali ni wajibu kujua 
jukumu lako katika serikali ya Jumba hili.  
Lakini wengi majukumu hayo wamekuwa wameyasahau , majukumu yale wanakuwa hata 
hawajielewi na ndio wakati unaposimama hapa na kuzungumza saa nyengine tukiwa tuko na 
mori kwa sababu tunajua m ajukumu ya serikali ni majukumu gani. Sio mtu kutaka vyeo tu na sio 
mtu k utaka mamlaka tu lakini wakati ukifika wakati wa kusimama na serikali tunakuta 
tunateteleka wakati wa  kusimama na kuzun gumza hoja inayostahili katika Nyumba hii yetu 
tukufu hauonekani lakini wakati wa majukumu ya kuwa unataka bendera na mamlaka na jukumu 
katika chama wewe ndio wa kwanza kusema unapinga , unapingwa unaonewa na unafanya nini ? 
Hapana tunataka sasa Jumba hili lianze kusimama ... hiyo kazi tumempa Mwenyekiti  wa ODM 
ulisema katika Nyumba hii kuwa turudi chini tungojee majibu ya kutoka kwenye chama na 
Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama hapa nikizungumza nikiwa hata mimi sibabaiki wala sitishwi 
nyau na unanijua hivyo kuwa...  
 
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Sh eillah use parliamentary language.  
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ninarudi nyuma lakini niliiga  mwenzangu 
niliyemsikia katika Jumba hili ambaye ninampenda sana wakati akisimama na kuzungumza 
akiwa na ujasiri wa hali ya juu na ndio hata mimi na uj asiri huo huo ambao Mheshimiwa 
Mwamwiri amenifundisha na amenifundisha kusimama kidete na kutetea.  
December 4 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         118 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 Nikizungumza nikiwa kidete leo najitetea kwa Mwenyekiti  wangu wa ODM arudi akae 
katika Nyumba yetu ya ODM ama afanye restructuring  ndani ya h ii Nyumba tukiru di Januar i 
atuletee majina muafa ka ya kuweza kufanya kazi katika Nyumba hii.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Sh eillah. Hon. Members we 
have heard from the Hon. Members and issues concerning your parties will be  discussed at your 
party levels . And Hon. Thoya your request for the Education Committee , the only person w ho 
got the mandate to allow the movement of Hon. Members and the Committees  is the Speaker of 
the County Assembly and not the Speaker of the day. So make a proper communication to the 
Speaker of the County Assembly and he will give a good direction as per what you have raised.   
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members having finished the Motion on adjournment I s ee the House is exhausted 
fully and the Motion . I now stand to announce that the House stands adjo urned until Tuesday 
Febru ary 11, 2020 at 10 :00a.m.   
The House rose at  4:10p.m. 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
  