November 3, 2021                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          119 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
 Tuesday , 3rd November, 2021   
The House met at 3:04p.m. 
 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): You may have your seats.  Yes Honourable 
Members , welcome back to our afternoon session today being the 3rd November , 2021 . Yes 
Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
GARBAGE PILE -UP AT MCHELENI COLLE CTION POINT IN KIPEV U WARD  
 
Yes Honourable  Faith?  
 
Hon.  Mwende : Thank you Mr.  Speaker for giving me this chance.  Mr. Speaker Sir , I 
stand  pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2)(c) to request for a statem ent from Chairperson , 
Committee on  Environment , Waste Management  and Energy  if he is a ware of the uncollected  
garbage  at Mcheleni collection p oint  which poses a  health hazard  to the residents. W hen will the 
garbage be collected ? Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. B wire): Thank you Honourable Faith M wende 
Boniface.  Yes Honourable Chairperson on Environment?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Vice  Chair?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Any Committee M ember for the quick response? Yes Honourable Leila?  
 
Hon.  Nyach e: Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika.  Mimi pia ni M wanakamati wa mazingira.  
Tunaomba tupe we kama wiki mbili ndi o tuweze tulete majibu hayo. Okay  baada ya mapumziko 
pole. 

November 3, 2021                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          119 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor Page 2 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): You are speculating ! Do we have recess?  
 
[Low murmuring ] 
 
Honourable Members , can you let the Honourable...  the one on the floor to respond 
please ?! What is your position Honourable Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyach e: Mheshimi wa Spika niliku wa naomba  tuweze kupe wa wiki mbili ndi o 
tuweze kuleta  majibu.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): Thank you.  
 
Hon.  Nyach e: Tafadhali.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): I am giving you enough time . Kindly make sure 
that you bring the response on 24th November , so I think that i s enough time.  
 
Hon.  Nyach e: Sawa Mheshimi wa Spika , ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE C OUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes Honourable Hamisi Musa M widani, th e Leader of Majority Party move the Motion 
please.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. M widani) : Let me take this opportunity to move the 
Motion of Adjournment of County Assembly.  
 
That Purs uant to Standing Order 3 0 of County Assembly of Mombasa . This House 
resolves to adjourn today Wednesday  3rd, 2021 and to resu me on Tuesday 23rd 
November , 2021.  
 
  I will request Honourable Amur to second the Motion.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): Thank you.  Yes Honourable Amur?  
 
Hon.  Murfad Amur : I stand to second the Motion Mr.  Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): Thank you  Honourable Members . I think  I will 
allow Members , just t wo Members to contribute then before I put a question on the same.  If there 
is any Member with contribution on  the same?  
 
Hon.  Murfad Amur : Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
November 3, 2021                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          119 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor Page 3 Mr. Speaker t he adjournment came the right time because Mom basa County 001 being 
the host C ounty of the CASA games it will  not be acceptable for us yet Honourable Members 
are participating in the games, members of staff are also participating and again there will be no 
need for us to come in the House and then we do not have a quorum Mr. Speaker . It is better that 
we will be saving the money of the tax payers if we come only 10 or five people we cannot 
transact effectively so it was wise for the Honourable Member , the Majori ty Leader to bring such 
an issue because by the time the 14 days are over  we are no t here the taxpayers money will be in 
better use . Thank you  Mr Speaker . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. B wire): Thank you Honourable Amur having seconded 
the Motion . I gave you time to  contribute because you are the seconder.  Honourable Members 
allow me to propose a questi on that the Motion moved by Honourable Hamisi Musa  M widani be 
considered in this Honourable House in the same terms as moved.  
 
[Question proposed and a greed  to] 
[Applause]  
 
Yes Honourable Hamisi M widani? If any?  
 
The Majority Leader  (Hon. M widani) : I think Mr.  Speaker my seconder has already 
touched  on the issues on why we are adjourning for two  weeks, it is  because of the CASA 
games.  You kno w some of us here as leaders we are among the players so we cannot serve t wo 
masters at a ago; sometimes I  am needed at the ground  sometimes I  am needed at the Assembly. 
As of no w I have received calls  here that I  am required at the fields of Mombasa Sports becau se 
you kno w as you are a ware Iam a very good footballer player .  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 So I think after we have adjourned, I have to rush to the ground  at Mombasa Sports Club  
for the match.  Thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire): Thank you , we always kno w the t radition 
Honourable Hamisi thank you. As t he tradition dictates we always do not debate on such a 
Motion,  it is a P rocedural Motion and after proposing a question there was also no need of 
putting a question so it seems the House is ok ay with the issue.  Thank you Honourable Majority 
Leader . Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Honourable Members , there having been no other Business , the House stands adjourned 
until Tuesday 23rd November , 2021at 10:00.a.m.  
 
The House r ose at 3 :14p.m. 