Februa ry 22, 202 3                       COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                         11 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wedne sday, 22nd February , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Eleventh  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 10:19a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Athman Rama Mwamw iri) in the C hair] 
 
PRAY ERS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Honourable  Members , you may be seated. 
Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
ROAD SAFETY  IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Samir Bhaloo MCA Tudor Ward, please give the Notice of Motion.  
Hon. Bhaloo:  Good morning,  Mr. Sp eaker Sir . Mr. Speak er Sir, I beg to give the following 
Notice of Motion:  
THAT AWARE THAT , part two of the Fourth Schedule  of the Constitution of Kenya section 
5 (a) (c) develo ped transport which includes County roads, traffic and parking ; 
FURTHER AWARE TH AT, road safety is an important factor for the safety and wellbeing 
of the public particularly for school going children;  
CONCERNED that majority of our schools especially the ECDES and lower primary 
schools… 
[Interruption ] 
[Power O utage ] 
 
The Temporary Sp eaker  (Hon. Mwa mwiri): Just proceed with the notice . 
Hon. Bhaloo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir.  
CONCERNED that majority of our schools especially the ECDE ’s and lower pr imary 
schools are  situated near roads with high number of motorists and motorbikes posing high 
risk for the safety of our kids;  
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that:  
Februa ry 22, 202 3                       COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                         11 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 2 The County govern ment in partnership with the National government Road agencies  to 
construct road bumps and paint zebra crossing marks on all roads near schools and area  
with mas ses crossing .  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
SUSTAINABLE BEAUTIFICATION OF MOMBASA COUNTY   
Yes, Honourable  Hawa Abdulrahman, please give the Notice of Motion . 
Hon. Hawa Abdulrahman:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to give the following Notice of 
Motion:  
THAT AWA RE THAT  Mombasa County is a major business hub and a popular tourist 
destination in Kenya, attracti ng bot h local and foreign entrepreneurs, investors and 
tourists;  
 
FURTHER  AWARE THAT  there is a need to promote the County's aesthetic beauty to 
enhance  and attract foreign investors, promote tourism, create employment opportunities, 
and improve the socio -economic development of the region;  
 
NOTING THAT  the Constitution of Keny a, pursuant to Article 69 provides for the 
sustainable exploitation, utilization, manag ement and conservation of the environment and 
natural resources, with environmental conservation an d mana gement being devolved to the 
County Governments as provided for in the Fourth Schedule of that document;  
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT  the Mombasa County Solid Waste Management Act, 2020 
advocates for the reduction, recovery and recycling of waste among a raf t of measures to 
manage and enforce responsible garbage disposal susta inably;  
 
APPRECIATING  the efforts by His Excellency the Governor, Abdulswamad Sheriff N assir , 
in garbage collection in his first 100 days and for his Mombasa ni Yangu  initiative, aptly 
impleme nted the County Assembly's resolution to employ 2000 casual empl oyees to clean 
the CBD and suburbs;  
 
CONCERNED THAT , without taking strong and urgent m easures, Mombasa will lose its 
competitiveness as a major business hub and popular tourist destinat ion, t hus affecting 
revenue by both levels of Government and impinging  on socio -economic development;  
 
SERIOUSLY CONCERNED THAT , without taking enhanced poli cy and practical 
measures , Mombasa will be an eyesore and be plagued with filth, noxious diseases which 
will pose public health risks and hazards;  
 
I, therefore, urge th is Assembly to RESOLVE : 
 
1. Garbage Collection and Disposal:  
Februa ry 22, 202 3                       COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                         11 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 3 a) THAT  the County government purchase additional garbage collection and disposal 
vehicles to increase the efficie ncy of ga rbage collection and disposal services ; 
 
b) THAT  the County government establishes a waste separation program to promote the 
proper disposal of garbage and m inimize pollution ;  
 
c) THAT  the County government encourages and involves residents and stakeholde rs in 
community -based solid waste management programmers ; 
 
d)THAT  the C ounty government consider working with partners to establish a garbage 
recycling facili ty and explore other uses of garbage such as for power generation ; 
 
2. Street Cleaning and Washing:   
a) THAT the County government purchase street cleaning and washing v ehicles to improve 
the cleanliness of the streets ;  
 
b) THAT  the County government develops and enforces  laws that promote the cleanliness 
of streets and impose penalties for littering ;  
 
c) THAT  the County government involves  residents and stakeholders in  keeping the streets 
clean by organizing regular cleanup exercises ; 
 
3. Enhancing the aesthetic beauty of Mombasa County:  
 
a) THAT the County government seek certification and compliance  with the ISO 14000 
Certification family  of standards for an Environm ental Management System of the County 
to ensure the environmental management practices a re continuous and measure to global 
standards and best practices ; 
 
b) THAT  the County government pl ant flowers, indigenous fruit trees, and  other plants 
along the stree ts and in public places to enhance the aesthetic beauty of the County ; 
 
c) THAT the Coun ty government sensitizes and encourages  landlords to paint and 
refurbish their buildings to improve  their appearance and promote tourism ;  
d) THAT  the County government  construct and rehabilitate public parks, recreational 
facilities, and tourist attractio n sites to enhance the attractiveness of the County.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Yes, C lerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
MEASURES TO DECONGEST COAST TEACHING AND REFERRAL HOSPITAL  
 
Yes, Hon ourable  Allen Katana please give the Notice of Motion.  
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg to give  the following Notice 
of Motion : 
Februa ry 22, 202 3                       COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                         11 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 4 THAT AWARE THAT , article 43 (1) (a ) of the Constitution of Kenya,  2010 provides that 
every person has the right to the highest attainable standard of health which include s the 
right to heath care se rvices;  
FURTHER AWARE THAT , health sector is the biggest function to be devolved under the 
Constitution of Kenya, 2010  to allow t he County government to design innovation models 
and interventions that suit the unique health need s, encourage effective citiz en 
participation and make autonomous and quick decision on resource mobilization and 
management;  
COGNIZANT THAT , the Coast Genera l Teaching and Referral Hospital  is the largest 
public health facility serving the Counties of Momb asa, Kilifi, Lamu, Tana Rive r, Kwale  
and Taita Taveta ; 
CONCERNED THAT , due to the high number of patients at Coast General Teaching & 
Referral  Hospita l the s ituation has caused congestion, undue delay in service delivery, 
straining of the available facilit ies and overworked staff;  
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE ; 
1. THAT, the County government through the Department of Health to conduct a  strategi c 
need s assessment survey of the infrastructure, equipment and human resource capacities 
of all health fa cilities in the County to be able to know requirement, capacities, for 
planning and implement solutions accordingly.  
 
2. THAT, The County governm ent to up grade Port Reitz Level 4 Hospital to level 5 and fully 
equip it to attend to referrals to reduce the overc rowding at the Coast Teaching & 
Referral Hospital.  
 
3. The County government to source for funds for construction of health facilities in every 
Ward and r enovat e the existing ones for easy access to health care.   
 
Number nine …, sorry with that Mr. Speaker , I than k you. 
 
[Laughter ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : I see you have decided to become a Clerk? 
Yes, Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
RENOVATION , REVAMPING , IMPROVEMENT AND EXPANSION OF COAST GENERAL HOSPITAL  
The Chair is seeking notification  of Hon ourable  Amriya Boy, assigned Hon ourable  
Hamida Noor to give a Notice of Motion. Kindly Honourable  Hamida Noo r proceed  on behalf of 
Honourable  Amriya Boy.  
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I beg to give  the following Notice of Motion;  
THAT AWARE THAT , Coast General Hospital is a premier Level 5 health facility 
established in 1908 and currently ser ves as a public  hospital serving the County of 
Mombasa and more;  
Februa ry 22, 202 3                       COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                         11 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 5 FURTHER AWARE THAT, some modest improvements hav e been done to give a facelift to 
the facility to improve its physical condition but are not far reaching;  
 
NOTING THAT, the imag e and look of  the facility i s that of an old, worn -out structure that 
needs repair and repainting;  
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT, the ho spital handles high human traffic putting a strain on the 
facility which causes undue delay, long ques, patients sharing beds a nd expectant mo thers 
unattende d; 
 
CONCERED THAT, if measures are not put in place to renovate  and revamp the exp and   
of the Fac ility.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
    
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Yes Clerk?  
 
[Power restored ] 
 
Hon. Noor:  Mr. Speaker ; 
 
CONCERED THAT, if measures are not put in place to renovate and revamp the facility  it 
will severe ly impact on its ability to offer quality and beneficial services to the public ; 
 
FURTHER Concerned  THAT, the health facility is yet to attain ISO certificati on or adapt 
world class best practice in matters of health care, cleanliness and security and custo m 
services ;  
 
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE ;  
 
THAT, the County government of Mombasa in partnership with the National government, 
to source for funds for renovating, revamping and expanding of the Coast General 
Hospital , to take measures to attain the ISO certification in order to offer enhanced better 
and qual ity services to the members of the public.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
This H ouse stand s adjourned until Wednesday 22nd February , 2023 at 2 :30p.m.  
 
The House rose at 10:36 a.m. 