February 2 , 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thurs day, 2nd February , 201 7 
The House met at 9:11am . 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Members you may sit down .  
(Silence ) 
Yes Clerk .  
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon  Kasangamba . 
Hon. Kasangamba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir  I have a reply o f the statement on the 
response of water shortage in Mombasa . Mr. Speaker Sir here with me it is a letter from the 
County Executive In charge  of Water and Natural resources . Mr. Speaker if you allow me to 
give the response lette r; the letter is addressed to the Clerk and it was meant to be brought to 
the County Assembly .  
(Phone rung ) 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Members Order ! Order ! Order  Hon 
Kasanga mba put the gadgets in a silent  mode . 
Hon. Kasangamba:  Mr. Speak er I have already switch ed it off. Mr. Speaker the 
content of the letter is as follows;  
(Hon Kasangamba read)  
Reference is made on your letter ref: /CEM / VOL.11/108 of 25th January, 2016  on the 
above subject.  
Water supply to Mombasa has been declining for the last few months. The major 
cause being an increased abstractions upstream by the water service providers of Kilifi, Taita 
Taveta and Kwale County.  
The upstream abstractions have been escalated by the current drought situation in the 
region , power interruptions  and systems brea kdowns have also been contributing to the 
decline.  
Mombasa County relies on water sources from other Counties like Kilifi, Kwale and 
Taita Taveta. The sources are Baricho Wel l fields in Kilifi County, Mzima in Taita Taveta 
County, Tiwi Boreholes in Kwale Cou nty. The competition for the resources with the host 
Counties is becoming  very stiff as time goes by. Mombasa County being at the receiving end 
is really disadvantaged as verified by the data below:  
Mr. Speaker I hope every Member has the letter  there's a table there indicating how 
the water has been decreasing, the supply of the water has been decreasing ; from the month 
of July 2016 we had a deficit of 18% until January 2017 the deficit has been increasing to 
34%. 
 Mr. Speaker that shows that there's a contin uing of shortage of  water supply in 
Mombasa County , if I cont inue with the letter the Coast Water Service Board is mandated to 
supply bulk water to Mombasa and the other Counties.  
The sharing of water to the Counties is not balanced and the Mom basa County is 
badly affected.  
The current wate r demand for Mombasa is 186,000 M 3 per day again st an average 
supply of 40, 00 0M 3 per day with a deficit of 78%. This has necessi tated the service provider 
to ration the supply.  
February 2 , 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  2 The County in cooperation with Mombasa Water Supply and Sanitation Company has 
initiated negotiations with Coast Water Service Board and other water service providers in 
the region on possibilities of balanced sharing of the scarce water resource. Patrols of the 
pipeline network outside  our County was initiated and rationing is being perfected.  
(Hon Kasangamba ended reading)  
The Letter was signed by Na soro Bakari for the Chief Officer of the Department of 
Water and Natural Resources.  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon Ibrahim Kondo . 
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii, mimi 
kwanza nasimama kwa kusema ripoti hii ilioletwa na mhusika katika kitengo cha maji 
tumesikia na nakala tuko nazo na tumeziona lakini cha kusikitisha maji ni uzima, maji ni uhai 
na jambo hili lina zidi kuwa donda sugu kwa wakaazi wetu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika haya yote yaliyoongelelewa hapa katika upande wangu na katika 
sehemu zetu za Changamwe masuala ya rationing  mpaka sasa naona hayamo ; haiwezekani 
mwanadamu haishi kumaliza miezi mitatu laini ya maji haina maji na tunatarajia wawe na 
maisha mazuri, watoto wasome na kina mama wawe katika hali zilizo  sawa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika hili tatizo mpaka liangaliwe kwa undani kabisa ni kikwazo gani 
kilichopo hata sehemu zengine hazijawahi hata kupata maji hata siku moja . 
Mheshimiwa Spika wizara inayohusika iingie mashinani na kujaribu kuangalia ni 
sehemu gani za maji ambazo hazifiki . Mheshimiwa Spika mabomba yaliyowekwa miaka ya 
nyuma tangu ukoloni mengine yamefungwa, mengine yamejifunga yenyewe na hayawezi 
kupitisha maji Mheshimiwa Spika....  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon  Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
tunamuona mwenye ameleta hii sijui kama ni Motion  ambapo anaijadi li ashaleta jawabu sasa 
kama Mheshimiwa kama kuna mtu ana tatizo lolote alete hii kama Motion  nafikiri itakuwa 
sawa sawa . 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon  Kondo you are the one who 
sought  the statement . 
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na ri poti ilioletwa hili ni Jumba 
na kauli yangu ninawakilisha Mombasa Kaunti.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ripoti hii imeletwa kwetu na njia ya kwanza kufikishwa ni katika 
Nyumba hii na ikiwa iko na makosa ni lazima tujaribu kurekebisha . Mheshimiwa Spika....  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon  Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kuna njia ya kufuata kwa maneno 
anayozungumza kama anaona kuna makosa aje na resolution  au motion  ya kuja kupitisha 
lakini si kwa njia ya statement  nafikiri kama alivyosema kwamba hii ni Nyumba ya sheria 
kwa hivyo lazima hizo sheria tuzifuate . 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon Kasangamba what is it?  
Hon. Kasangamba:  Mr. Speaker I would like to assist my fellow Member that I 
would wish if Honorable Members have contribution on the report so I beg your permission 
that I move a Motion on the same matter so that Honorable Members can discuss it and give 
their recommendation on the matter.  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Hon Kondo do you seek to move a M otion 
on the matter?  
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika ndio sababu 
nikasimama kuleta muhadhara huu mbele ya Nyumba yako ili tupate mwelekeo sahihi, 
mwelekeo ambao utahakikisha s uala hili limekuwa na mafanikio. A hsante.  
February 2 , 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  3 Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon Wangudi . 
Hon. Wangudi:  Mheshimiwa Spika kutokana na hali halisi Mheshimiwa Spika 
nitaunga mkono ombi la Mheshimiwa Kasangamba ya kwamba uruhusu Nyumba hii iweze 
kujadili japokuwa kwa kifupi hoja hii . 
Mheshimiwa Spika  ukizingatia unapotembea katik a eneo la Mombasa suala ambalo  
utakaloulizwa ni suala la maji ; hawa waheshimiwa unaowaona hapa kila siku wanajibu 
maswali ya maji sasa wacha tujadili tuweze kupata sulu hu ya jambo hili. A hsante.  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Okay I underst and from Honorable 
Members but this one it has to come whoever that is not satisfied can bring a Motion later on 
and not today. Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members there being no other bus iness this House stands adjourned until in the 
afternoon.  
The H ouse rose at 9:28 am. 
   