March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 4th March , 2020.  
The House met at 10:20a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Yes, Clerk next order  please ? 
 
MOTION  
 
 Yes, Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu  Deputy Speaker, please move the M otion . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker 
Sir, I now beg to give the following Motion:  
 
THAT AWARE that unemploym ent in our C ounty is mounting at an alarming rate 
among our youths;  
 
FURTHER  AWARE that most youths w ithin the C ounty remain unemployed and often 
times contractors, who are given work within the County do not engage the residents of 
Mombasa, but instead e mploy labo urers from other C ounties yet this kind of labo ur is 
locally available;  
 
CONCERNED THAT resident s are  not considered in such labo ur works yet they 
continue to languish in poverty;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
 
The County g overnment of Mombasa compels contractors to give job opportunities that 
do not require expertise to the youth s within the area that the project is being undertaken . 

March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Mr. Speaker and I ask Hon.  Kitula to second.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I rise to s econd.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili.  Hon. Members I now propose the 
question that the Motion by Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu be considered by this Hon ourable  House  in 
the same terms  as moved . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Hon. Fad hili the floor is open.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker a s 
the M otion it is , it’s well stated and simple and I rise to ask my fellow Hon. Member s to co me on 
my side and support this M otion.  Mr. Speaker we un derstand the economy of Mombasa, how it ’s 
moving and the recent  censors shows that  Kenya as the Country has got high percentage of 
youths and there are very many youths who are unemployed . Further to that there are some jobs 
which do not require any skills,  but unfortunately Mr. Speaker, you will find the contractors 
giving these  jobs... bringing labourers  from other Counties.   
 Mr. Speaker we understand that we are one Country Kenya , one Nation but we have to 
consider our y ouths that reside in our County;  there are many jobs that don’ t require skill s, such 
as the laying of tarmac at Dongo Kundu  but you  will find that very many youth s are coming 
from our neighbouring Counties,  most ly come from Samburu if you follow up  because I have 
follow ed many of these con tractors , but it has all gone in vain in acquiring jobs for our youths.  
Mr. Speaker am urging the County Executive,  to atleast have a way  of which they will be 
having so rt of data to know that  if our youth s are benefitting from the jobs that we have or  we get 
in our Counties. Mr. Speaker long time bef ore people use to queue in the labour  offices , those 
were during the eighties ’ and there was a very good data that showed how people were 
benefitting from the jobs that are within . So Mr. Speaker am asking the  Honourable  House to 
come and support and the executives to have a way of data of how they will know whether  our 
youths from our County are benefitting from  these kind of jobs . Mr. Speaker wi th those few 
remarks am asking the Hon. Member s to support this Motion. Thank you. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili . Yes, Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I rise to support the M otion 
with a few words . Mr. Speaker, o ne; despite Mombasa being a cosmopolitan  town the 
Constitution of Kenya is very clear , when opportunities  arise a 70:30  ratio should be considered.  
Two, there should be a clause indicated when we are doing  contract s with these contractors ; Mr. 
Speaker  it should be a must that a contractor should be co mpelled in the contract that  if he  is 
working in Port Reitz, he should be in consultation with the MCA for Port Reitz to give the 
labourers  from his area these jobs.  
 Mr. Speaker  there is a lot of (??) all going i t’s true but the fact  remains  that we are  
always saying that we are one Ken ya yes its true we are one Ken ya, but again the Constitution  
has given powers to the County g overnments , during employment of 70:30  ratio, do we follow 
the ratio Mr. Speaker?  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 So Mr. Speaker we should  emphasize  that whenev er we are dealing with these 
contractors of these jobs there should be a clause ,  clearly stipulating in that contract that if he is 
working in O ld Town then in consultation with area Member to provide labourers  and pay the 
standard rate of labour ers. This  is because we do not just want to give  them work with few 
shillings , but they be paid using  the standard rate per day . This should be  captured because 
somebody can employ you and give you 300 because you have nothing and earn  nothing  then 
you will rather go for that 300 but not with the standard rate of labour Mr. Speaker . Thank y ou 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Murfad . Yes, Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, . Mheshimiwa  Spika nasimama 
nikiwa na akil i zangu timamu kupinga hoja hii ! Kwa sababu nitakazozitoa n a wale wote 
Mheshimiwa  Spika M wenyezi Mungu katika sura ya 39 anamuambia M tume aseme , 'Hivi wako 
sawa wenye kujua na  wasiojua '. Swala hili ni swala la balagha  halihitaji jibu , kwetu sisi 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  pia tujiulize katika swala hilo hilo balagha  ambalo limeulizwa katika Sura 
(of Koran ) …na sisi tuko katika fungu lipi la wenye kujua na ama wasiojua ?! 
Mheshimiwa Spika kiongozi N aibu wa Spika wa Bunge hili hoja aliyoileta kimtazamo 
wangu ameas hiria tu kudhalilisha vijana kwa  kuwapatia kisingizio  cha kwamba  ni skilled 
labourers . Mheshimiwa  Spika fauka ya haya angezikatia hoja iliyotangulia mbeleni ambayo hoja 
hii ilijengwa kutokana na sehemu ya 27 ya Public Procurement Act ya 2015 , ambayo kwa hiyo 
sheria ile  ilitambua uwepo wa vijana , kina mama , walemavu na wakapatiwa naf asi ya hizi 
kandarasi zenyewe.  
Licha ya yeye ya kwamba  kandarasi zipewe watu wa umri wake na zaidi ya umri wake ili 
vijana wadhalilishwe kupewa vibarua angekuja katika ile hoja tungei pigania ya kwamba vijana 
hawa kwa kutambulika kwao wapewe hizi kandarasi , ili hao vijana na kina mama na walemavu 
wajiweze kuw aajiri miongoni mwao wana ostahiki kuwemo  vijana wenzao, kina mama wenzi 
wao na ndugu zetu wana oishi na walemavu .  
Mheshimiwa  Spika , lakini kwa kuwakusanya vijan a na kuwaweka fungu la unskilled  ili 
waajiriwe katika vibarua hio  ni hujma na kudhalilisha vijana na tayari hoja  ilipita ka tika Bunge 
hili. Ingekuwa ni jukumu lake na jukumu la Bunge hili  kuhaki kisha  vijana wamefaidika katika 
kandarasi zote zinazopita katika serikali yetu , achilia mbali serikali ya kitaifa , hii yetu ya Gatuzi 
je zile asilimia 30 zilizohifadhiwa kwa minajili ya kina mama, vijana na walemavu wanazipata?  
Pili Mheshimiwa Spika katika swala mzima la uajiri kumbukumb u zangu , miongoni mwa 
hoja za awali  la Bunge hili la  pili ni hoja iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa  Hatimy , iliyozungumzia 
kwamba asili mia 70 ya ajira zote , katika ta asisi zote na kandarasi zote zibakie kwa wenyeji wa 
maeneo . Mheshimiwa Spika h oja ile  ilipita bila pingamizi katika Bunge hili.  
Kwa hivyo hoja ipo yeye  kuregelea hii wakati ile nyingine haijatekelezeka  tungeanza 
kwanza kuchunguza kat ika idara zetu katika serikali G atuzi je hii hoja tuliyopitisha asilimia 70 
imetekelezwa? Ndio tutoke katika kampuni za wa tu binafsi wanaofanya  kandarasi na biashara 
zao binafsi ya kwamba na hao  wanaiga kanuni njema na hu lka njema am bayo Bunge ilipitisha 
na idara zake z a serikali G atuzi zinatekeleza . Mheshimiwa  Spika  hapo ingekuwa kuna usahali  na 
wepesi wa kushurutisha y oyote mwingine kupata kazi ama hata ku pata leseni ya kuhudumu 
katika G atuzi letu ya kwamba ni lazima asikie kanuni hii na hii.  
Mheshimiwa  Spika tutakubaliana ama tuta afikiana ya kwamba changamoto ku bwa 
imekuwa katika utekelezaji; sh eria zipo , hoja zimepita ka tika J umba hili na hata hii ni miongoni 
mwa uba dilifu wa makashablasha na makaratasi ya kwamba tumeleta hoja ijadiliwe . 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Najua kwa huba ya wale watoto kwa nia safi itapitishwa  ndio lakini Mheshimiwa  Spika 
isije ikaungana na zile zengine zilizotangul ia zisiz okuwa na ubora zaidi ya  hii lakini zimekosa 
nia njema na nia safi ya utekelez aji kuu wa hayo . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika tungeregelea 
nyuma tukaangalia ile hoja iliyopita iliyokuwa  imekita katika maswala ya Public Procurement 
Act na hoja ambayo ili letwa na  Mheshimiwa  Hatimy ya asilimia 70 ya kila nafasi ya ajira , iweze 
kupata wenyeji wa eneo lile , kama ni kata ndogo ya Mji wa K ale basi asilimia 70 iwe ni wenyeji 
wa kata ndogo y a Mji wa K ale. Ambay o kanuni zipo hoja zimepita Mheshimiwa  Spika , lakini 
hili tukisema tunaenda tukatafutane na W achina  wanaojenga D ongo Kundu  kwanza mkataba 
wao na  serikali kuu kwa kutekeleza swala hili h atujui wame afikiana vipi .  
Kwa hi vyo Mheshimiwa Spika sisi kwenda kutafutana na W achina kuuliza umeajiri nani, 
ametoka wapi  itakuwa tunavuka mipaka wakat i hapa kwetu chambilecho maandiko ya kwamba 
tunaangalia  kibanzi kwa jicho la ndugu yetu , wakati sisi wenyew e kama serikali G atuzi tuna 
boroti nzima katika macho yetu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika naendelea kupinga hoja hii .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri . Yes, Hon. Mwalimu 
Mgwisho?  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi : Ahsan te sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii ili 
na mimi niweze kuchangia hoja hii ambayo iko kwa ukamilifu sana . Nimesimama kuunga 
mkono hoja hii; Mheshimi wa Spika ni ukweli kwamba vijana wetu wengi wame kaa maskani 
hawana ajira na panapo tokea kazi kama hizi  ndogo ndogo ambazo hazi hitaji elimu ya hali ya juu , 
ni kusukuma tu wheel barrow ni umuhimu kweli kwamba  vijana wetu waweze kuhusishwa na 
waweze kuchukuliw a katika kazi hii . Nikitoa mfano mmoja  ambayo s aa hii ile barabara ya 
Dongo Kundu ile ya round about, hasa yajengwa pale S hika Adabu  lakini vib arua vingi sana 
ambao wako pale  ni vijana ambao wametoka Kaunti jirani .  
 Kwa hivyo ni muhimu kabisa kwamba kuchuk uliwe njia muhimu mwafaka ili tuone 
kwamba vijana wetu hasa wale ambao wako pale Shika Adabu  wanaona ni balaa gani hii , kazi 
iko kwetu na sisi pia kibarua hatuc hukuliwi ambap o ni kazi ambayo hata mtu wa kawaida 
anaweza kusukuma wheelbarrow , hata wewe unawe za kusukuma wheelbarrow muhimu kwamba 
wenyeji wako katika sehemu ile waweze kupata ile ajira japo kuwa ni kazi ile aweze kupata ile 
ajira.  
 Hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa  Spika nasimama hapa kuunga mkono hoja hii n a naomba 
Wabunge wenzangu ili tuone vijana wetu wasiweze kukaa tu mitaani na kufanya ma mbo ambayo 
hayafai kwa ukosefu wa ajira . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu . Yes, Hon. Charles Kitula.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mimi nasima ma kuunga mkono hoja hii na 
Mheshimiwa  Spika lazima tu weze kusema ukweli  kwamba  nikipiga utafiti wangu  katika  nchi 
nzima si dhani kama kun a Bunge wameleta hoja kabambe za kunufaisha wananchi kama Kaunti 
ya Mombasa . L akini changamoto kubwa inakuja k atika maswala ya utekelezaji 
“Implementation”  Mheshimiwa Spika; s isi tunapitisha hoja , Mheshimiwa Hatimy ameleta hoja 
nzuri, Mheshimiwa  Milka ameleta hoja nzuri , Mheshimiwa  Civilizer  ameleta hoja nz uri na 
Waheshimiwa wengine wameleta h oja nzuri lakini tati zo liko katika utekelezaji. Mheshimiwa  
Spika  hivi leo kila siku sisi tukileta hoja nzuri kama hizi Fadhili analeta kila siku hoja ni nzuri 
lakin i tutaleta lini hoja nzuri wakati  kesho na kesho kutwa hazitekelezwi ? 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 Hilo ndi lo sisi kama Bunge la Mombasa tunapata kama Waheshimiwa na kusema kweli 
sisi tunaonekana kana kwamba hatufanyi kazi, lakini  wale wenye wana o tufanya sisi tusionekane 
kwamba hatufanyi  kazi zetu ni executive Mheshimiwa  Spika. L eo hii hoja kama hii imepi ta 
Kamati ya Implementation ambayo  Mhes himiwa  mwenzangu N aibu Mheshimiwa  Mwamwiri 
yuko hapa anastahili aweze kutilia mkazo leo hii anasema hoja f ulani ilipitishwa  haikutekelezwa  
wakati yeye ndio N aibu Mwenyekiti wa Kamati husika. Hivyo basi  yeye mwenyewe anastahili 
pamoja na K amati yake kuweza kutuambia zile hoja zilizopita zimefikia wapi hadi kufikia leo , 
kuliko aseme ilipita Mheshimiwa fu lani na leo tunatewa hoja ingine , ile iliyoletwa ni ya asilimia 
30 to 70, hii ni ya unskilled labo urers ni hoja mbili tofauti  kabisa.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika jambo lengine mimi kusema kweli ni kuhusu maswala ya 
hawa ma  contractors ; lau leo ingekuwa tunafahamishwa kwamba kila mwana kandarasi atakuja 
hapa kama ni K amati f ulani iseme katika W odi ya F rere Town mwana kandarasi  ni mtu f ulani na 
kandarasi  ni ya mt u fulani kwa hivyo , mimi kama MCA nita kuwa na u fahamu ya kwamba  kuna 
kandarasi  imepelekwa katika Wo di yangu na nitajitahidi kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba vijana au 
kina mama na walemavu wamepata vibarua husika wa  katika  kandarasi  ile.  
Hivyo basi  langu kuu Mheshimiwa  Spika ni upande wa executive  na ningependa sana pia 
Mwakilishi wa vijana katika Bunge hili tumehojiana hapa ana hoja nzuri sana ametayarisha na 
lau hoj a hii ikija katika Bunge hii itatusaidia sisi kama wa wakilishi wa K ata ndogo mbali mbali  
kuweza k uonekana kwamba tunatekeleza wajibu  wetu kulingana na K atiba ya nchi yetu . Kwa 
hivyo kwa hayo ma chache Mheshimiwa  Spika nasimama na kuunga mkono hoja hii . Ahsante 
sana. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula . Yes Hon. Junior  Wambua , 
the Chief Whip.  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa nafasi hii . Mimi 
ningelitaka kuunga mkono hoja hii; h oja hii ni nzuri sana k wa sababu Bwana Spika matatizo 
yamekuwa mwana kandarasi  wowote ambaye anapewa kazi wanakuja na watu wao ku toka 
sehemu ambazo wanataka n a hiyo inasababisha wale vijana wapate tabu wakitaka hizo kazi 
ndogo ndogo .  
 Juzi ilikuwa kwangu mwana kandarasi  alipata kazi, vijana wakaja na vijana wa kuchimba 
na vijana wangu walikataa na wakaleta fujo sana ikalazimisha mwana kandarasi  akimbie 
anitafute aliv yonitafuta nikamwambia vijana wangu awape kazi akawapa hiyo kazi vijana 30 
hapo wakapata kazi karibu wiki moja . Hii itakuwa ikishapita na ikishatekelezwa itakuwa 
inatusaidia sisi  kwa sababu hata katika serikali Gatuzi  ya Mombasa sisi tunaona mwana 
kandarasi  ameingia na hatujui ametoka wapi na wewe ndio umes ukuma hiyo kitu mpaka ikapita 
lakini ikianza kufanywa ile kazi we we hautajua .  
 Kwa hivyo watu wako hawatapata hiyo kazi ; hiyo imekuwa jambo ambayo sio nzuri , hata 
tukienda kwa Wabunge wetu, W abunge wetu pi a wakileta wana kandarasi  katika W odi yako 
hakuna chochote ambacho waweza kuongezea . Tunasema hiyo ikipita lazima itekelezwe na 
kama haitatekelezwa tutailazimisha kule mitaani itekelezwe i li watu wetu waweze kupata kaz i. 
Ahsante s ana. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Wambua. Y es Hon . Hamida Noor.  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I do support the M otion that has come ; I feel 
like we are sitting on a time bomb , if we do not engage these young people ! 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  When these opportunities arise I think we are in deep trouble, this is a very good Motion 
and I think when these people come  in and want to do work in our County we should have the 
young ones to be given the jobs . These people are unskilled on the verandas a s we call them 
mtaani  and right now we don’t have any jobs in Mombasa  as unemployment has gone high and 
we don’t know what to do with the people . We are having gangsters coming up every now and 
then and I think we should implement this Motion and the rest of the M otions that we have 
brought in this  House , I do support this M otion.  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Hamida. Y es Hon . Juma Boy.  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker .  I arise to support the M otion;  
it’s very important for us to differentiat e this Motion with the p revious Motion and I have heard 
one of my colleagues asking about the Public Procurement Disposal Act, it says its 30  per cent  of 
the tender should be given to  special interest and then the Motion that was brought by Hon . 
Hatimy is that all companies , all private companies should accord residents 70  per cent  of their 
employment opportunities and then when it comes to this M otion it is very clear that we want 
employment of unskilled labour ers by our contractors who are on the ground .  
 So it’s important we as Hon . Members learn to differentiate issues because in my view 
these are total ly different issues . Mr. Speaker Sir when we are talking about the 30  per cent  that 
we give to the youth s is different from saying that  a contractor on the ground should employ the 
locally unskilled  labourers who are youth s in that area,  so you see in my view the mischief that 
this M otion is trying to achieve is that most cont ractors are very mischievous because th ey want 
cheap labour and they are going to negotiate with some desperate youths from one of our slum s 
so they keep moving with them so that is availability of cheap labour . When they come to 
Kisauni they come with that cheap labour that they negotia ted els ewhere or even in other 
Counties or even in Kilifi so they come there with cheap labour so they don’t want to engage our 
youth s maybe our youth s are advanced  and they would want for instance Ksh.700 but their 
negotiated prices with their.. ...(Technical h itch).   
 There is a saying , hata mkizima stima tutaendela tu   the drunk ards were saying... that is 
just a by the way , so what am saying ...the issue that i was trying to put to the attentio n of Hon.  
Members is that this M otion is a bit different because we a re saying apart from the  Public 
Procurement Disposal Act ; apart from the 70  per cent  of all private companies residents to be 
employed, we are saying its mandatory that if am a contracto r is in Mjambere he or she  must 
take youth s from Mjambere there is no question about it . I can’t  come with youths from Kwale 
or youths from elsewhere and make them work there , so i think this is a good M otion although it 
has its flip side, i think this is a good M otion and i stand to support it. S o it’s important we 
differen tiate issues as Hon . Members because we are quick to judge others as dumb but also our 
intellectual quotient should also be examined because we have to l ook at issues and separate 
them.  Thank y ou. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Juma Amriya. Yes Hon Nyiro . 
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker , first and foremost I want to use the 
microphone that is available on my d esk because of hygienic reasons.  Mr. Speaker we are being 
subjected to ve ry unhygienic conditions in this House ; it is a  very serious matter as most people 
in Mombasa if you have observed now are coughing including myself , so allowing us or forcing 
us to using one mic rophone  all of us am not a doctor but it is not hygienic . 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  So whoever is concerned with the electroni cs in t his H ouse must up his game b ecause we 
might contract C orona all of us in one go and you can just imagine Mr. Speaker all of us getting 
sick! So it’s not a laughing matter and again our insurance is not out so you can imagi ne we are 
surviving by the Grace o f God.   
 Mr. Speaker going to the M otion at hand indeed it is a good M otion and we have heard 
very many observati ons from the ground including f rom my village where a con tractor was 
contracted by this C ounty to do a road and of course  he came with his boys  from I don’t know 
where ! But again when I forced him to also take my boys what he was doing is he was giving the 
wages where he differentiated the local boys  who were given Ksh.400 per day and the imported 
boys were given Ksh.800. The reason behind that i s that the local boys were from the village and 
the other s were imported so they need ed fare to commute.  
 Mr. Speaker we must be clear in some issues and we must be able to know whoever is 
going to enforce this law when we pass it here because it is eviden t that we have been passing 
very good M otions in this House but we fail to understand the inef ficiency of the  department or 
the lack of the know-how on who  should be following up on the M otions and implement them . 
 Mr. Speaker I sit in the Implementation C ommittee but the C ommittee is not to blame 
because the departments are employed just like we are here to debate in this H ouse nobody is 
forcing us to come to this House . Mr. Speaker , so I don’t see the essence as to why a whole 
executive office or departme nt should be co erced  by people to do what they w ere already 
employed to do . 
 Mr. S peaker so sometimes it is a matter of being responsible and fearing God and being 
true we are grown ups and one qualification for one to acquire employment is that we must be  
grown -ups so you can’t be a grown up given a responsibility to do and then you don’t do it you 
expect someone to come knock at your door every day to do it.   
 Mr. Speaker maybe we should mature as a House and am not saying that we  are 
immature ... what am saying we should progress in doing our things . We should be able to use 
our teeth and bite Mr. Speaker if we are su re this M otion passed and it was supposed to be 
implemented by a department and the department is not doing it . We have the power to summon  
them and ask hard questions from them but if you continue to question the Implementation 
Committee if the M otion was sup posed to be implemented by the Health C ommittee , the Health 
Committee should be responsible  and call that depa rtment ask them we passed t his M otion why 
are you not implementing it as a matter of supplementing the work of the Implementation 
Committee if you want to get things done . 
 Mr. Speaker so this M otion is good but we need to be able to understand wh oever is 
going to enforce this M otion... this law so that we can be sure when there is a gap we can be able 
to face them otherwise we will be creating employment to some rogue  officials in this C ounty 
because if we leave it open some people from the known department s might try to go there an d 
solicit if you don’t employ people from here something like that . So we should be very serious 
about this thing and it is a good M otion Mr. Speaker so I support it but again as a H ouse we 
should up our game and take full responsibility of everything we p ass here if we want it to be 
implemented.  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Robert Nyiro . Yes Hon . Kizito Opeya ? 
 
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I also rise to support the M otion brought by the 
Deputy Speaker Hon. Fad hili Mwalimu ; I think i t will create better employment for the locals 
especially in our W ards where we have been faced with several instances .  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  This is where you see a road being built in your Ward and people who are  not even from 
there are the ones doing  the work and it brings a  lot of pressure to the MCAs because now the 
youth s start questioning you . We also have to look at the issue that Hon . Kitula said about 
implementation , let’s just not bring the M otion but we also make sure it is impleme nted so  that it 
can benefit us. Thank y ou. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Kizito . Yes Hon . Juma Renson . 
 
 Hon. Thoya : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker . I think th is is a M otion that I deserve to 
support being the Chair of L abour and it happens that everyo ne of us is a resident of Mombasa 
where we understand the labour scenario ...our situation in Mombasa County truly the labour  
market in Mombasa is in a disarray ! It is going to be very well if at all we come with  all 
strategies to ensure that we get alterna tive of what used to exist . 
 We und erstand that most of our youth s used to get jobs in the port but that is now a thing 
in the past and therefore coming up with strategies like these we need to support it but  maybe we 
need the time to put the County Labour  Inspectors at hand because these contractors need to be 
inspected  whether they  are doing the righ t thing that was passed by the C ounty Assembly of 
Mombasa.  
 I support the Motion  and I think it should not end to the contractors that ar e being given 
contra cts by the C ounty, even those people that are being given by the national government they 
are bringing infrastructural development that is one , they should also bring employment benefits 
and it should be an issue of the national government alone that if an  MCA is going questioning 
he is being said that he is crossing borders, there are no borders in Mombasa. W hat we 
understand development is for Mombasa and these development should include infrastructural 
development they should include employment benefits ...all of them . 
 Sometimes you go to these contractors and you are told the MP is going to bring labour 
not the MCA ; these are some of the things they need to be sorted out . I support it and it should 
not be  tagged that this is national and this is County a nd sometimes being the Chairman of 
Labour you give me a very enormous  task when you say huku sio kwako .  
 Labour in Mombasa sho uld remain labour not only the C ounties perspective we have got 
very small thing to look in the County but there are very small c ontractors that are brought here 
and some of them are so rogue ... they don’t understand this they are so many companies , so 
many shops here our youths are languishing they have just decided to go to  drug hubs  while we 
are here very comfortable s eated. I  support it and i support anything related to employment  that 
comes in this House  count me number one . Thank y ou. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Renson. Yes Hon . Mohamed Mohamed ? 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza nataka kup ongeza rafiki 
yangu Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri kwa verse  ile alioleta ya kusema kuwa , Hal-yastawi lladhina ya  
Alamumuna Walladhina la Y a Alamuna  ni kusema kuwa ni sisi wenyewe kujua kwa sababu 
mambo haya yalikuwa yatakikana jana yafanyike sisi ni kama ambao hatun a interest twaangalia 
mambo mengine lakini mambo muhimu hatu angalii ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9  Mheshimiwa Spika Motion  kama hii ilikuwa kitambo tufanye policy ambayo ile policy 
itakuwa iko na hakuna haja ya kwenda kumkumbusha mtu kuwa kwenye kandarasi  ikitoka kuna 
sheria hii.. .(Technical hitch ). Kwa hivyo sisi kazi  yetu ni kufanya sh eria lakini sheria hazifu atwi, 
lau ingekuwa sisi tuna concentrate  kikweli (Off microphone/Power outage ...kwa mfano 
Mheshimiwa Sp ika nilileta ile Motion haswa kuna b enki f ulani tumepata ku zungumza nao kuwa 
twataka watoto wetu wakipewa kandarasi  wakiwa na zile LPOs wakienda benki, benki ikubali 
kuwapatia  mikopo  wafanye kazi ili ipate kuwasaidia alafu Kaunti  ilipe zile pesa, Kaunti  italipa 
zile pesa mikopo  waliotoa ki sha ile faida mwenye kazi  ataichuku a. Kwa hivyo M heshim iwa 
Spika nafikiri hii Mheshimiwa  Fadhili ameleta ni kama kofia la ufahamu tufanyeni sera vitu 
kama hivi tuvi weke tukitoka ndani ya hii N yumba w atu wajue kwamba tumefanya kitu.  
 Mheshimiwa S pika hii hoja ni nzuri na Members  tukubaliane kwa sauti moja sote 
tupitishe jambo hili alafu twaomba Implementation C ommittee  iwajibike ikiwa watu wanaweza 
kufuata m paka Waziri wa Uchukuzi  aweze kufanyiwa impeachment   kwa nini hawa hawaf uatwi 
kama waliv yo fu atwa Idara ya Uchukuzi. Kwa  hivyo ni sisi wenyewe kuwajibika na kusema 
tuifanyeni kazi vile inavyotakikana na tupate kuendelea mbele, ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed. Y es Hon . Nzai . 
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . As far a s i would wish to support this M otion it is 
also very bad to say that your dad is naked , thank you Mr. Speaker back to our M otion.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Milka . 
 
 Hon. Ngare : The words the Hon ourable is using vernacular language if it’s English he 
should use  English if Kiswahili it should be Swahili.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Milka . Yes continue Hon . Nzai ? 
 
 Hon. Nzai : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I would like to inform this House i have never 
expressed myself in my vernacular language I always us e English , the problem is that colleges or 
universities we attended are different ... 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes continue Hon . Nzai . 
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Okay back to the Motion. The M otion I don’t say it’s a repeat of events but 
it’s so sad becau se sometimes we are the ones  to blame ourselves; actually  the way I am sensing 
issues here is that they are four to five manda tory obligations which we are la cking. One, the 
implementation obligation  lacks in this House, second, the enforcement obligation…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson?  
 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10  Hon. Thoya:  I think I … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Juma Renson Thoya are you on a point of 
information or?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  I want to inform you and then you are going  to make your ruling on the 
same. I am worried by the kind of vocabulary he is bringing out and the coat he is wearing is 
very big if you are observing  Mr. Speaker . I think Serj eant should look at that man; t hese are the 
things that you cannot open a dicti onary and see, and please if he is going to use Kiswahili we 
will be very comfortable. ..obligatory , what are those things? He should not force himself to be 
seen that he went to school. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Juma Renson. Ye s Hon. Nzai?  
  
Hon. Nzai:   Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Or were you trying to say obligations?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Mr. Speaker you should protect me ! You know sometimes we use the words 
building informatory and information … 
 
(Laughte r) 
 
So they should understand they  are so many ways of  using the English  words; y ou can 
use the normal words and at the same time you can build them to the heaven. So what is 
important ... (Technical hitch) (power outage )  Mr. Speaker Sir, so many good Motio ns have been 
passed in this House of which it is a credit to us but a pity on them is that no policy and 
regulations were made on them a nd for a Motion to work there must be a policy paper in place. 
 So I think it is high time being in our third  year or ra ther two and a half years we go back 
to the cooperation between the upper House and the lower House. If this , Hon. Speaker ; can be 
done then I believe everything can be on the same line.  
Coming back to my W ard, you can never find such a thing happening be cause youth s in 
my area are always alert and when ever a contractor comes in Kadzandani he or she cannot do 
that job. It is a must for him to give work to my youth s and this has happened several times and I 
have been at war with them and things are now ok.  
So my fellow Hon. Members it is up to you, pull up your socks so that any contractor, 
any contractor and I repeat who will come to your W ards and not dance to your tune then do not 
blame anybody, do not blame the Executive, blame yourself for failing to i mplement what is due 
for you. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Kombe Nzai. Yes Hon. Tobias 
Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker just a plea on our side , all these 
microph ones are d ead! S o maybe the technicians to take note on that we are more comfortable 
using these ones than using this moving microphone. Hon. Speaker I would wish to support the 
Motion and I also concur with most of the Members who have supported the Motion , but my 
issue is a Motion has to be implemented immediately after 60 days after it being tabled in the 
House and after it has passed.  
 The concern of Members and the concern of most of us  is that  we have got good Motions, 
we have good documents, we have good argu ments but Mr. Speaker let us not blame the 
Implementation Committee let  us blame ourselves. When the  implementation Committee will 
start dealing with issues to do with the implementation it is us the same Members who will start 
compromising the situation. I am a Member of the said Committee and I think the last 
assignment that we did we tabled a Report before the House and nothing has been done so far.  
Maybe it is a new year 2020 with new energy we will  come with so many Motions here;  
your Motion is as goo d and we could have passed it as early as yesterday , but I am afraid just 
like the others that have here ...Hon. Milka once had a very good Motion about installing litter 
bins all over . I do not even know where it  stalled s o I would request through your Cha ir and 
through your office Hon. Speaker that if mayb e the Implementation Committee is not up to the 
task...,because we would wish through your Chair , through your leadership we leav e a legacy 
behind so at least something should be done so that even if you can have an Ad Hoc  Committee 
that is going to do a follow up on all the Motions that we have passed in this House that one 
would be a good thing to do.  
Anyway I support the Motion and I am readily available, like Hon. Nzai has said tha t 
they will only act  in your W ard when you are weak. I am readily available to offer any 
manpower or any backup or any support to support any Hon. Member who is facing difficulties I 
stand to support the Motion. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Samba. Ye s Hon. Milka Moraa?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. In regards to what Hon. Nyiro has already raised 
on hygiene matters I would request not to use that microphone because my anxiety is already 
rising, I think I am audible enough…  
 
(Technical hitch)   
(Background consultations)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes but the Clerk has used it, so I do not know if you will 
be fine with it?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  There is no sound..  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sure? Ok.  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12  Hon. Ngare:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker onc e again thank you so much for allowing me to 
make this moment so that I can contribute while I feel safe and comfortable. I rise to support the 
very good Motion that has been brought by  our able Deputy Speaker of this House. Just to say in 
very few words I  think it is an abuse to the locals when people get contract s and they import 
cheap labour, the unskilled labour from elsewhere to come and plant them at  the site where the 
work is being done. Yes and I repeat it is an abuse to the locals who are yearning for those kind 
of jobs so they can make ends meet.  
 As Hon. Members we can look outside here we have youth s who are languishing, who 
are so much in need of jobs, who really need anything to do to make a living, to put some bread 
on the table for their fam ilies or for themselves. So it is high time we continue to fight for this 
kind of Motions and in fact as Hon. Amriya said there is one that was brought by Hon. Hatimy, 
this one has now come up maybe it is high time we generate a Bill or a Policy so that we  have all 
of them together that it is known that when a contractor is given this kind of work, when this 
kind of thing is happening this is the law that we should follow so that we do  not have to do 
things like a sking the youth to go fight for those jobs a nd cause some commotions at the 
construction site where the contractor is messing.  
 So we really need to work as Hon. Members, generate a Bill so that this is known that 
this is what is supposed to happen i n order for the locals to gain a nd we cannot abso lutely 
exonerate the Implementation Committee, i t is not possible because the bu ck stops with them. If 
they are having some challenges on implementing the Motions that we passed, let them also ask 
for our support then together as a House we can see how to summon the Executive and also 
ensure that the Motions passed in this House are implemented.  
 It is an embarrassment for example people have been quoting me from former Chief 
Whip and the others that we passed the Motion, I brought a Motion here on Install ation of litter 
bins, we do not have a single litter bin even within offices here, within the Assembly we do not 
have even a single litter bin where we can put the rubbish that is already needed to be disposed 
off! It is an embarrassment.  
 So we really ne ed to follow up on Motions that  we pass  in this House so that they can be 
implemented then we shall be seen like we are working because if we pass and they are put in 
some kind of shelf and left there to rot and gather  dust then we are doing nothing, w e will leave 
no legacy in this House. With those few remarks Mr. Speaker thank you so much and I fully  
support, 100  per cent the Motion that is in this House this moment. Thank you so much.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka. Hon. Members I just  want to remind 
you that I have heard most Members complaining about the Executive whereby they do not 
implement these Motions. But the problem sta rts with you yourselves Members;  the Standing 
Order is very clear ... Hon. Amriya if you can read for us Stand ing Order 189 Committee on 
Implementation what are their m andates? Do these people even meet , have they looked at their 
mandate s, do they even know what their mandate is? And it is very clear Standing Order 189 .  
 
(Hon. Amriya Juma read Standing Order No. 189) 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : (1) There shall be a Select Committee to be known as the 
Committee on Implementation. (2) The Committee shall scrutinize the resolutions of the County 
Assembly (including adopted Committee Reports), petitions and the undertakings g iven by the 
County Executive Committee and examine ;  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 (a) Whether or not such decisions and undertakings have been implemented and where 
implemented, the extent to which they have been implemented; and whether such 
implementation has taken place within the mini mum time necessary; and , 
  
(b) Whether or not legislation passed by the County Assembly has been operationalized  and 
where operationalized , the extent to which such operationaliz ation has taken place within 
the minimum time necessary.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes and Sub Section 3? Please Hon. Amriya just finish with 
Sub Section 3 , I think that is the most important.  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Ok. 189 (3) of the Standing Order says that ; (3) The Committee 
may propose to the County Assembly, sanctions against any Mem ber of the County Executive 
Committee who fails to report to the relevant Select Committee on Implementation status without 
justifiable reasons.   
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So has any of those Members done anything like that? 
Instead of us we are just c omplaining here. So Hon. Members, yes Hon. Renson ? 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I wonder as a Member of the Implementation Committee, this 
is one of Committee that needs to track all the Motions passed here ; but it is one of the 
Committee s you need to call ei ther to your office so that it can explain its situation. It is when we 
try to say this is not a Sectoral Committee with no training with nothing. These are some of the 
things that we are coming across here ... you need, I think yesterday we had a meeting i n your 
office and some of th ese things came our very clear ly because for me to do my job, to do it very 
well I need to have the said necessary skills and that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Renson Juma I do not understand what came out 
clear ly yesterday, c an you explain to this House what was the meeting about?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Ok. I think…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You know Hon. Renson please do not put me in that corner. 
Yesterday you came to my office the re was nothing  which came clear; y ou came to my office 
and you said you want to go to Nairobi, so just make it clear please. There is nothing like 
anything which came out clear ly, just give the mic rophone  to Hon. Renson. You know Hon. 
Renson do not push the ball to my s ide there is nothing which came out clear ly yesterday. Just 
explain to this House...  
 
(Point of Information)  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa taarifa.  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14 (Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, let the Hon. Member first finish to explain what was 
conspired yesterday in my office.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Bwana Spika.  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Baadhi ya mikakati ambayo Kamati hii inajaribu ili kuweza kujua na kuwa na uzoefu wa 
kazi hii ni katika hatua ambayo tulikuja jana kwa sababu baadhi ya Kamati zinapelekwa katika 
mafun disho (Technical hitch / Off Mic rophone)  ni wajibu wetu kuja kwa ofisi yako kujaribu 
kueleza zile shida ambazo tunajaribu kupitia ikiwemo moja kutokuwa na uzoefu wa kutekeleza 
hizi kazi. Ahsante . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes H on. Mohamed what is your point of 
information?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika tusifanye Implementation  tukamfanya 
kondoo wa sikukuu hapa. Unajua hizi Standing Orders  nyingi zimeowana Mheshimiwa Spika ; 
nataka kwenda kuarifu Nyumba hii kuwa ni sisi kuwa hatuko (Technical h itch/Off microphone)  
lakini ukiangalia Kanuni ya Bunge  182 inatatua hii shida yetu ambayo Kanuni nambari  182 
imeshikana na Article  163 ya Katiba iko wazi kabisa.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kama ni kweli sisi twazungumza hapa kwa uk weli, 
twataka kufanya kazi Kanuni nambari  182 itekelezwe  hii shida yote itatuondokea. Nafikiri hii 
itatuondokea kwa sababu ni lazima tupate Report any Motion, any document  itakayotoka ndani 
ya hii Nyumba . Waziri anaehusika na jambo hili ni lazima alete Rip oti ndani ya hii Nyumba 
kusema kuwa amefanya, hakufanya na kwa nini hakufanya; n a ukiangalia Kifungu cha 16 3 iko 
wazi kabisa Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed but again I think even Standing 
Order 189 it is even much cle arer what is the job of the Committee on Implementation and that is 
why we are asking the Hon. Members . According to Hon. Juma Renson it is true they came to 
my office yesterday, complaining to me the difficulties which they were facing whereby with 
that Committee they have not understoo d their mandates, right Hon. Renson?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And we are planning something so that they can be taken for 
a course whereby they will understand their mandates and maybe hopeful ly after that they will 
be no any other complaints from the Hon. Members , so Hon. Renson we are working on that. 
Yes Hon. Mwamwiri, Vice Chairman?  
 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15  Hon. Athman Mwam wiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nikiwa Naibu wa Mwenyekiti 
ambaye kama Mwenyekiti wangu hayuko nina geuka ninakuwa Kaimu wa Mwenyekiti 
Mheshimiwa Spika nimeona mzigo wa lawama ukilekezwa katika Kamati yetu husika lakini 
Mheshimiwa kwa uchache wa ufahamu na elimu tuliyonayo katika Kamati yetu husika tuliweza 
kuleta ripoti ya kila hoja iliopita katika Jumb a hili na iliku wa ni matarajio yetu ya kwamba 
Kamati husika ya zile hoja waseme ya kwamba ripoti tulio weka kutokana na idara tulizopewa 
taarifa zile zina uhaba ama haziko sahihi ili jukumu la ibara ya 89 sehemu ndogo ya tatu (3) 
tuweze kuitekeleza .  
 Hoja hii lazima ilikuwa ijengwe kutokana na Kamati husika yenyewe Mheshimiwa 
Spika, l akini baada ya sisi kuleta ripoti ya hoja zote kabla tufunge kwenda likizo ndefu mwaka 
jana hakuna Mheshimiwa yeyote wala K amati yoyote ilion yesha kutoridhika na ripoti ile  ama 
kuwa na dukuduku ya kwamba utekelezaji ule hauko sahihi . 
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kwa Waheshimiwa kunya nyuka na kuelekeza kidole cha 
lawama kwa Kamati ya U tekelezaji kwa lugha sahihi nitasema huo ni unafiki wa hali ya juu. 
Kwa sababu wao wenyewe pia wa nalo jukumu k atika ibara 182 ya kuhakikisha Mawaziri husika 
wa K amati hizi wanajua ndani ya siku 6 0 kwa Kamati zao sio kwa Kamati ya Utekelezaji 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
 Hivyo basi  sisi letu ni  kuulizia baadae utekelezaji wa kijumuiya ama uf uatilizi lakini 
ndani  ya siku 60 ni jukumu la Waziri kujibu kwa K amati yake husika ; je hizi K amati husika 
chini ya usimamizi ya Wenyeviti na M anaibu wao na wanachama wao washawahi pata taarifa 
yoyote kuhusiana na hoja ndani ya siku 60?. Kama bado Mheshimiwa S pika hawajapata la wama 
hili kubwa lik o kwao zaidi kulikoni hata kwa K amati utekelezaji.  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika pamoja na Mheshimiwa wanachama wangu wa Kamati ya 
Utekelezaji amejaribu kuyaelekeza lakini pia tunajaribu kwa ule uchache wa ufahamu tulio  nao 
kujitahidi  kuhakikisha tunasukuma gurudumu  hili mbele ili majukumu yatekelezeke tukisubiria 
ile juhudi ofisi yako inatekeleza kwa niaba ya K amati yetu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri.  Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
 Hon. Kitula : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ningependa kupitia K iti chako kwa sababu 
nimeshangazwa sana na Mhes himiwa mwenzangu ambaye ni M wenyekiti w a Kamati ya Leba 
kusema kwamba Kamati yao ya Utekelezaji  hawafahamu majukumu yao na sasa hivi tuko ndani 
ya miaka miwili.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika l akini la kushangaza ukienda katika zile  stakabadhi  za kutia sahihi 
kwamba wamekaa kama kikao wame weka saini, kama Kamati w amekaa na kuweza kufanya 
mikutano . Tunaomba zile kumbukumbu  za kila m kutano  walikuwa wanakaa wanafanya nini? 
Kama hawa jui majukumu yao wakati wametia sahihi katika kila kikao. Ahs ante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula . Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri : Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante . Kumuweka sawa Mheshimiwa 
Kitula ni kwe li Kamati tunakaa tunatekeleza yale tunayoyafahamu kwa uchache wa elimu 
tuliyonayo na ndani yake yamezibuka baadhi ya upungufu ambayo imepelekea miongoni mwa 
lawama kuelekezwa kwetu .  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
16  Ndio maana ya Mheshimiwa na Kamati jana kuja katika ofisi yako kutaka k ujegwa 
uwezo zaidi ; lakini majukumu tunayatekeleza kukaa tunakaa na kumbukumbu za B unge hili 
zitathibitisha kwamba tushawahi  leta ripoti inayohusiana na utekelezaji wa hoja zote am balo hilo 
ni moja wapo ya jukumu ya K amati yetu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Kwa hivy o Mheshim iwa S pika hatukuwa asilimia 100 kamili kiufasaha na usawa wa 
utekelezaji lakini angalau kwenye 70 tunacheza , hivyo tukipat a maelekezo zaidi chini ya 
matay arisho ya ofisi yako tuna  imani majukumu yetu na uwajibika ji wetu utafika asilimia 100 na 
Mun gu akituwezesha. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : I want to give clarification. Mr. Speaker you noticed that this 
Standing Order was a model law from the N ational Assembly and the Article 153 (4) (b) talks of 
the national . So Mr. Speaker this is something that we need to talk; 152, one when we are 
referring to Article, I think the S ecretaria t can capture this and yourself, when you are referring 
to Article 153 (4) (b) I understand because this is…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : One fifty ...? 
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : One eighty two (182) of the Standing Order makes reference with 
Article 153 (4) (b) of the Constitution.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes?  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : And…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It is clear Article 153 (4) (b), Cabinet Secretaries shall 
provide P arliament with full and regular reports concerning matters under their control.  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : Yes it refers to the Cabinet in the S enate. Mr. Speaker this  is the 
County A ssembly so we need to take note and we refer it to my opinion to Article 195 that gives 
the County Assembly powers so this is in line with national , it talks about t he national 
government and the Parliament and the S enate .  
 Mr. Speaker so this is in vis a vis the Cabinet Se cretaries of the national level ; however, 
having sa id that because we adopted these  Standing Orders I would like to say that pursuant to 
your earlier directions the Com mittee o n implementation ...the bu ck stops at the Comm ittee on 
Implementation.  
 Why I am I saying that? Because 182 is very spe cific in its legislative work, i t says that 
60 days after the adop tion of the a resolution the CEC  will report back to the Committee just that 
but on the sanctions the only instituti on that or the only C ommittee that has power to sanction , 
that has been g iven powers to sanction is the Committee on I mplementation .  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
17  So the legislative part is 182 , that 60 days the Cabinet Secretaries need  to bring a report 
back to t he C ommittee ... to the different secto ral  Committee but if they f ail to do so the 
Committee on I mplementation now has powers to sanction and bring a report . So my friend here 
Hon. Mwamwiri cannot skip the gun; y ou can’t sa y that 182 alone is sufficient, h ere the literature 
of the S tanding order is clear on the golden rule interpretation that 189 is specifically that the 
only Committee with the  mandate of sanctioning is the Committee on I mplementation so he 
can’t  pass the buck,  liaise with all the sectorial C ommittees, thank y ou.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members . I think we are getting out of the 
Motion now , so Hon. Members...   
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Yes, but Hon. Mwamwiri you are the Vice C hair. So Hon. Mwamwiri what is your point 
of information?  
 
 Hon. Ath man M wamwiri : Mheshimiwa Spika ndugu yangu Wakili  Mheshimiwa 
Amriya katika 82 imejukumisha Waziri kwa Kam ati husika halafu ikapeana 8 9 ya kwamba 
Kamati ya U tekelezaji i chukue hatua lakini sisi hatuna uwezo wa  kuchukua hatua pasi na  kupata 
taarifa ile kutoka kwa  Kamati husika . Swali ni je yeye kama M wenyekiti na wale Wenyeviti  
wengi ne wa K amati husika ndani ya siku 60 kwa wao kutopata taarifa hizi , je washawah i leta 
hoja hii ama kuitaarifu Kamati ya U tekelezaji juu ya changamoto hiyo i li sisi twende katika  
89(3)  Mheshimiwa Spika? Kwa hivyo sisi hatukimbii lakini na yeye asitufukuze mbio tunazo.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Mwamwiri have you read 189 (2)? The C ommittee 
shall scrutinize the resolution of the County Assembly ; including adopted Committee repo rts, 
Petition undertaking given by the County Executive C ommittee and examine; (a) Whether or not 
such decision undertaking have been implemented ... can you read that 189 properly?  
 
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri : Ndio Mheshimiwa Sp ika iko wazi kwa weupe na weusi n a 
ndipos a kabla tufunge B unge hili mw aka jana tulileta taarifa kama K amati ya kwamba  
utekelezaji wa kila hoja kama K amati sisi tumeona imefikilia hapa kutokana na  yale tulioyauliza . 
Kwa hivyo palipo  uhaba ama kutokuwa na uha lisia wa jambo lile ilikuwa ni K amati iseme ni 
kweli hoja hii inatuhusu na sisi tunajua imefika asilimia 40 ripoti yenu mlioleta inasema ni  
asilimia 80. Ndio hili la ziada la sehemu ndogo ya tatu tuweze kulitekeleza na sisi tulileta ripoti 
ya hoja zote zilizopita katika B unge hili na Waheshimiwa wote kwa mioyo mikunjufu waliridhia 
na wakanyamazia swali ni je sisi kama kama ti pengine hatujui majukumu ama … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Hon. Mwamwiri I think you 
are contradicting yourself ; it is very c lear you have always been complaining in this House that 
whenever you write to the executive they never reply to you, you do n’t know, you cannot truck 
the Motion and this S tanding orders are very clear 189 (3) gives you  all the powers but you as 
the C ommit tee you don’t make use of those powers.  
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
18 It is very clear the C ommittee may propose to the County Assembly sanctions against any 
Member of the County Executive Committee who fails to  report to the relevant select Committee 
on Implementation status without justifiable reasons . So Hon. Mwamwiri not unle ss maybe you 
have other reasons y ou have this Standing Order and it is very clear , so go through that S tanding 
order and you will see where your powers are as a C ommittee and make use of those powers 
because ag ain Implementati on C ommittee covers all the C ommittees.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Yes Hon . Fadhili you may reply to the M otion?  
 
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 Yes Hon. Fadhili please reply?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me 
this time to respond Mr. Speaker I take this time to thank the all Hon. Members for their input in 
this motion Mr. Speak er plus the self -proclaim Hon t he ki ng of Makashablasha Mr. Speaker...  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 Mr. Speaker I think it is high time for the executive w ing to have a Liaison offi cer for 
him to liaise with the Committee on I mplementation to atleast spearhead the implementation or 
communicate to the office of the County Secretary on the M otions that we passed in this 
Honourable House. Indeed Mr. Speaker we are passing  good M otions and we have heard from 
the Hon. Members that some are still to be implemented and the department or the executive 
concerned as per our S tanding orders have 60 days to reply to this H onourable House as to why 
such M otions are being not implemented or they have been implemented.  
 Mr. Speaker it is now upon the C ommittee on Implementation through your C hair you 
have enlighten ed the C ommittee to at least know their mandates . From the meeting that 
transpired yesterday in your office it was clear enough in this Hon ourable  House with the self -
proclaimed king of Makashablasha  that he wasn’t aware of S tanding order 189 , but from today I 
am sure  he is awa re and I say thanks to the Honourable House and Hon. Members . 
 I will also like the Commi ttee on L abour to look forward in preparing a policy on such 
and very many polici es that are pending in this Honourable  House so that the residents of 
Mombasa can benefit from whatever we are transacting in this Hon ourable  House . Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Speaker) : Thank you very much Hon. Fadhili.  Hon. Members  I now 
put a question that the M otion by Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu be adopted by this Honourable House 
in the same term s as moved ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes, Clerk next of Order?  
 
March 4 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
19 MOTION  
 
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker  Sir I seek leave from this 
Honourable  House to at least  amend or add some input in my M otion because I have talked to 
Hon. Members and there are some inputs that we nee d to add to this M otion. So Mr. Speaker I 
am aski ng or seeking leave from this Hon ourable House to allow that the M otion  be returned 
back to the House Business C ommitt ee and be allotted another time. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So H on. F adhili you are withdrawing the Motion under 
Standing Order 48?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Mr. Speaker , under Standing Order 
48 on a M otion withdrawn that may be moved again.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : There was an amendment wit h another amendment so…  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes I am seeking leave to amend and the 
Chair S peaker will allot time as to wh en we are going to debate this M otion.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili permission is gran ted, you can 
withdraw the M otion . It is the same thin g to withdraw so as to amend because if you look at 
Standing order 48 (1) ; A notice of M otion may be withdrawn by the M ember who gave the notice, 
but notice of the same M otion may be given again eith er by the same or by any other M ember ... 
 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
 So the Motion is withdrawn and it should be brought back to the House Business where 
the time will be allotted to be back in the House. Yes Clerk next Order ? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this Hous e stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 4th March, 2020 at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The House r ose at  11:43 a.m. 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 