February 3, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedn esday, 3rd February, 2016  
The House  met at 2: 31p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh  Baya . 
(Silence ) 
...Hon.  Swaleh Kibwana Baya , yes Hon.  Saad , do you have something  from Hon.  Baya? 
Did he tell you to tell us something?  
Hon.   Faraj:  Thank you  so much for this opportunity . Mr. Speaker I don’t have anything 
or any message from Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh  Baya  but it  is very, very unfortunate for this House  
to have a lot of M otions come twice without the mover of the  Motion himself being present . So 
Mr. Speaker I would like to advise my fellow Hon.  Members of this House  that whenever we 
have a bus iness to transact in this House , we must make sure that we appear and make sure that 
we do actually transact that particular  statement  of the day, thank you so much.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Muriuki, do y ou have a message 
from any M ember?  
Hon.  Siminyu : Mine is a concern on  the law which  actually I think it has  to be done 
through a C ommittee , I don’t think there is any  Member of this C ommittee . Mr. Speaker this 
Report  is very important for this House  so that it can help us in  our oversight role. Mr. Speaker , 
this should go as a stern warning  to the committee, whether the Chairman is not there, a Member 
of the C ommittee should bring that paper. Mr. Speaker Sir, thank you.   
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Fadhili.  
            Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker sir, we have a Report , the first 
quarter Report  from the department of health b ut we had some few issues and as per our 
Standing orders something that is still in the Committee level  we cannot discuss it in f ront of the 
House  but we have the Report  but from  the C hairman but there are some few changes that we 
need to make in this Report  before we debate it in this Hon.  House  but if…  
(Interruption ) 
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : So are you sug gesting we push the Report  
forward , the Notice of M otion forward  or? Yes, a Notice of motio n the paper was presented here  
or maybe are you suggesting  that we put it another day or?  
            Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker, if i t is to move the N otice of Motion, we can move the 
Notice of Motion o f the Report  but debating  on this Report  or the actual date of bringing the 
Report  in this Hon.  House  even if it is next week.  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay then you can move the Notice of 
Motion. 
            Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Fadhili, can you move the Notice 
of M otion.  
(Loud c onsultation ) 
            Hon.  Mwalimu: Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  
(Hon.  Mwalimu moved Notice of M otion)  
February 3, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor  Page 2 Hon.  Fadhili gives Notice of M otion on adoption  of first quarter Report  for 2015 from the 
department of health  services ; That this House  adopts the first quarter Report  for 2015 from the 
Department of Health Services laid on the table of this House  on Wednesday  3rd February 2016 . 
I give the Notice of M otion to this Hon.  House . 
(End of Notice of Motion)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Saad. What is it?  
Hon.  Faraj:  Mr. Speaker it looks like there is a lot of confusion. Mr. Spea ker, this  was 
supposed to be a Notice of M otion so that we can be able to adopt the first quarter Report  for 
2015  for the Department of Health Services. Mr. Speaker and if you look at the O rder paper, 
number eight o n Motion, it re -appears again i t comes as a Motio n now, not as a Notice of M otion 
and the Hon.  Members not even attempted to seek leave so that it c an be delibe rated as a M otion . 
So I think Mr. Sp eaker that the Hon.  Member  should consult first before making any decision 
with the Chairman . Thank you.  
Depu ty Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : I understand Hon.  Saad but we are in business 
number six, we are yet to get to business number eight so , Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Hon.  Zeinab Omar Mumba.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg t o table 
this Report . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  it is a statement.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba:  I beg to table this statement.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : And you can do it  can you please read it for 
us? 
(Hon.  (Ms) Zeinab Mumba  read s tatement ) 
RECENT SHORTAGE OF  WATER IN THE COUNTY OF MOMBASA  
Water was disconne cted by the  Coast Water Service Board(C WSB) on 23rd 2016  on all 
water sources  which are outside  the C ounty . The sources are Tiwi  boreholes and Marere springs 
from Kwale County, M zizima Springs from Taita -Taveta County and Baricho from Kilifi 
County. These sources supply a total of 45 Million litres per day to Mombasa County. The 
disconnection was due to non -payment of the current bill of 26 Million Kenya s hillings and an 
outstandi ng bill  of 62 9.0 Million Kenya Shillings as from July 2013. A notice of disconnection 
authorized by the Ministry of Water and Irrigation was issued to the Water Company by CWSB. 
The current Bill was paid in full by Wednesday 27th January 2016 but CWSB refu sed to re -
connect until the County government paid 100 million by Friday 29th January 2016.  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Continue.  
(Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab Mumba continued)  
Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Omar Mumba:  The County government managed to pa y 5 million 
by 29th January 2016 and promises to pay 10 million Kenya shillings by Wednesday 3rd February 
2016. The County Executive Member made a  written commitment  for all the current bills as 
from February  2016 to be paid in full and ksh.45.0M to be pai d by 25th of each month to clear 
the outstanding bills . The County government of Mombasa has to factor some funds in 
2016/2017 budget to bail  out the water company.  The water supply resumed on 30th January 
2016 after the Coast water services board was sati sfied with the commitment made by the county 
government of Mombasa.  The CWSB was under pressure by the national treasury to raise funds 
for the repayment of World Bank  loan which had accrued to Ksh.4.1 B funds which were 
borrowed to improve water infrastru cture in coast region including Mombasa C ounty ; most of 
the funds were used to improve the water supply o f Mombasa over Ksh.1.5B of the World B ank 
February 3, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor  Page 3 funds was used within Mombasa County.  Mombasa Water Company  pays for bulk water supply 
at Ksh.25 per cubic me ter and 9 per cent of the total water billed for lease fee to CWSB every  
month. T he company bills an average of Ksh.75M per month  and collect s an average of 
Ksh.60.0M per month.  KSh.27M of the revenue collected goes for salaries and wages and 
KSh.10M goes to operation s and maintenance , the remaining is paid to CWSB and others , 
expenditures  are higher than the revenue.  The department has initiated a turnaround project 
support ed by the W orld bank to make the water company sustainable.  Thank you.  
Deputy Speake r (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much it was a beautiful 
statement. Yes, Clerk?  
MOTION  
Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh  Baya t he Chairperson for C ommittee on health or any  other person 
impersonating him y es, Hon.  Fadhili  Makarani?  
Hon.  Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker. Mr. Speaker, as I had said earlier, there are 
some few changes in this Report . I hereby seek permission from this Hon.  House  Mr. Speaker 
for us to brin g the same Report  next week by Wednesday morning we will be in a position to 
present this Report  to this Hon.  House . Thank you  Sir. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick.  
Hon.  Siminyu : Mr. Speaker, this matter has been referred to later dates for several times. 
Mr. Speaker, there is a need f or this Committee to do as the reason  because the quarter  Report  is 
very important for us and  I think Wednesday is too far m aybe the committee should bring it 
earlier as per T uesday afternoon b ecause we need this Report  and they have been  postponing 
every now and then, they have been seeking  for more time and the time is not there with us and 
the House  has to transact business and we as the oversight body we need to ha ve this Report  on 
time because I know  even  on Wednesday they are going to seek for more time. Let them work 
hard with the mission  Mr. Sp eaker Sir for the C ommittee to every now and then  to seek more 
time and this Report  we have had it for quite some time . I beg this House  to be protect ed Mr. 
Speaker so that we can have our Report  and this House  can be working as required by the 
constitutio n Mr. Speaker Sir. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Fadhili.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker as I said, the Report  is ready and 
the Report  its right in front  of the  Hon.  House  but as I said there are some few thin gs that we 
have to undertake so that when we make a Report  in this Hon.  House , it will be a fully supported 
Report . Mr. Speaker the Report  is from the executive department and one of the main reasons 
that we are not able to present the Report  today is that  the Report  is yet to be signed by the 
executive Member and the C hief officer and we are afraid  we might present the Report  if 
allowed I can present the Report  right in front of the Hon.  House  but it does not have the 
signature of the se two  executive M embe rs and the C hief officer a nd the adoption Report , the 
minute of adopting this Report  also are not  with this Report .  
So Mr. Speaker, I’m asking for this Hon.  House  to give us some few days , I’m sure by 
Wednesday morning we will be able to bring a full Repo rt with all the supporting documents . 
Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Kondo.  
Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi  pia ni 
mmoja  kati ya wanachama  wa Kamati  hii na Kamati iliyoko  mbele  yetu ambayo  iko na ripoti ; ni 
Kamati ambayo  ni muhimu  kwa kila mkaazi  na kila mwenyeji  wa Kaunti ya Mombasa . 
Mheshimiwa Spika, kama  alivyotuambia  Mheshimiwa  Fadhili  alivyosema  kwamba  ripoti  hiyo 
inahitaji  ipewe  muda  zaidi  kwa sababu  ya mawili au matatu  ambayo  yamepungua  katika  ripoti  
hii na kusema  ukweli  wanaohusika  katika  upande  wa executive  pia ni wiki mbili  sasa wako  
February 3, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor  Page 4 mafunzo, Chief Officer  mwenyewe  pamoja  na waziri  mwenyewe  katika  wizara  hii. Kwa  hivyo  ni 
muhimu  tukileta  ripoti  hii hapa h iyo ni ripoti  ambayo  itakuwa  ambapo  imekamilika  na isiwe  
nautata  katika  Nyumba  yetu hii. A hsante sana  Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you Hon.  Fadhili and all those 
who came up to clear this matter , now it seems there are some problems with th is Report  in the 
matter that it came in and the m anner it is being debated . Now for that reason I order this Report  
to go back to the Health Committee and it should be returned when you are ready, when it has a 
signature  and all the amendments are in order .So … 
(Applause ) 
When  is the Minister coming?  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker first and foremost we thank you for giving us this time 
without limit … 
(Laughter ) 
And Mr. Speaker , frankly speaking I am not in a position to say when the Minister is 
coming he might come and maybe his calendar on… maybe leaving again and…  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay! Okay! Okay! You bring it when it is 
ready . When it is ready you bring it here.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ): When it is ready bring it. Yes, Hon.  Patrick.  
Hon.  Siminyu : Mr. Speaker , the C ommittee should not be given a blank  cheque like that 
they can bring the Report  next year, next year but one and it is a quarterly Report  and the Report s 
usually have timeline s, at least  the C ommittee should tell us and make a communication next 
week or Tuesday give us the status of the Report . We should not operate in a vacuum, a nd Mr. 
Speaker,  I believe  an office…  
(Interruption ) 
Hon.  Mwalimu : Point of order Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Fadhili what is the point of order?  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it is as if the Hon.  Member is 
opposing your decision, you r directive Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker is it that we have other 
speakers in this House  or… 
                                                                 (Laughter ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay. I think, Mheshimiwa  Fadhili I believe 
everyone has a right to air their views so Mr. Patrick Siminyu  is in order.  He is in order to air his 
views on that note. Yes, Hon.  Patrick.  
Hon.  Siminyu : Mine is not challenging your decision Mr. Speaker. Mine was a concern 
that I was trying to raise in this House  Mr. Speaker Sir. It has been delayed , the C ommittee has 
already b een delayed  and giving us a blank check Mr. Speaker is dangerous and we don’t have 
time for each and every Report , the quarterly  Report  can come into contact with another 
quarterly Report . So, I beg for your direction , maybe on Tuesday they can give us the  status and 
then we can know the way forward for this House . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Mwadziwe  of Mwakirunge . 
Hon.  Mwinga: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  I just want to concur with my Hon.  
fellow here . Mr. Speaker I th ink this C ommittee should work hard because if they are saying that 
the Report  is ready but it has not been signed by the minister I think the Minister has not 
travelled to a foreign country , if the minister is here in Mombasa County, how long does it take  
him to get him and the signature ? So Mr. Speaker I think the C ommittee should sit and work 
February 3, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor  Page 5 hard for the people of Mombasa County. You cannot just be delayed with the Report  just 
because  of the signature .  
Mr. Speaker I think the Office of the Minister is just here at Mwembe  Tayari, h e doesn’t 
even need transport to go to Mwembe  Tayari s o, I’m wondering if it is only the signature; o nly 
the signature to be signed by the minister on the document . 
Mr. Speaker I think something needs to be done in this Committ ee, I think you as the 
Speaker should si t with this C ommittee so that you can talk to them. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay. Thank you. Members, I think yes, Hon.  
mama  Dharwesh ilikuwa  wataka  sema  nini? 
Hon.  (Mrs.) Zainab Said : Nilikuwa nataka  kumjibu  Mheshimiwa  wa Mwakirunge  
maanake  asema Kamati  haiko sawasawa; Kamati  iko sawasawa … 
(Applause ) 
Hon.  (Mrs.) Zainab Said : Ripoti  itakuja  vipi? Hatutaki  kuleta  ripoti  ya kirongo.. . 
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Zeinab. 
Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab  Kithinzi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika, 
ningependa  kufahamisha  hili Jumba  ni Jumba  la sheria  na sisi ni wanasheria  na lazima  tufuate  
sheria. Sioni  kama  kuna  umuhimu  wa kujadili  hili swala  wakati  wewe  umetoa uamuzi  na 
akasema  italetwa. Sijui  kwanini  ijadiliwe , ningeomba  tuwe  na nidhamu  na tufuate  sheria  kama  
inavyotakikana. A hsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Saad  Faraj, what is it?  
Hon.  Faraj:  Mheshimiwa  Spika  ahsante  sana kwa fursa  hii. Mheshimiwa  Spika  ni kweli  
kuwa  Kamati  imeshindwa  kufanya  kazi yake inavyostahili  kufanyika. Mhes himiwa  Spika hii  
ripoti  tumekuwa  tukizungumza  na baadhi  ya Wanachama  katika  Kamati  ya Afya . Wengine  
wameweza  kuishuhudia  katika  Kamati  yao au fika  katika  Jumba  hili tena wengine  hawaja wahi 
shuhudia  kwa sababu kopi ni lizo nazo  ni za Mheshimiwa  Fadhili  peke  yake. Sisi  hatujui  
kumeandikwa  nini wala  kumepangwa  nini katika  karatasi  hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika n a sisi  
tunafanya  kazi kutokamana  na muda  ambao  kwamba  umewekwa  na hii  ni quarterly Report  
kumaanisha  ni ripoti ambayo  kwamba  ni ya muda fulani ambayo  kwamba  inafaa  kufika  na kama  
itachelewa  itaingia quarter  nyengine  wakati  hii quarter ya kwanza haija wahi  zungumzwa au 
haijajadiliwa  katika  Jumba  hili.  
Mheshimiwa  Spika  kuna uzembe  wa hali ya juu kabisa  katika  Kamati hii, kwa hivyo  
naomba  kupitia  kwa kiti chako  uweze  kuhakikisha  ikiwa r ipoti imefika  katika  Jumba  na 
imewekwa  katika Order paper  ya hakikisho  kuwa  kila kitu kiko tayari  ndio tupitishe  hapa. Sisi  
Kamati  ya utalii bado  hatujapitisha  kwa sababu  bado  hatujakuwa  tayari. A hsante.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much M embers. Members, I 
thought I said in this House … Order M embers! Order M embers! Just listen to what I have just 
said. Members keep or der! Yeah,  Members, I have be en saying again and again, the Health 
Committee is one of the best C ommittees…  
(Applause ) 
Of all the Committees which is well planned….  
(Applause ) 
 And best performing C ommittee … 
(Applause ) 
So M embers , I have faith in this C omm ittee and I know next week the Report  will be in a 
perfect condition … 
(Applause ) 
            Yes Clerk.  
February 3, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor  Page 6 ADJOURNMENT  
            This House  stands adjourned until tomorrow in the afternoon. Thank you.  
The House  rose at 3:01p.m. 