March 13, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 13th March , 2018  
The House met at 2:33p.m. 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Deputy  Speaker : Have your seats . Yes Clerk . 
 
STATEMENTS  
STATUS OF CLEANLINES S IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Yes Chairperson Committee on Environment, Waste  Management and Energy or a 
Member from that Committee ? Yes Hon . Nyiro . 
Hon.  Nyiro : Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to give the following statement response on the 
status of the cleanliness in the County.  
 
(Hon. Nyiro moved the Statement)  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, for a long time waste collection has been un regulated leading to 
establishment of over 60 illegal collection po ints across the County that has  no 
appropriate infrastructure which has triggered environmental crisis leading to 
Mombasa County being dirty and unhygienic.  
The department estimates that th ere are 1000 waste collectors across the 
County and over 90 per cent  of these collectors employ transport system s that a re not 
recommended such as hand cart or mkokoteni . 
The Department of Environment, Waste Management and Energy has been 
facing many challenges suc h as shortage of trailers, insufficient work force in 
garbage collection dump sites , therefore putting in place various ways to improve the 
situation.  
Also the waste generators  both household and commercials  have been 
engaging individuals and companies to  collect waste from their precincts which they 
then dump at undesignated collection points leading to the pile ups. As such, a 
directive was given to close all the collection points across the County.  
The aforementioned Department has been clearing all the  dumpsites and 
advocating team work in ensuring that the department achieves its goals of making 
Mombasa a cleaner and greener city. Furthermore the department is also  
implementing a curb collection system on the Island to get rid of waste placed along 
the roads, public spaces and market such as Marikiti.  
We would like to assure Members that the County Government is aware of the 
above concerns posed by garbage and is currently taking necessary remedial 
measures through County Inspectorate to close  the dumps ites and ensure that the 
directives put in place are complied to.  
The Department is also promising the residents of Mombasa that garbage 
menace will be a thing of the past.  
March 13, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          11 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Attached to this statement is brief report from the Department detailing some 
of th e activities and efforts it has been making to remedy the situation and the same 
has been circulated to members for their perusal.  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy  Speaker : Thank you Hon. Nyiro ; lay the paper  attached to the statement 
because  it has not been validly tabled in this Assembly , you have to lay the paper for the 
Members to be allowed to debate on the report from this Committee.  
Hon. Nyiro:  Most obliged Mr . Chairman , Speaker sorry . 
The Deputy  Speaker : So Clerk they will lay the ir paper tomor row for the H ouse 
Business to allot  them time for the Members to debate on this report . Next order ?    
 
BILLS  
 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2018  
FIRST READING  
Next order ? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Yes Hon. Members the House  stands adjourned until tomorrow 14th Wednesday , 2018 at 
8:00a.m. 
The House rose at 2: 42p.m 