October 12, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   120 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday,  12th October, 2016  
The House met at 2.35pm . 
(Hon. Deputy Speaker  (Mr. Mswabah Rashid ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Kindly Hon.  Members have your seats . 
Yes C lerk. 
PAPER  
Yes Hon. Simi nyu. 
Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  I would like to report to the H ouse, 
this matter is very serious as a C ommittee we have discovered a lot of issues that are affecting 
our workers . 
       Mr. Speaker as you understand that there was a time that  we had a site visit and we 
discovered that the ot her C ounties have done it best and they have been given officers training . 
So as a Committee we need to be given a chance so that we can have at l east a few days 
away to Kilifi County o r maybe Nairobi C ounty so that we can have a well elaborate fire station 
for our people.  
Mr. Speaker we have a lot of fires and fire issues, we have a lot of conflict from the 
wananchi and one day we lost a fire engine because the security was not enough and if we 
implement the way the fire station has been mentioned it would be best for our people.  
Mr. Speaker we discovered because we have already visited most of our fire stations, we 
discovered there are issues that like overtime and man time our worker s are very stressed and as 
a Committee we want to make sure our fire workers are working in a good condition.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon. Patrick Siminyu, yes 
Hon.  Tom Ogalo what is it?  
Hon. Ogalo:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika namuunga mkono Mheshimiwa wangu 
kwa sababu tulienda huko kwa fire na tukasikitika sana tukiomba hata wewe ukipata nafasi 
uende pia w ewe ukaone wanapitia shida gani  ndio aone zile shida wanazozipatia wafanyi  kazi 
wale.  
October 12, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   120 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Hon. Depu ty Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you Hon . Ogalo, Hon . 
Patrick Siminyu I understand your situation ; fire fighting  is sensitive sometimes and it’s also a 
matter of life and death the fire fighters deserve excellent materials and good condition s as well. 
I order the Committee to go to Nairobi to learn more about this as we know it’s a matter 
of life and death , so I order you to go to Nairobi I understand there are more issues concerning 
the matter so you should go and learn more there. Thank you. Ye s Clerk . 
MOTION  
Yes Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spik a. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama chini ya 
hoja zetu za nidhamu nambari 25.  
Mheshimiwa Spika unajua Nyumba kupangilia ratiba zake hicho K iti chako kinatupa 
Bunge uwezo wa kuweza wakitaka kubadilisha kitu unaweza kubadilisha . 
Mheshimiwa Spika twajua kuwa tarehe 20  Mwezi Oktoba ni siku ya Mashujaa , kuna 
mambo mengi ambayo tumeleta...   
Mheshimiwa S pika Kamati ya House B usiness  ina mambo mengi ambayo inataka 
ipangilie i li yaweze kuja diliwa ndani ya  Bunge hili ndi posa nimesimama chini ya Standing 
order  hiyo niliyoitaja ili kuweza kushauri na kushawishi B unge hi i tuweze kukubaliana kwa 
pamoja.  
Mheshimiwa S pika tutakapo kuwa tumekubaliana ili kikao hichi kikuwe tarehe 20 iweze 
kuletwa  tarehe 19 asubuhi ili vikao vyetu visiwe vitakuwa vimepungua na si tu kupungua kazi ili 
iweze kufanyika maana kuna kazi nyingi ambayo inatakikana ifanywe . 
Kwa hayo Mheshimiwa S pika naomba wenzangu tukubaliane ili tuweze kuharakisha 
kidogo kuwajibika kushu gulikia wana nchi wetu . 
Mheshimiwa S pika namuita dungu yangu Mheshimiwa Mary aweze kuniunga mkono .  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, nimesimama nikiunga na 
marekebisho kidogo tarehe kumi na nane asubuhi, kwa hiyo naomba hayo warekebishe iwe  
tarehe 18. Ahsante . 
(Question proposed)  
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Huu Mswa da umeletwa na   I propose a 
question, It has been proposed that  the session  on the 20th be brought back to 18th, it has been 
proposed by Hon. Fadhili that the session on 20th to be brought back to 18th. Yes Hon. Fadhili 
Makarani . 
October 12, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   120 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon. M walimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kama nilivyotangulia kusema hapo awali 
Standing order number  25 inatengeza kalenda ya B unge hii na ndani ya kalenda hio ndani ya 
Standing order  yetu pia tunajipatia uwezo wa kutaka kubadilisha , tunaweza kubadilisha . 
Mheshimiwa S pika mimi nimeleta hoja hii kulingana na mambo ya livyo mengi , kuna 
kazi nyingi ukiangalia uamuzi wa B unge hii wiki tatu ama kuna R ipoti nyi ngi ambazo chini ya 
Kiti chako u meamua kuwa zingine zijadiliwe zingine zinaenda public participation  ambazo 
zitarudi ndani ya B unge hili . 
Naomba tukubaliane ili tuweze kufanya hiki kik ao Jumanne tarehe 18 kama 
nilivyorekebisha , Mheshimiwa S pika silazimishi lakini hatujakiuka sheria zozo te ni kulinga na na 
sheria na kanuni zetu za B unge . 
Kuna kipenge e ambacho kimetupa mwanya wa kuweza kufanya hivyo na kwa hivyo ni 
tukubaliane na uamuzi huu  tukiwa sote tutaweza kukubaliwa itakuwa ni vizuri kuwafanyia watu 
wetu huduma  ambazo ziko katika msururu wa mipangilio kwa mambo ambay o yalikuwa 
yatakuja wiki ijayo Mheshimiwa S pika. Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu?  
Hon.  Simi nyu: Thank you M r. Speaker it is a loss to our  people  I really support this 
Motion so that we can work for our people and as you understand we have a lot of work that 
needs to be covered and if we lose a day …… technical hitch  ….. in our C ommittee which need s 
to be tackled and if we lose that day it wi ll mean that it will be transferred to the other week and 
that means I fully support the Motion by H on. Fadhili Mwalim u Makarani and I hope that all 
Members will support. Thank you.  
       Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Amir Mohamed Thoya . 
       Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono moja kw a moja hoja 
ambayo imeletwa na Naibu wa Spika wa Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Fadhili Mwalimu M akarani . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika hoja hii imeletwa ni lengo zuri, lengo ambalo ni la k uhudumia wakaazi 
wa K aunti yetu wa Mombasa na haikuletwa kwa misingi ingine yeyote na sababu tarehe  20 kama 
vile alivyosema Mheshimiwa F adhili M walimu ni likizo na kwetu kama B unge si likizo  ni hasara 
kwa sababu yako mambo mengi ambayo ni lazima yaweze kup itishwa katika ile siku ambayo 
tumekubaliana kwa sabab u tukipoteza basi pengine tutaat hirika . 
      Mimi naun ga mkono na twafanya haya yote Mheshimiwa S pika kwa sababu ya kwamba 
tuweze kuwafanyia wakaazi wetu wa Mombasa haki kwa s ababu sisi t watunga  sheria kwa 
serikali hii.  Ahsante sana mimi naun ga mkono hoja hii ilioletwa na Mheshimiwa Naibu S pika wa 
Bunge letu. Ah sante . 
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Opeya . 
October 12, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   120 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Hon.  Opeya : Thank you M r. Speaker I also support the R eport brought by Hon Fadhili,  
we should also …(Not audi ble)...So let us make sure..... (Technical hitch)  
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Mary Akinyi . 
Hon. ((Ms.) Akinyi: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, naomba mjadala huu kuunga 
mkono  ya kuwa tuwe na kikao siku ya J umaane tarehe 18, kuna R ipoti zengine ambazo ni za 
muhimu zinahitaji haraka sana ; kama ile R ipoti ya kunyunyiza madawa kwa sababu watu 
wanateseka kule wakiwa wanaumwa na kunguni.  
Hivyo basi tukite nga siku kama hii tukaweza i le Ripoti tukaletewa tukaweza kujua ni 
hatua gani tunachukua itakua ni muhimu kabisa kwa sababu tutakuwa tumesaidia wale watu  
ambao tunawakilisha kule mashinani  na pia tu takua tumeendeleza K aunti yetu kwa sababu 
tutakua tunaangalia zile shida ambazo zimeku mba watu ambazo zin atakikana zifanywe kwa 
haraka, a hsante M heshimiwa Spika.  
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Karume . 
Hon. Karume: Thank you Mr. S peaker sir, I would also like to take this opportunity  to 
join my colleagues in this M otion, a Hon. Member ha s shown one of the qualities of a good 
leader…  
(Applause ) 
       and Mr. S peaker sir one of the qualities of a good leader is to be focused, and he knows that 
time is value so if we spend our time wisely wana nchi will give us good values.  
       Therefore H on. Speaker I would like to take this opportunity to also urge  my colleagues to 
support this M otion so that we spend the little time that we have to transact as many businesse s 
as possible . So thank you Mr. Speaker Sir and a  Hon. 001 Ward R epresentative will stand with 
you o n the crowd, thank you so much…  
(Applause ) 
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Fadhili  can you rely to the 
Motion . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , ni kama walivyosema wenzangu 
imedhihirisha  wazi kuwa kuna kazi ambayo iko mbele yetu , tumeambiwa kuhusu Ripoti kama 
zile z a kunguni a mbazo zilikua zangojewa katika B unge hi li. 
Mheshimiwa Spika, W aheshimiwa wamejieleza wazi kwamba kuna shu ghuli nyingi 
ambazo zimetar ajiwa kupangiwa ili ziweze kufany ika, nawashukuru W aheshimiwa walioona 
kuwa iko haja ya sisi kuweza kukaa siku hiyo ya asubuhi ili tuweze kutekeleza kazi yetu na 
October 12, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   120 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 tuweze kuwaridhisha wananc hi wetu na vile  vile hatujavunja sheria yoyote kwa sababu iko ndani 
ya Standing order  zetu kuwa kuna calendar na twa weza kubadilisha tarehe zaidi.  
Mheshimiwa S pika mimi nawashukuru wenzangu wote na kwa wale ambao 
hawakuchangia nina imani pia wanan iunga mkono ... 
(Applause ) 
       Na wale ambao walikua wanafikiria k wa kuipinga Mheshimiwa S pika nina imani  kwa sasa 
hivi wamesh awishika kwa  nini tumeleta hoja hii na kwa  nini tunataka tuwe ze kuwajibika kwa 
wananchi wetu.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Amur what is it ? 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker everyone has the right to accept or not he cannot talk on behalf 
of other M embers it is you to decide a question but he cannot say wale ambao pia hawaungi 
wameona , he cannot m islead this A ssembly, thank you.   
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah R ashid) : Yes Hon.  Simi nyu. 
Hon. Siminyu:  Can the M ember who just spoke tell us because everybody has... . 
(Inaudible) .... 
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mary Akinyi what is it ? 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member  who stood up just responded because 
we had already finished discussion so i think he was just responding . 
So Hon. Members  who ha ve been asking the Hon. Member to stop urging the other 
Member s who are opposing the M otion to support we are telling them aga in we urge them to 
support the M otion, thank you . 
Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Well thank you, M embers I think Hon. 
Fadhili is right to ask Members to vote for his M otion so t here is nothing wrong with that.  
Members I should now put question as  many as of the opinion that the business that was to be 
transacted on 20th should now be presided on 18th. 
(Question  put and a greed  to) 
       Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members , this H ouse is adjourned until tomorrow afternoon . 
The House rose at 2.59pm.  