November  24, 2021               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       121 
DISCL AIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
 Wednesday , 24th November , 2021   
The House met at 2:30p.m. 
 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire ): Once again welcome back Honorable  
Members  to our afternoon session.  Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICES OF MOTION  
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUTH  ON COMMISSION BASIS FOR ENFORCEMENT OF R ULE ON  LITTERING THE 
COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri , kindly give the Notice of Motion.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I beg to give Notice of the 
following Motion;  
 
THAT AWARE THAT , the County under the Fourth Schedule Part II (3) had 
devolved the functions of control of publ ic nuisance,  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT , there is a legislation which prohibits littering the 
environment and penalty for such an offence is imposition of a fine;  
 
CONCERNED THAT , the public continues to litter the environment, not because of 
lack of legislation bu t because of weak enf orcement on part of the County government 
due to lack of personnel in the Department of Environment, Waste Management and 
Energy to enforce this rules;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that: - 
 
1. The County government to employ on  contractual terms the youth s who are 
involved in garbage collection activities to assist in enforcing legislations that bars the 
littering o f the environment in the County ; 
 
2. The County government to pay the youth on commission basis of 20  per cent  
on fine charged o n the law breakers after being charged in the court.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  

November  24, 2021               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       121 
DISCL AIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri. 
Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPE RSON , COMMITTEE ON ENVIRON MENT , WASTE 
MANAGEMENT AND ENERG Y HON OURABLE  ATHMAN MWAMWIRI  ON 
GARBAGE PILE -UP AT MICHELENI COLL ECTION POINT IN KIPE VU WARD  
 
Yes Chairperson, Committee on Environment, W aste Management and Energy, 
Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri?  
 
The Chairperson, Committee on Environment, W aste Management and Energy, 
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , I wish the Member who 
brought this Statement was in first to confirm to me whether the said Micheleni collection 
point  is a Gazetted  collection point or an initiative by the community before I proceed. But 
since she is not in, I ra ther reserve my response until next week. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Mwamwiri, are you interacting 
with the statement for the first time? I think you were to respond today and if you had some 
issues with the statement then you should have raised it before the response day.  
 
The Chairperson, Committee on Environment, W aste Management and Energy, 
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri ): Mr. Speaker , when first this statement was brought I was not in , 
but I saw it in my Committee and as a way of responding first I wanted to confirm the said 
Micheleni, is i t a gazetted  collection point by the County government or a publi c initiated 
illegal dump site b ecause before you  complain of collecting such garbage  at the such  point is 
it a legal point first, if not, then this should be a n cooperative init iative of both the public, the 
Member and the Department to make sure that such collection point is not  only garbage  are 
collected but  to also completely close d to safeguard the interest of the people and our 
environment . So I have to confirm with the Membe r first.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon ourable  Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. S peaker I think the Member  is trying to be smart, he should give 
the response for the benefit of the whole House. Thank you a nd Hon ourable  Leila is here, is 
also an a spirant there, so she knows whatever.. .. 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are o ut of Order Hon ourable  Ogutu ! 
That is not our business today. Yes Hon ourable  Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I think what is very important  is the name  Micheleni is not 
the first time that is coming to this House. Before the coming up of the Chairman, the current 
Chair, there was another Chair, Micheleni has been coming to this House frequently and sad 
enough there was no question like that of either being  gazetted or it  is not b ut if it is supposed 
to be g azetted or not, the Chairman had the opportunity if that day th e statement was being 
requested . 
Even if  he was not in, still he had time to interact with the same statement in the 
Committee s o he had time to ca ll Honourable  Faith to that Committee to exp ound  on the 
same. We as the House we demand a respond of the same today . Thank you.  
November  24, 2021               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       121 
DISCL AIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Just t hank Hon ourable  Renson Thoya . Yes 
Honourable  Hamida Noor?  
 
Hon. Noor : Thank you Mr. Spea ker. Mr. Speaker speaking about the garbage  pilling I 
think the Chair for Environment should be more concerned because right now having the 
Corona with us and  then we get Chikung unya and then we get Dengue fever  with all these 
garbage that is around I think this is a very important thing that we should be concerned. 
Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . I guess Hon ourable  Chairman 
you are taking note that people are so concerned . Yes Hon ourable  Nzai?  
 
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker , being a Member of the same Committee 
I think my Chair was right to request for more time because…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable Nzai, the Chairman has not 
requested for more time. The Chairman has  requested to…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Nzai:  No! The Chairman has requested for clarity.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes. 
 
Hon. Nzai:  So he is right to ask for that clari fication , because of late Mr. Speaker. .. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes. 
 
Hon. Nzai: There have been changes in this garbage pilling co llection cent res so I 
think my Chair is right to be given that time so that he can do clarification w hether that 
Mcheleni is truly a collection point or is just a check point . 
 
The Temporary Speak er (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Hon ourable  Renson Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker , I do not think we need this drama  here and there. We have 
said they ha d enough time , call the said Hon ourable  Member who brought this statement so 
whether there are changes in garbage collection  points  the vocabularies that they are bringing 
here gazetted or not gazetted whatever those are not our concerns  our concern is response to 
us. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon ourable  Chair I think you are 
just to do the honourable thing ; you interacted with this statement sometimes back and you 
were to call the author of this statement to confirm whether the alleged place is a gazetted or 
not gazetted . So it seems you have no response as we speak?  So I thin k just like the other 
Member has said it is b etter you ask for more time Hon ourable  Faith and the Department at 
large whether it is a gazetted or non gazetted according to the statements it is a pile up 
already  and it needs to be decongested . 
November  24, 2021               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       121 
DISCL AIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  I mean ... so I think we jus t ask  for more time if I will be in order so you ask for  more 
time to consult wit h the Member and the Department if that is right.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for your guidance and I con cur 
with your directives.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 That I beg to ask your Honourable House and your Chair for one week for official 
response Mr. S peaker. T hank you . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon ourable  Chairman next week 
Wednesday you will be through with it. Yes Clerk please?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON TRANSPORT , 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS , HONOURABLE PRISC HILLA  MUMBA ON  STREET LIGHTS IN 
KIPEVU WARD  
 
Chair person Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public W orks Hon ourable  
Priscill a Mumba?  
[Silence ] 
 
Vice Chair o r any other Member?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Omondi Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , I am a Member of the said 
Transport Infrastructure and Public Works Committee and I woul d request you actually give 
us one week so that we can come up a very comprehensive response for that statement, thank 
you. 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is it Hon ourable  Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Can we be given reas ons as to why we are  postpo ning this response to 
next week  Mr. Speaker!  
         
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon ourable  Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  It is very clear Mr. Speaker if I said to be given a comprehensive  
response ; when I talk on comprehensiv e statement that I mean that we want to do more 
research…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
November  24, 2021               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       121 
DISCL AIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You mean you have a shallow one? You 
have a shallow report?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Not a shallow one, we do  not want to bring a shallow one! That is  
why we need more time so that we can come up with a quality response that  will going to 
satisfy this Hon ourable  House Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Permission granted Hon ourable  Ibrahim 
Omondi?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you . 
 
The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members there having no other business this House stands adjourned 
until Tuesday 30th November, 2021 at 10 :00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 2 :45p.m.  
 
 
 