October 19, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      123 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 19th October , 2016  
The House met at 9.15a m. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may  sit, yes Clerk. 
PAPER  
       Report  on facilitation of candidates wi th geometrical sets and board, y es Hon . Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker this P aper was to be brought by the Leader of Majority but Mr. 
Speaker Sir he is not around  and am kindly request ing it brought in the afternoon session so 
that we can consult maybe in the afternoon I can table it on behalf of Hon.  Mwidani.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you I understand that the Mombasa 
County Assembly Service Board is undertaking interviews so Hon . Amur liaise wit h the 
Leader of the Majority and the Deputy Leader of Majority for this  House need to know about 
this P aper.  
       Hon. Amur : Thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Proceed . 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon . Karisa Munyika Nzai . 
       Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa niaba ya Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Kondo 
suala la maji ambalo  aliniomba mimi kupitia kwa K amati tuko na jambo katika umoja wa 
taarifa hii.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika maji yametutatiza na kwa kusema kweli  Mheshimiwa Spika bado 
hatujapata kithibitisho maalum ya kwamba maji haya mpaka sasa hatujaambiwa kuwa 
yamepotelea wapi?  
      Mheshimiwa Spika huwa ma  directors  wa maji tuliharakisha kwamba kuna maji na kuna 
laini mpya ambayo ina toka Marere kuja Mji wa M ombasa hayo masaibu ya maji tuliweza 
kuweka paipu mpya kwa  shilingi  1.2 B illion i kutoka kwa  shirika la  World Bank ku leta maji 
katika Mji wa Mombasa.  
October 19, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      123 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2        Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kusikitisha kwamba Miritini, Jomvu, Mikindani mahali 
maji yanatokezea kufika mjini sisi ndio tunakuwa wale wa kwanza Changamwe tunakuwa 
watu wa kwanza kukosa maji . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika tunataka tueleze maji haya yanaruka kwa juu mpaka watu wa West 
hatupati maji ama ni nini kinachofanyika kizungumkuti cha aina gani ambacho  kinafanya sisi 
watu wa West tusipate maji . 
      Mheshimiwa Spika hatuwezi kuelezwa stori kwa sababu tunajua maji yanatoka Marere  
hayahitaji power  tunatumia gravity  yanatumia msukumo kutoka Marere mpaka kufika mjini 
Mombasa.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika naomb a tuelezwe n a sisi maji yanapotolewa wapi? K ando na 
Baricho , kando na Mzima na tunajua kuwa yanaingia katika Mji huu so tungeomba kwanza 
aidha tuambiwe kwamba maji yanapot olea wapi?  
       Ama turuhusiwe tujikombolee kwanza tuweze kupata na watu wetu wapa te maji kuliko 
kudhalilishwa kama vile tunafanywa.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika kwa mwelekeo wako na tukijua wewe ndiye Spika ambaye unaweza 
utupatie mwelekeo tuwaambiwe maji yanapotolewa wapi? A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwal imu) : Hon. Mary are you up on the same issue or you 
have another statement .  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Is it another Statement?  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Mheshimiwa Spika k wa ruhusa yako naomba....  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Mheshimiwa Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Kwa ruhusa yako Mheshimiwa Spika tunaomba kujadili hiyo taarifa 
yake ambayo ameitoa kuhusiana na suala la maji . 
       Temporary Sp eaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Mheshimiwa Mary I con cur the House has its 
procedures and the person who stated this statement stand on behalf of the person who 
sponsored this statement . 
       So I think if we are in order, if the House Business Committee will allo w this or if you 
go to the House Business and say you want to bring a Motion concerning the same issue 
before I direct further action so I will not address this issue . 
October 19, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      123 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3        We are going to wait for the House ; whether to bring a Motion next week and if th ey will 
be no Motion brought concerning the same issue then the Speaker will direct on how to be 
done about water or as it has been stated in the media that we are in the tunnel of death . 
S so Hon . Members we will wait for the Hon . House to be brought as a  Motion. Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Hon. Members the House stand adjourned until today in the afternoon at 2.00 pm.       
The H ouse adjourned at 9.25 am. 
 
 