October 26, 2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        126 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 2 6th October , 2016  
The House met at 9.14am . 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Sera Nyamvula ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Hon.  Members you may have your seats. 
Clerk . 
PAPER  
       Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani , Leader of M ajority , Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani . Is the Deputy Leader 
here? Deputy L eader? Yes Hon.  Saad . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Hon.  Madam Speaker . Madam Speaker in my opinion I 
think this issue should be redirected through your Chair to the Department of  Education  because  
it does concern that particular Committee of the Assembly . 
       I feel we will get the necessary information that is needed towards this particular 
communication.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Okay I totally agree with you on this, yes 
Hon.  Mary Akinyi . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Madam Speaker . Madam Speaker to me I think this whatever 
we are discussing he re has been taken over by event s because the candidates are about to start 
the exams just on Monday , so to me I think it has been taken over by events.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Yes Hon.  Amur .  
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Madam  Speaker the distribution of th ese sets can be done in one 
day. 
       Madam Speaker, the last time every Member was involved and every Member went to the 
schools and assisted the County in distributing those sets . 
       So if the County will give us the sets by tomorrow we can disperse before the e nd of Friday . 
Thank you Madam Speaker.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Hon.  Madundo . 
       Hon. Mohamed Madundo:  Ahsante Bi Spika yangu pia ni kama yanafanana na ya 
Mheshimiwa Saad lakini kidogo kwa sababu huu mtihani na kila Mheshimiwa yuko na shughuli 
zake huko . 
       Kwa hiyo kitu ambacho kinaweza kuzungu mziwa ni kwa sababu tuko na Mwenyekiti wa 
Elimu hapa nafikiri hii process  ikiendelea ili tuipitishe tuwe na wakati wa  kwenda hizi shule ili 
tukienda mapema . 
       Kwa sababu kufikia wiki ijayo  kabla wafanye mtihani ikiwa Mwenyekiti wa  Elimu yuko 
hapa ni muhimu tuizungumzie ili tumalizane nayo. A hsante sana.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Yes Hon.  Mary Akinyi .  
October 26, 2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        126 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Hon. (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Madam Speaker I would like to inform this House there are some 
regulations that were brought by C abinet Secretary  Matiang i that nobody is nee ded now within 
the school compound, now if we have those sets where are you going to take them?  
       Hon. Amur : Madam Speaker , point of clarification .  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Let us have some order yes Hon.  Amur . 
       Hon.  Amur : We don't go to schools to be seen that we are going to schools ; we will hand 
over the sets to the Headmasters and the Headmistresses . 
       The County is only given the number of the candidates in each school and then the 
geometrical sets are distributed through the Headmistresses and the Headmasters will giv e them 
to the students on the examination day the first day . 
       So there's no issue of us going there unless you want to go and publicize but from the 
County we will just send our officers from the Education department we have the record of how 
many  students are in this school . 
       It is only the issue of the officers dis patching  these things before Friday since the exam are 
on Monday , we have all three days Madam Speaker. Thank you.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Hon. Karisa Nzai .  
       Hon. Nzai : Thank you Madam Speaker . I think my colleague maybe they are missing the 
conception that the thing here  is to buy the geometrical sets . 
       Whether this or the next term but it is to be allowed that we can purchase in every exam test 
with geometrical sets and clip boards not necessarily  for this term , not necessarily for the next 
term but at least if it is in order  that now we can buy, the County is allowed to buy the 
equipment for the students the candidates then that will be okay . 
       So the Chairman of Education and maybe with the Committe e of Finance through the Chair 
if you can look at it and see on the financial aspect if we can do something about it. Thank you 
Madam Speaker.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): May I remind you Hon.  Members that Paper 
has not been laid Hon.  Wangudi, Chairman Educat ion.  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you Madam Speaker for the opportunity but as per the Order paper it 
is very clear the matter is being handle d under the office of the Leader of Majority and there’s no 
way you can change the fact in the floor of this H ouse, the Committee of Education to handle 
this issue.  
       The moment the Committee of Education is coming here with this matter and there’s no way 
we can take this matter . 
(Applause ) 
       Yes we  go back and own the mat ter and table it so as per the Committee of Education that 
especially the st atus because the office of the Leader have been handling these matters since the 
past years . 
       But we beg that we handle this issue with office of the Leader at that level and we can take 
the responsibility to ensure that on such a case we tackle it. Thank you.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Yes Hon.  Amur . 
October 26, 2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        126 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3        Hon.  Amur : Madam Speaker it’s so s urprising that the  Chairman of Education himself this 
is not th e first time we distributed  th ese things . 
       It should be the Committee's able to liaise with t he Executive Member to confirm other than 
he saying that we escape this because it was given and it should be suppose d to be , but by the 
Chairman telling us we should skip this year and then what are we doing for our children 
because this issue is for the Education department and the Education department had already 
once or twice dispatched th ese mathematical geometrical sets to the schools . 
       It was that the Committee effort  to make sure that even  this time these things should happe n 
to the school ; i am so amaze d that he doesn’t know about it . 
       This issue was brought to this House two weeks ago and I want t o believe that there were 
some Members if he was not in this House but some Committee Members were in this House 
they should have informed the Chairman.  
       It is so surprising that the Chair himself is saying that he does not know anything about this 
matter Madam Speaker. Thank you.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Hon.  Wangudi yes . 
       Hon. Wangudi : Madam Speaker I was very clear in my statemen t that we handle this matter 
under the office of the Leader of the Majority and we have been doing this and the 
communication is done through the office of the Leader of Majority . 
       That’s why even this time it  was through the office of the Majority Leader of  this House, so 
what am sayi ng is that there is no way the Education Committee can handle this matter at this 
level it has to pass through the Majority Leader that is what am saying.  
       I am not saying we are assuming we skip next time no, am saying we tackle  this ma tter 
through the office of the Majority Leader. Thank you . 
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Hon.  Ndanda are you up on this issue of 
education .  
       Hon. Mohamed  Ndanda : Thank you Madam Speaker according to me am not happy 
because if the Majority Leader knew the re was a crucial matter li ke this he would have 
delegated . 
       I would also like to give my comments that such serious matters should be handled with 
great care.  
       However Madam Speaker since we have the Chair for Finance around I think through you r 
Chair I beg and I propose we give him time also to tell us if it is possi ble because it is through 
this House where we also give recommendations and we sometimes give resolutions.  
       Madam Speaker this has been the criteria of all the other years , if this t ime we are not going 
to help them then indeed the people we are representing will not understand us.  
       So I have a proposal that since the Chair of Finance is around we can give him time, we can 
also get time to go to the Committee room so that we can discus s it at length and see the best 
way we can put it to work.  
       If there is no money, it can be explained and I think nothing is going to be wrong because 
“palipo na wazee hapaharibiki mambo” . Thank you Madam Speaker.  
October 26, 2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        126 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4        Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Just briefly let’s hear from t he Chair of 
Finance, Hon.  Hatimy.  
       The Paper has not been laid on the tabl e but still we are looking fo r Majority Leader or 
Minority Leader. So Hon.  Hatimy the House is listening to you.  
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Ahsante sana Bi Spika . Bi Spika jambo la kw anza sijaelewa ni 
kwa nini hii hoja na kuwa tuko na Kamati ya Elimu  na inaletwa na Kiongo zi wa Walio Wengi 
Bungeni .  
       Bi Spika kama tunavyojua kuwa mitihani iko kila siku, kila mwaka kuna mitihani na 
nashindwa kufahamu kuwa au vile nafahamu ni kuwa kila mwaka Gav ana au ofisini ya kitengo 
cha elimu huwa inapeana, isipokuwa malalamiko inasemekana kuwa ha vitoshi  vile vitu 
vikigawanywa . 
       Lakini naf ikiri sisi kuzembea kuwa twafanya  kazi yetu ni kuwa tukiangalia Standing order  
206 wakati tunapofanya bajeti 206 na 207 , ni hu wa Kamati  zinakaa na zinaenda kupitia zile 
bajeti  kila kitengo . 
       Kwa hio  Bi Spika  inatakikan a kuwa kwanza  tusifanye marudio  ya kazi kusema kuwa wale 
tayari kwenye bajeti washaweka vifaa vya watoto hawa, lakini vile vile  sisi tuwe tunakuja na 
Mswada . 
       Nafikir i itakuwa jambo la busara Bwana Spika Kamati ya Elimu  ipatiwe nafasi ya kuweza 
kwenda kuangalia jambo hili halafu kama ni leo saa nane ama ni kesho iweze kuleta Ripoti . 
       Ni kusema kuwa jambo hili limefanyika ama bado hali jafanyika au kuwa pesa hizi 
zimewekwa kando ama bado hazijawekwa kando . 
       Hapo tutaweza kusema kwa sababu b ajeti ipo na hatuwezi na kama iko kwa b ajeti twajua iko 
kwa ceiling , zile ceiling  tushazifikia kile kiwango kinachotakikana.  
       Kwa hivyo kwenye mwaka huu Bi Spika  hatuwezi kuongeza jambo lolote isipokuwa ni 
kuleta kufanya reallocation  ya vote ya kuangalia kama haijafanyika basi tuangalie tutatoa wapi 
pesa ziwekwe kwenye kununua hizi ili tuweze kuhakikisha watoto wamepatiwa hizi seti 
tunazozizungumza. A hsante.  
       Temporary  Speaker  (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula ): Listening to the deliberations of the House 
from the Hon.  Members  this issue is important , very i mportant . 
       It should have been done like yesterday, what i will direct is that  this issue be referred to the 
Committee of Education fo r them to  liaise with the office of the Majority Leader and because it 
is very urgen t to come back and give us the Report  in the afternoon at exactly 2: 30pm so as we 
know where the children of the Mombasa County things for this exams stand.   
(Applause ) 
Clerk? 
ADJOURNMENT  
       This House stands adjourned until today the 26th October , 2016  at 2:30pm. 
The House rose at 9:34 am . 
 