October 2 7, 2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        128 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thur sday, 2 7th October , 2016  
The House met at 2.35pm . 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats, yes Clerk. 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Yes Clerk, Hon.  Members i am putting into consideration the M otion and it was passed 
yesterday concerning facilitation of KCPE candidates with success cards and lunch . 
       So M embers be aware and make arrangem ents with the Department of E ducation with the 
Head masters concerning the issue to make plan  of the food and the success cards so as to reach 
the candidates. Yes Clerk.  
PAPER  
       Chairman of the F inance  Committee, the R eport on remittance of gratuity, yes Hon.  Amur 
Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker the matter is very sensitive , I want to believe that according to this 
matter now it has been brought many times before the Members...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Caro . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mr. Speaker i  support the Statement that has been said by Hon.  Amur 
because it is true that the matter is sensitive and  we received statement from LAPFUND and  it is 
so amazing by the way . 
       In fact i can’t even explain it because i was shocked... ! 
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Is it amazing or shocking . 
       Hon. (Ms)  Auma : It is amaz ing in a way that i was shocked.  Mr. Speaker Sir it is the 
correct w ay so it is better to have the Finance Committee M embers to explain to us what’s the 
way forward concerning this issue ... 
October 2 7, 2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        128 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members I believe every M ember received his 
or her statement from LAPFUND , there is a lot to be discussed.  
       Now that also the Chairman of Finance is around am sure he wi ll add something o n this 
issue unless he's got a P aper. Yes Hon.  Hatimy, the issue on g ratuity , do you have the paper ?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Yes Mr. Speaker . 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : You have the Paper then proceed, Hon.  Hatimy I 
was saying that the Hon.  Members have received their statements from LAPFUND . 
       For me I think that it  will be the betterment of the P aper that you are to lay in this House ; 
first sit with the Hon.  Members and see to their concerns.  
       They have sai d that what  they have received is shocking, s o for me I think  it is better we 
postpone this P aper today and you accommo date whatever they have in the R eport so that it 
won’t be shocking anymore.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speake r I have no objection but let 
me say this is not the way to work , you cannot hold me at a gunpoint to say that there is a Report 
and I know nothing about it.  
       Mr. Speak er the proper way for that the R eport to be tabled before the Finance Committee 
first before they come into this House , so the way the y are  doing this business activity is not 
right. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : And that was what I directed the H ouse that the 
Hon.  Members will s it with the Finance C ommittee for them to raise their concerns and Hon.  
Hatimy other M embers are raising their concerns that the Report will be allowed or will be given 
entrance to this House.  
       So I hope the Chairman of  Finance will call  a meeting with the Hon.  Members  so the Hon.  
Members for you to get what is concerning the Members so let us hold the meeting as soon as 
possible and we need the report by Wednesday next week afternoon . 
       Hon.  Hatimy we will need that R eport.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Okay Mr. Sp eaker Sir . 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk.  
PAPER  
       Hon. Boma : Thank you Mr. Speaker I wish to table the Report on draft Mombasa County 
Land Policy.  
October 2 7, 2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        128 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3        Mr. Speaker Sir I want the R eport to be discussed on Wednesday next week. T hank you.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members it seems that the Deputy or Vice 
Chairman for Land wants you Members to go through this L and policy that is why he is giving 
you ample time for you to go through this land policy and as he has  stated he wants it come back 
on Wednesday morning . 
       So I hope by that time Members would have gone through t hat R eport and wherever you 
will feel that you want to amend or  you want to put any input the R eport will be discussed on 
Wednesday morning. Yes Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Having being no other business the House stands adjourned until 1st of November, 2016 
Tuesday in the afternoon.  
The H ouse rose at 2.50pm.  
 