February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 3rd February , 201 7 
The House  met at 2: 38pm. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you can sit down.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 Yes Hon Thoya . 
(Silence)  
 Hon Hatimy . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker the O rder paper here is different , it’s number 
seven is Notice of Motion…  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : So this is your Notice of M otion , then you 
can go ahead.  
(Hon. Hatimy moved Motion )  
 Mr. S peaker S ir, 
  THAT  AWARE THAT part two of the F ourth schedule  of the  constitution 2010  in the 
Article 2(g) mandate d the County government of Mombasa  to deal with refuse removal, 
refuse dumps and solid waste, which should come to end . 
 Mr. Speaker sir,  
 NOTING THAT the County Executive in Article 183 is mandated  to implement County 
legislation, manage  and coordinate the function s of t he C ounty administration and its 
department among other functions.  
 Mr. Speaker,  concern ed that measures which  have been pu t in place at the C ounty 
government in main taining a clean environment have  not born e much fruits  due to lack of 
adequate participation on the part of the  residents.   
 Mr. Speaker sir I u rge this  Assembly to RESOLVE  that; 
a) Every  business, property , vehic ular, motorized  and non -moto rized owners , occupiers  and 
for authorized parking.  
2 sorry Mr. Speaker: b) To ensure safe, clean and sanitary disposal of refuse  
c) To ensure clea n and well kept waste produce, C ounty yards, work place and keep 
environment cl ean; 
d) To provide dustbin, litterbin  fixed with suitable handles close fitting and water and fly 
proof lid attached to it;  
e) To ensure that  garbage are disposed only in batteries, central bulk containers, collection 
sites ,lorries or side loaders ,transf er stations and garbage collection points;  
f) To ensure removal of any container authorized with non  motorized vehicles  and scrap 
object in front t heir premises.  
 Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Hatimy.  Yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
 Hon Amir Thoya . 
(Silence ) 
 Hon Amir Thoya , yes Hon Fadhil i what is it?  
 Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker I stand from the C hair, we were supposed to reply this 
stateme nt, we were supposed to reply on this statement,  but unfortunately  the Executive o f 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Transport was not around and we requested on the same issue from his office and we were 
told t o wait till when the executive M ember comes , there is a Chief O fficer but…  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amur ? 
 Hon. Amur : If the executive is not around  does it mean there is no office , there are 
Chief officers and other people who can work ; this is the second time now we are waiting for 
a report, if the executive M ember is not in the office let it be known that the office is sti ll 
around and pe ople are there to work.  
 People should take their responsibility with seriousness Mr.  Speaker this is the second 
time th e committee has failed in this A ssembly to produce the report that is due in this 
Assembly.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswaba h Rashid) :  Yes Hon Mwalimu . 
 Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker , as I said earlier  I was standing for the 
Chairman Mr. Speaker and if the C ommittee has failed the Hon Member who ha s just spoken 
he is one of the Members of that Transport C ommittee that ha s failed  in this Honorable 
House … 
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker h e cannot accuse me that I am a Member and I am not a 
Member.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I have not allowed you to speak.  
 Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker the Hon Member is a M ember of this H on House  what 
am saying is we were requesting for a week .  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amur what is it?  
 Hon. Amur:  With all due respect my learned I want you to produce a list of the 
Members if am a M ember this House  shou ld take action, am challenging the House  because I 
had resigned and I was ta ken out as a M ember unlawfully and I respected that by resigning it 
means  I should be cleared from the committee, i was  cleared let him prove in this Assembly 
that am a Member of t his C ommittee.  
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker th e Honorable Member is a M ember by virtue that he 
was removed unlawfully …. 
(Laughter ) 
 Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker with all due respect I was no t removed I was...I resigned 
this House  knows that i resigned.  
 Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay have a sea t, I can see the chairman 
is in. 
 Hon Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. S peaker I was to re port to the House  that my able 
Chairman has arrived and he is a hardworking C hair… 
(Laughter ) 
 Mr. Speaker I have requested on behalf  of the Committee that we are requesting for a 
week's time and we will p roduce the report and also the C hairman .  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Faraj . 
 Hon.  Mwalimu : As he is around he can ask the House  for permission, thank you.  
 Hon. Far aj: Mr. Speaker i think it is only fair that we give this opportunity to the 
Chairman now that he is with us here s o that w e can hear the position of the Chair himself 
because as a Member of Transport C ommittee I don't remember anywhere where we 
discussed the issues that are being raised ..., 
(Laughter ) 
 ...So to be fair to the C ommittee M embers to be fair to the Members of the County 
Assembly that were present today i think we sho uld give an opportunity to the C hairman but 
considering the fact that we have been discussing the issue of succession planning in the 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 absence of the C ounty Executive ,  there is the C hief Officer  there are department al heads,  
officers who are in charge, I d on't think I don't know why as C ommittee we have failed to 
produce ... 
(Applau se and l aughter ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon Fadhili . 
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. S peaker, b efore I give the button to the C hairm an 
you know there are stubborn M embers …. 
(Laughter ) 
….and our able C hairman clarify  before this House  because the H onorable  who has just 
spoken was absent during our recent meeting which we were deliberating this issue, it is 
confirmed he was not around....  
(Loud consultation ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I will give you a chance to speak Hon 
Saad, c ontinue Hon Fadhili . 
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , the Hon Member I can say that he came 
late… 
(Laughter ) 
 He was in the meeting but he came when we had finished we were about to finish that 
meeting so Mr .  Speaker it is upon the H on Members...   
 Hon. Amur : We are receiving a double standard Mr. Speaker  he said he was not in 
that meeting again not... 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Asha Hussein.  
 Hon (Ms) Asha Hussein : Thank you Mr. Speaker as we proc eed I can see the  
Chairman of T ransport is here why can’t he take over on the issue Mr. Speaker and finish this 
so that we can go to another issue . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Saad Faraj was about to speak 
something have you finished ? What had you wanted to say?  
 Hon Saad : Mr. Speaker I think we should clear the air with regards to what the H on 
Member ...to conclude ... was just saying that we attended a meeting , initially he was saying 
that I did not attend the meeting and later he confirmed that I attended the meeting but I was 
late while I was ... he saying I don’t even remember attending  the meeting …  
(Laughter and a pplause ) 
 Mr. Speaker combined everything and for the benefit of the M embers who were 
present I would kindly have to ask this House  if to be given the opport unity to go through the 
list of M embers who attended that meeting for that particular day so that I can confirm if I 
was present then I should co me here and apologize  to the  House  for not telling the truth by 
not being present on that committee while  I wa s present in that committee . Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Chairman Amir T hoya.  
 Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwanza nataka kuchukua fursa hii 
ama kiti cha (??) utukufu katika serikali yetu ya Mombasa kwa kuweza kujadil i yale mambo 
mengi yale yako katikati  yetu. 
 Si maswala ya  ziada  bali ni maswala  ambayo yanadhur u wananchi wetu katika K aunti 
yetu ya Mombasa ; Mhes himiwa S pika ni kweli kwamba swala ambalo linajadiliwa ni swala 
nyeti na  ni swala ambalo wanajadili lililetw a hapa hali yake iko katika hali ambayo inahitaji  
kuzingatiwa lakini cha msingi Bwana S pika kama tunavyojua ni kwamba wiki iliyopita 
tuliweza kuwa na msiba mkubwa  kwa sababu kwa kumpoteza mmoja kati yetu na harakati 
nyingi Mheshimiwa Spika ambazo …. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Mheshimiwa wa Tudor ? 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker the way we are taking a s a House  is very confusing ; the 
Honorable was telling us about the executive change of that department was abroad , now the 
Chairman is saying something else , Member s are fighting against themselves . 
Mr. Speaker I think this C ommittee should tell this House  the truth.  Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amir Thoya . 
Hon Thoya: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika,  cha msingi  ni kwamba ni kweli 
kulikuwa na juku mu kama Kamati  lakini lile linalozungumziwa hapa sio swali la  masi hara   
kwa sababu ni kweli wiki il e kulikuwa na msiba katika wiki.. . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amur.  
Hon. Amur: Mr. Speaker with all due respect  to my brother it is true that we had one  
day to adjourn but this A ssembly must continue ; its only yesterday that we had adjourned and  
we attended  the funeral the Assembly was in session so somebody should not tell us that just 
because we had an issue thi s Assembly is not taking place . 
The A ssembly  was on Mr. Speaker it ’s only yesterday the session  was adjourned ; we 
had to give our last respect  for our sister . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili . 
Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Spea ker the H on Members should let the able Chairman to state 
before this H on House  what transpired, he has just started with what has recently … and am 
sure the H on Members , our able  Chairman of transport will also tell the House that what we 
have done as C ommittee . 
We have proceed ed Mr. Speaker as a C ommittee we sat and talked about this issue 
and we have also asked from the Executive M embers , so the H on Members or the Hon House  
should let our Chairman to express before what has transpire d. 
Mr. Speaker please  and please guide our able Chairman ; protect him  from these 
unnecessary S tanding orders , points of order . Mr. Speaker please protect our C hairman.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Chairman can you proceed.  
Hon.  Amir Thoya : Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika , nafikiri mambo kama haya 
ambayo tumekuwa nayo wiki iliyopita naisitoshe pia ni haki ambaye amezungumza kama 
Mheshimiwa Fadhil lazima ajue kwamba Bunge  hili ni  Bunge  la sheria na kuna procedures  
ambazo lazima zifuatwe, kwa  sababu barua iliweza kuandi kwa na maandalizi wa site visit  
vile vile iliweza kufanywa na yote hayo. .. 
(Applause ) 
...Mheshimiwa S pika ni  kutokana kupiti a kwa sheria ya mawasiliano na Kamati 
inalijua hili na ilipokea ule msiba Mheshimiwa S pika, ilikuwa haiwezi (??) pamoja ya 
kwamba visit ishapangwa lakini tukaona kwamba hili Bunge  na aliyepotea au aliyeondoka ni 
mwenzet u ikabidi niende site visit  tuweze kui ahirisha kidogo ili tuhakikishe k wamba 
tunampatia Mheshimiwa Serah Nyamvula heshima kama vile ambavyo ilikuwa inastahili 
lakini ukw eli wa mambo ni kwamba site visit  hii itafanyika siku ya Jumanne  Mwenyezi 
Mungu  akipenda...  
(Applause ) 
…Kwa  hivyo mi mi nadhani Mheshimiwa  tuko sawa mama Nyamvula  tumeshamzika 
site visit  imeshapangwa , kwa hivyo ilivyobakia ni  kuchapa kazi Bunge  hili iweze k upatiwa 
heshima yake ri poti i weze kuletwa katika Bunge  hili……  
(Applause ) 
….Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : So this House  will get the report on 
Thursday.  
Hon.  Thoya:  Itakuwa sawa Mheshimiwa  Spika. A hsante.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk.  
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 (Technical hitch ) 
Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Sp ika ahsante kwa kunipa fursa hii kutokana na  yale yal iotokea ; 
kwa niaba ya wenzangu Mheshimiwa Spika ningemuomba M heshimiwa wetu 
anayewakilisha vijana pia atoe kama rambi  rambi kidogo za mwenzetu aliyet uacha ajue tu 
Mheshimiwa aliyetu acha tulikuwa naye na jinsi tulivyofanya naye kazi hayo ndio maoni 
ambayo ni  yangu kama kuna mwengine akiwa na maoni yake anaweza kuyatoa ndani ya 
Bunge  letu. A hsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Patrick, what is it?  
Hon. Siminyu : Hon Speaker  our coll eague we all know her we  need to giv e each and 
every one at least a minute to pay tribute because I think for each and everything is recorded . 
For the recording purpo se I think it is in order to  give this opportunity to any M ember 
who feel s they want to contribute to Serah Nyamvula who was our coll eague and we worked 
with her in t his House  and several times she has been a very good C hair and I think each one 
of us shou ld be given an opportunity.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes, then I think we should continue with 
order nu mber 9 and then after order 9 w e will give each M ember, an yone who  wishes to talk 
about Hon  Serah Nyamvula will be given a chance. Y es Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
Leader of M ajority? I think I gave an order that the Leader of M ajority  in liaison  with 
the implementation C hair I think this was an order last week.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika hata pia 
nashangazwa kwa sabab u ilikuwa inasemakana it was changed  na ndivyo yasemekana 
ilikuwa inatushangaza . 
Kwa hivyo nafikiri kuna typing error  hapa kwa  sababu mimi natakikana kujibu sio 
kusoma taarifa  kwa hivyo B wana Spika nafikiri heading hii naona haiku sawa ….. 
(Applause ) 
…Nikir udi Bwana Spika nafikiri ingekuwa bora pia tupewe nafasi uliotuitia na  
utuelez e jinsi tulikuwa na mwenzetu , ni wazo zuri sana yeye kwamba mama mmoja mwenye 
mcheshi sana kama tunavyojua alikuwa mjuzi na mambo ya sports vizuri sana hata mpaka 
saa hii …. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amur Murfad.  
Hon. Amur: With all due respect Mr.  Speaker he was supposed to talk about the  
statement since the statement is not there then we should have s at and then you give him 
another chance to talk on abo ut M adam , our late M adam because the issue was he was  
supposed to reply to the issue  not to put an other issue on top of another . 
First he should tell us whether this order is not in or der then we forget ab out it and 
then you allow this A ssembly to discus a bout the late H on. Serah Nyamvula.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Amur, you are very right,  I was also 
expecting such move; i  remember last week I ordered C ommittee on  Implementation together  
they should liaise with you so that the st atemen t can be replied in this House , Chairman of 
Implementation the floor is yours.  
Hon.  Opeya: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I was not ab le to get the replies for that or der 
on time.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Because  i told you to liaise with  the 
Leader of M ajority. Did you liaise with the L eader of M ajority?  
Hon.  Opeya: I haven’t seen him, I have seen him today … 
(Laughter ) 
He is not been around, I have seen him today …. 
(Laughter ) 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): He is very much right, maybe becaus e he has 
received his two months office rent that’s why he is saying he doesn’t see me, but I know he 
is going to see me later on b ut actually Mr. Speaker, this is what you have said but In f act i 
was expecting my friend my fellow colleague to come to liai se with me so th at we can make 
the arrangemen t, actually am not going to accuse him, he is my best friend and I think we 
shall meet so that we do something.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay. This House  needs that statement 
replied fast, so b y nex t week the replies should be ready, the reply. Yes Hon Hatimy  what is 
it? 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Hon Speaker  (Inaudible)  request  (Inaudible)  Chair who 
have about  20 B ills and we have only three months time to go, so am requesting you Mr. 
Speaker to appoint a nother C ommittee so that it will deal with the 20 B ills whic h are 
pending. So M r. Speaker, I think we must deal with these Bills. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  I will do that and communicate to this 
House  next week, okay M embers now the  floor is open to anyone who want s to talk , who 
want to celebrate the life of the late Hon.  Serah Nyamvula , we start with H on Maimuna . 
Leader of Minority  (Hon (Ms) Maimuna  Salim ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika, 
mimi kwanza ningependa kuzidisha salamu za ra mbi rambi  ziwafikie familia za Mheshimiwa  
mwenzetu M heshimiwa Serah Nyamvula,  Mwenyezi Mungu ailaze roho yake  mahali pem a 
kwenye waja wema . 
Sisi tunajua ya kwamba  Mheshimiwa mwenzetu aliku wa Mheshimiwa  wa kufanya 
kazi Mheshimiwa  Spika ; za Bunge  na za nje ya Bunge , kwa ufupi nje ya Mombasa na nda ni 
ya Mombasa  Mheshimiwa Serah alikua ambaye  nimtenda kazi kwa kila mahali n a nafikiri  
jana tukiwa katika mazishi yake  tuliona ule utenda kazi wake namna watu walijitoke za kwa 
wingi kuja kumsindikiza.  
Mimi maombi ya ngu kama mama mwenzangu  ambaye ameweza kutuacha  ilikua 
tuombe Bunge  ili kupitia kwa M wenyekit i wa Transport  and Public works  tuangalie barabara 
moja ambayo iko maeneo hayo ya Nyali  tuweze ku ita Serah Nyamvula road … 
(Applause ) 
….Hayo ndi yo maombi yangu amba yo tutakuwa hatutamsahau na vizazi vija vyo 
vitajua kuna mama ambaye M heshimiwa aliweza kuingia katika Bunge  la Kaunti  ya 
Mombasa ; wao ndio waliku wa katika ua nzilishi wa serikali za ugatuzi kwa sababu yeye pia 
ni muanzilishi wa ugatuzi .  
Kwa hiyo maombi yan gu ni kwamba sisi kama Bunge tukae tuangalie barabara moja 
ya N yali na tuweze kupatia jina  la marehemu Serah Nyamvula.  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa 
Spika. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amir Thoya.  
Hon. Thoya: Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika  kwa hu zuni h ii mimi kama 
Mwakilishi wa W odi ya Frere town na M wenyekiti wa Uchukuzi na miundo msingi na hasaa 
katika mipangilio wa makao katika Bunge  hili nafikiri mimi  ndiye nilikua naye karibu san a; 
yeye yuko katika hichi ki ti cha mbele na mimi hapa nyuma m ara nyingi tuli  consult   hata  
hoja zinapokua zikiendelea ka tika kiti hapo juu  mara nying i tukishauriana kabla pengine 
asimame kuzungumza ama niweze kuzungumza.  
Kwa hivyo bado tukio ambalo limetupata Mheshimiwa Spika ni tukio kubwa na ni 
huzuni kubwa  sana ha sa hasa ikibidi kipindi hichi ambacho tunaelekea kumaliza kikao cha 
Bunge letu kwa sababu karibuni tu angeweza kukamilisha kile kipindi kamili cha vikao vya 
Bunge letu.  
Kwa hivyo ni huzuni kwa sababu tumekaa naye kwa muda mrefu kazi zake 
tumezitambua uwen yekiti wa Kamati yake ya vijana na jinsia na masuala mengi ambayo kila 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7 tukileta kwenye Bunge hili ilikuwa lazima aweze kujadili masuala ya kina mama na masuala 
ya kijinsia . 
Kwa hivyo tutamkosa kama kiongozi, tutamkosa kama Naibu  wa S pika wa Bunge 
letu h ili tukufu na amini ya kwamba sw ala ambalo Kiongozi wa Walio W achache amelitoa 
kama ombi na hili ni Jumba la sheria kama itaweza kugundulika na barabara ziko pale katika 
eneo la Frere Town . 
Nlikuwa najaribu kuangalia ile barabara ambayo tuliweka cabro  katika k ipindi cha 
mwisho cha uongozi huu kwamba iweze kupatiwa jina muhimu la huyu mwenzetu ili iweze 
kubakia kumbukumbu kama kwamba alitumikia kwenye Bunge letu kama Kiongozi . 
Alikuwa Mwenyekiti katika Bunge hili na vile vile al ikuwa Naibu wa Spika ; badala 
ya k uangalia majina haya mengine mengi ambayo tungeweza kuyaita lakini tungeweza 
kutambua juhudi zake kama Kiongozi wa kipindi hichi cha serikali ya kwanza ya ugatuzi  ili 
angalau kumbukumbu ile iweze kubakia kule kwetu Frere Town kama Mheshimiwa Serah 
Nyamvula atapatiwa barabara moja kwa nyingi , barabara zetu nyingi tulizo nazo kule kuu na 
natoa rambi rambi kwa niaba ya wakaazi wote wa Frere Town.  
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Stephen Wangudi . 
Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii na mimi niweze 
kuzungumzia mama yetu Mheshimiwa wetu marehemu Serah Nyamvula ambaye ametoweka 
kwa macho yetu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ni uchungu katikati yetu na ni huzuni kubwa kwa namna 
tulivyoishi na yeye, mimi binafsi kwa upande wangu nimempoteza mama na ukizingatia 
kwamba mama yangu mzazi anaitwa Sarah, mama Nyamvula anaitwa Serah Nyamvula  
mamangu anaitwa S arah Nyangweso ni mama yangu . 
 Katika Bunge hili nikitegemea mambo mengi katika ushauri Mheshimiwa Spika basi 
yeye  ndiye aliyekuwa mwelekezi wangu , ukizingatia Kamati ninayoikalia kama Mwenyekiti 
ikiwa inahusisha mambo ya watoto basi mama Nyamvula alikuwa mwenye msaada mkubwa 
katika uendeshaji wa Kamati yangu . 
Wakati alikuwa mwana  kamati K amati hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika i likuwa 
tukishirikiana naye na tulienda na yeye mpaka kwa wizara ya watoto kwa pamoja japo 
hakuwa mwanakamati lakini nilihitaji huduma zake . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika nimepoteza rafiki, nimepoteza mama, nimepoteza mama mshauri 
hasa nikizingatia namna nilivyoshiriki ana na yeye katika masuala kadha wa kadha naweza 
kusimama na kusema pole kwetu sote na haya yote ni m ipango ya Mwenyezi  Mungu hatuna 
budi kukubaliana na hayo na kuombeana katika Nyumba ila tunajua kwamba tumepoteza 
kiungo muhimu na hakuna la kufanya ila ku kubali aliye juu kwa sababu ni hali ambayo haiko 
mikononi mwetu ni Mwenyezi Mungu mwenye jukumu hili kwa maana yeye ndiye Mungu 
na pia nasimama kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu kwa yote. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa K izito Opeya . 
Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I want also to say that our colle ague was an 
inspiration to us and she will be missed , I just want to add on what Hon Amir Thoya said that 
if we are going to look for a road for Hon Serah Nyamvula we should al so do so for Hon 
Amina Zuberi and Hon Saad a Rajab because they were also M embers of the County so that 
the people of Mombasa could not say that we have favored  one person and we have left the 
other s, they were also part of us and it will be fair for all of  them three to be named on our 
roads. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Maimuna Mwamassa . 
Hon. (Mrs) Maimuna  Mwamassa : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kweli 
tumepoteza shujaa na ni shujaa alikuwa ni wa kitaifa sio Mombasa pekee  yake; 
tutamkumbuka mama Serah Nyamvula na tutawakumbuka walio tangulia kifo cha Serah 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 8 Nyamvula kimetukumbusha wenzetu wawili ambao tuliwapoteza   mwanzo mwanzo wa tamu 
tulipokua tumeingia kwenye Bunge  hili na ni pigo kubwa kwa kina mama , kwa jamii lakini 
hatuna budi kukubalia neno maana yake kazi ya Mungu haina makosa na vil e vile namuunga 
mkono Mama Mheshimiwa Maimuna Mwawasi na Opeya pia  kwa sababu kifo cha mama 
Serah kama nilivyotangulia kusema Mheshimiwa kimetukumbusha wale wengine na 
tukikumbuka pia Am ina Zuberi alikua shujaa katika mashujaa . 
Walikua ni walimu wetu wote ; hao walituenua mpaka saa hii ukituona sisi wengine  
tuko katika hili Bunge  tuko katika mikondo yao , kwa hivyo tumepata pigo  walikua ni walimu 
wetu, walikua ni mama zetu na Mungu akaja a katukutanisha tena kwenye Jumba  hili. 
Kwa hio tumepata kichapo kikubwa sana kina mama na mimi leo nina haja kuwa 
tuwatambue wote kwa pamoja ikiwa ni barabara zitatengengwa upande wa Nyali kama 
kutatengwa barabara na upande wa Mvita pia kutengwe barabara ha wa wawili pia waweze 
kutambulika kwa sababu walichangia pakubwa kwa upande wa ugatuzi ndipo hadi mpaka sisi 
leo tukajipata kuwa wateule.  
Hizi nafasi hazingekuja kama hawakutia michango yao katika ugatuzi ; walipigana 
vikali, walikua ni mashujaa kwa watoto, kina mama na kwa jamii nzima kwa jumla kwa 
hivyo mi mi naomba watambulike kwa pamoja i li tuonekane  tumeweka ule usawa , kwa hayo 
machache a hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Patrick Siminyu  
Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker. Hon  Speaker  it is sad that we have lost a 
very vibrant Hon . Member; sometimes I look at that C hair I remember her commanding 
reasons that she  performed more than any other M ember in this House .  
Mr. Speaker, S erah Nyamvula was a hard working H on Member whenever she was 
fighting in a Committee  she fought for the rights of  our children and women,  I remember she 
also fou ght for the right s of Frere Town people very hard and historical monuments 
belonging to the Frere Town people. Madam Speaker  this House  have lost…  
(Loud consultation ) 
…Sorry, Mr. Speaker this House  have lost three H on Members since inception and 
they died honorabl y they died while they h eld their title and it is only proper to have even a 
road; maybe one in Mvita because one belonged to Mv ita, another one in Changamwe and 
Frere Town named after them so that their names can live even if their spirits will live with  us 
but their names can live and people to remember them because of the  works that they have 
done for this County and for the sak e of devolution because they are pioneers  despite not all 
of us to have names but them being remembered because they died during the course of duty .  
Mr. Speaker, I want to say Rest in Peace Serah Nyamvula, thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Karume.  
Hon. Karume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for this opportunity to a lso share my 
attributes to our Hon  the late departed Serah Nyamvula.  
Mr. Speaker the Hon Member in  the disability circles is one Member that we feel 
cannot be replaced,  there is no rep lacement for her , she was a very close friend to the 
disability fraternity and in person . 
The first time I knew her is during my work in the civil society ; in the NGO world , 
that is the first time I knew her and ever since we have been worki ng together till the 
unfortunate demise.  
Mr. Speaker, it is at times very difficult to hold the grief that we are undergoing at the 
moment but they say whatever that God has done we can never correct or criticize  God’s 
work.  
Mr. Speaker, our Hon Serah I really remember her the way that she used to mentor 
some of us and she was  really in stable communication with some of us in terms of getting to 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 9 understand what  is going on, getting to assist  us to correct some of the anomalies here and 
there.  
She was  very supportive I  believe if not most but all us , Mr. Speaker I remember even 
there is a time when I travelled to my homeland and then … 
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Amur:  Where?  
Hon. Karume:  Somewhere in Bamburi … 
 
(Applause and laughter ) 
…AKA Kakamega s o but she made sure that there was a forum that was being 
organized  somewhere just here in Mombasa Serena Beach Hotel and she told me that this 
forum cannot proceed  without the representation of People Living with Disabilities and I took 
it very positive  because she knows , she knew very well that the constitution , the new 
constitution is all about inclusivity and nothing can be done without inclusion of persons with 
disabilities . 
In fact I knew her as a gender activist, a child activist and when I was pursuing  my 
diploma in County governance and management because of which most of us here were part 
of the same I did a project on the growth of street children the growth of population  of the 
street children in the Coast region  and I acknowledge her as one of the very active persons in 
the children fraternity … 
(Applause ) 
So as we focus on coming up with mea ns of remembering our departed Hon Members 
personally she is already in my project and she is there to stay in archives of KCA university 
and at the same  time I would call on my colleague Hon  Amir Thoya to come up with a 
Motion so that we pass that Motion in terms of the remembrance of our departed colleagues 
so that we can have move on by pus hing the executive t o implement . Mr. Speaker  sir may 
God r est our dear sister in eternal peace . Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Meti , Hon Omar Met i. 
Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa 
kumalizia … 
(Interruption ) 
Kutoa risala za rambi  rambi kwa Mheshimiwa wetu aliyetuondokea, Mheshi miwa 
Spika nasema pole kwa ndugu  zangu wote ma MCAs na watu wa Frère town na nchi yetu 
Kenya kwa jumla kwa  sababu tumepoteza shujaa, shujaa aliyekuwa anajali jamii, shujaa 
aliyekuwa mtetezi mkubw a wa haki za watoto na wanawake . 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi imenig usa sana kumpoteza Mheshimiwa Se rah Nyamvula 
kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Se rah ndiye aliyekuwa Mwenyekiti  wangu wa Kamati  ya Vijana, 
Jinsia na michezo  na mimi pia vile  vile nilikuwa Naibu  wake na nilijifunza mengi sana 
kupitia kwake kwa  sababu yeye alikuwa  akiniongoza kwa mengi, alikuwa akinirekebisha 
kama mtoto wake ama kijana wake . 
Kila jambo ilikuwa tukifanya pamoj a na tukishirikiana Mheshimiwa Spika, pia vile  
vile inaniuma tena zaidi kwa  sababu Mheshimiwa yule pia nakumbuka yeye na maman gu pia 
walikwenda shule moja  walisoma wote katika shule ya Frère town hata walikuwa marafiki 
wakubwa, akiwa na jambo lolote lazima aongee na mamangu na pia mara kwa mara mama 
alikuwa  akinituma kwake pia nimsalimie . 
Kwa hivyo nimepoteza mwenzangu ninayef anya naye kazi, nimepoteza Mwenyekiti  
wangu na pia vile  vile nimepoteza kama mamangu Mwenyekiti  wangu na pia vile  vile 
nime poteza kama mamangu Mheshimiwa Spika. 
February 3, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 10 Jambo la kukumbuka Mheshimiwa wetu aliyetuondokea Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo 
langu mimi kama vile tul ivyopendekeza kwamba kama kutapatikana barabara sehemu ya 
Nyali  tuweke jina lake, sehemu ya Mvita pia tuweke jina la Mheshimiwa aliyetuondokea pia 
Saada Rajab na Amina Zuberi pia vile  vile tuweze kuwakumbuka  tusionekane labda 
tunabagua upande huu na tunaac ha kule kwa  sababu wote wamekuwa mashujaa katika 
serikali yetu ya kwanza ya Kaunti na ni kina mama waliojitolea maisha yao kupigania hili 
jambo au swala la ugatuzi katika nchi yetu hii ya Kenya . 
Mheshimiwa Spika cha mwisho ni kwamba ningep enda kuwakumbusha 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu ya  kwamba sisi sote kama ma MCA lazima tuwe na upendo lazima 
tupendane iwe ni elected iwe ni nominated  tuongeze mapenzi kwa  sababu tunaona kwamba 
leo tuko pamoja kesho wengine wanatuondokea . 
Kwa hiyo ni  bora tuzidishiane mapenz i tujue hiyo  nafasi tuko nayo saa hii ambayo 
tunaishi tuitumie vizuri tuon yeshane mapenzi ili kesho tukipoteana wengine wa kienda mbele 
za haki iwe tunakumbukana kwa memories  nzuri lakini nasema tukuwe sote yeye mbele sisi 
nyuma . Rest In Pea ce Mama Se rah Nyamvula.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili Makarani .  
Hon. M walimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru nafikiri mimi ndio niliyotoa 
hoja hii ; kuondokewa ni vibaya na inauma lakini mimi napinga wenzangu walivyoomba 
tutengeze barabara . 
Mheshimiwa Spika tungeangalia wenzetu hawa ambao ni Waheshimiwa  watu ambao 
wanajiweza chanzo cha Waheshimiwa wote hawa watatu ; chanzo cha vifo vyao ni nini ? Je 
tutafanya nini Mheshimiwa Spika tusaidie yule mwananchi wa chini ili asiwe atakuwa ni 
mwenye kupata matatizo . 
Namshukuru Mheshimiwa Gavana  Mheshimiwa Spika jana katika hot uba yake wakati 
wa mazishi alizungumzia swala hili na mimi nawaomba wenzangu tutilieni swala hili mkazo 
kando ama badili ya kuwekelea ama kuweka zile barabara mwanzo ni tuangalie tutafanya 
nini kwa sababu kama ni saratani  zimeumiza mpaka wananchi wa chini . 
Sasa sisi kama serikali ya Kaunti ili kuwapa hadhi Waheshimiwa wetu walioondoka 
tuhamasishe ama tuongeze nguvu katika hospitali zetu ili wananchi wa chini waweze 
kusaidika na iwe changamoto hiyo imetokana na  hili somo ambalo tumelisoma kutoka kwa 
Wahesh imiwa wetu, ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ahsante sana waheshimiwa wenzangu 
kwa hayo maneno. Clerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
There being no other business this House  is adjourned till Tuesday afternoon . 
The House  rose at 3 :30pm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 