February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 28th February, 2019  
The House met at 2:55p.m.  
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Good afternoon Hon. Members we may be seated. Yes 
Clerk? 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Hon. Members, I wish to bring to the attention of this Honourable Assembly that we have 
visitors from the House of Representatives , Women Caucus from Zanzibar.  I recognize the 
presence of the delegation which consists of;  Hon. Mgeni Hassa n Juma – Deputy Speaker and 
Chairperson of the House  of Representatives Women Caucus , Hon. Mwantatu Mbarak Khamis – 
Deputy Chairperson of the House of Representatives Women Caucus , Hon. Lulu Msham 
Abdulla – Member of the House of Representat ives Women Caucus , Hon. Khadija Omar Kibano 
– Member of the House of Representatives Women Caucus , Hon. Mwanaidi Kassim Mussa – 
Member of the House of Representatives Women Caucus , Ms. Nasra Awadh Salmin – Staff of 
the House of Representatives , Ms. Fatma A li Mohamed – Staff o f the House of Representatives .
 Hon. Members thank you for coming to Mombasa and on behalf of the Assembly, I 
welcome you all to the County Assembly of Mombasa.  Karibuni sana . 
 
(The delegation bowed before the House)  
(Applause)  
PAPERS  
THE STATUS OF THE REP ORT ON SUPPLY OF STR EET LIGHTING EQUIPME NT AND EMPLOYMENT OF  
TECHNICIANS IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
 Yes, Hon. Prischilla Mumba, Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and 
Public Works please table the report.  

February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Hon.  Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving this opportunity. Mr. Speaker Sir I 
would like to up -date the Honourable House on behalf of the Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works on the status of the report on supply of street  lighting equipment  
and employment  of technicians in Mombasa County.  Mr. Speaker Sir  we were ready to prepare 
until a report as you directed…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Faith ? 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Mr. Speaker I guess last week yo u authorized the Clerks to give 
Members cop ies so th at they know what is being read, w e do not have  the copies by now. T hank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
(Consultations)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Faith.  Honourable Members according to 
the Clerk they are saying the  Honourable,  Chairperson of th e Committee that this is not a report 
but she just trying to explain, so can you please let her explain and we listen to her.  
 Hon.  Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for guiding me properly. Mr. Speaker Sir we 
were ready to prepare and table a report as you had  directed but this was only possible if you 
could get the requisite information from the Chief Officer, Department of Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works.  
 Mr. Speaker we extended two invitatio ns to him to meet the Committee;  the first on 
Monday , 25th February , 2019 at 2:00 p.m. and later today Thursday, 28th February , 2019 at 10: 00 
a.m. in both situation s he did not appear before the Committee.  
 In view of the failure of the Chief Officer to appear before the Committee we have 
decided to invoke the  provision of the law to summon him to appear. We would like to remind 
ourselves that this is an Honourable House which legislative and oversight powers ; the 
Constitution and status law give us powers  to oversight the County Executive and summon 
anyone to appear before it.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir we would like to particularly bring to your attention Article 195 of the 
Constitution of Kenya , 2010 and Section 39 Cap 2 of the County Government Act , 2012 and 
Section 18 and to Section 27 of the County Assembly Powers and Priviledges Act , 2017. They 
are serious allegations , consequences to anyone defying the County Assembly and its 
Committees.  
 Further we would urge the House to give us more time and avoid discussing the matter 
until we have delivered our report as pro vided for in Standing Order 82 , we would be able to 
provide a report in this Honourable House once we have received sufficient clarification from the 
Chief Officer. The Committee has therefore decided to summon the Chief Officer to appear 
before the Commit tee on Thurday, 7th March, 2019 at 10:00 a.m. T hank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
(Applause)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable Chair. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 GARBAGE PILE UP IN AIRPORT WARD 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . 
 Hon.  Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir for the opportunity granted. Mr. Speaker Sir I 
want to read a Statement . Garbage pile up in Airport Ward.  
Honourable Speaker, Pursuant to Standing Order 42 ..., sorry Mr. Speaker Sir I have a 
problem with my eyes, Pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2) (c), I seek to know from the 
Chairperson Committee on Environment, Waste Management and Energy, whether he is 
aware of the garbage pile up at Saratoga area in Airport Ward which ha s not been 
collected f or the past two years, and further if he is awa re the afore said area is used b y the 
entire Changamwe Sub County as a dumping  site and finally what plans does the County 
government of Mombasa have to remove the garbage considering that it is now posing a 
health hazard to the residents.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir if you woul d allow me just one minute I would like to emphasize that 
indeed it is very serious as I speak now the area that I am talking about is very much affected and 
you will find that, that is an area where the community and even the youths use that particular 
area is a place where they practice most of the ir games and that place is  really  very serious and 
therefore I want to urge with a lot of strength that action should  be taken with immediate effect. 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you Hon. I brahim Omondi, MCA Airport Ward. Yes 
the Chairperson Committee on Environment, Waste Management and Energy Hon. Shebe 
Athman may you please rep ly to the request for S tatement , when will the response be ready  or if 
you have the response with you ?  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Yes, thank you Hon. Speaker . I am s addened to hear my fellow 
Honourable Member that area of Saratoga garbage has  not been c ollected for the last two years. 
It is very unfortunate Hon. Speaker and I am not aware of this so I kindly urg e to give me time so 
that I can go to this area and see what is happening there . Thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe Ath umani we are giving you one 
week so by next Thursday we can have the reply please. Yes Clerk?  
CLOGGED DRAINAGE S YSTEM AND MANHOLE AT  WAYANI , BOKOLE AND BOMU CATHOLIC CHURCH  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. I brahim Omondi ? 
 Hon. Omondi:  I stand up to give a statement on the clogged drainage system and 
manhole at Wayani, Bokole and Bomu Catholic Church.  
Mr. Speaker  Sir, I seek also to know pursuant to the Mombasa County Assembly 
Standing Order 41(2) (c), from the Chairperson, Committee on Transport, Infrastructure 
and Public Works if he is indeed aware that the drainage system and manhole at Wayani, 
Bokole and Bomu Catholic Church is blocked com pletely and whether the County 
government have any measures or plans to unclog this system considering that the rainy 
season is just approaching.  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Mr. Speaker if you would allow me just to emphasize the rainy season is approa ching and 
just before it starts we shall hear a lot of outcry from this and I know that this S tatement is only 
not affecting me, l am 100  per cent  sure that it is affecting almost the entire County in every 
Ward and therefore I wish that the Department con cerned will move very fast to make sure that 
this is affected, thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank y ou very much again Hon. Ebrahim. Y es Hon. Faith . 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I am standing under Standing Order 41 
concerning the same clog ged drainage system in Mombasa County , this is from Mainland to 
Akamba Handicraft and Umoja Primary drainage system … 
 (Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Faith sorry you are giving a Statement as well .  
 Hon. Mwende:  Yeah. 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): So can you let me finish to direct that Statement first . 
 Hon. Mwende:  Okay . 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : The one the Hon. Member which he has said and when it 
comes to Statement again you can rise .  
(Consultations)  
 So Hon. Members with the Statemen t regarding which the Hon. Member just said Hon. 
Ibrahim regarding the blockage I think the drainage systems is under Transport and 
Infrastructure so am going to ask the Chairperson for Transport and Infrastructure please to tell 
this House when will the r esponse be ready?  
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker again I would like to be given not less than seven  
days so that we could have a site visit with my Committee and then we compile a report then we 
bring the report into this House. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are saying one week? One week is okay, so next 
week Thursday is fine. Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Faith?  
 Hon. Mwende: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir once again am Standing under Standing 
Order 41 (c) if you allow me .  
 The Speak er (Hon. Khatri) : Yeah just read for us Standing Order 41 (c)  
 Hon. Mwende:  ‘A Member may request for a Statement from the Committee 
Chairperson relating to the matters under the mandate of the Committee and the Speaker may 
either appoint a day for the Sta tement or the direct that the Stat ement be issued on the same 
day’, with your permission...  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It's fine Hon. Faith so let the Clerk again announce a 
Statement and then you will stand and rise for the Statement I think that the pr ocedure . 
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Yes Clerk?  So when I finish with Hon. Member I call upon the Clerk and when the Clerk 
again says Statement so you can stand so that you can give the Statement. Yes Clerk?  
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT  FROM CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTU RE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS HON. MUMBA ON PLANS FOR UNBLOCKING CLOGGED  DRAINAGE FROM 
MAINLAND TO AKAMBA H ANDICRAT FROM ABC CH URCH TO MIGADINI MWI SHO 
 Yes Hon. Faith?  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Mr. Speaker I would like to know from the Chairperson on the 
Committee of Transport,  Infrastructure and Public Works on what is planning of the drainage 
blockage from Mainland to Akamba Handicraft from ABC Church to Migadini Mwisho of 
which I brought this Statement last year and no action has been taken since then . So I will urge 
the Chai rperson to move on a fast speed because the rainy season is approaching , is very near 
and there  is a lot of outcry from the electorates. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Faith Mwende. Yes Hon. Prischillah 
Mumba Chairperson for Transport and Infrastructure please kindly tell this House when will you 
have the response?  
 Hon.  Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I brought the response in this House if I could 
remember although the date because it is not vividly in my mind but the prob lem was the youth 
who were given that work to work they had already done their work but there was no right 
payment at that time so they were waiting for those youth s to be paid so that they continue with 
the projects . So what I can on ly confirm is I will g o to the M inistry and confirm whether they 
have paid the youth s so that they can continue with their work because that was given to youth 
groups to clean all those sewage lines. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So we are giving you one we ek as well. Thank you. Yes 
Hon. Fadhili?  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi nimesimama chini ya kanuni za kudumu 41 ya Bunge letu hili. Mheshimiwa Spika kuna 
tetesi kuwa kuna vikundi vya vijana na kina mama ambao wameweza kupatiwa na serikali ya 
Kaunti mifugo  Mheshimiwa Spika pasi na sisi W aheshimiwa kuwa na taarifa yeyote ...  
(Applause)  
 Ningependa Bunge letu hili lipewe uwazi lielezwe ni vikundi gani ambavyo vimefaidi 
kutoka mradi ule Mheshimiwa Spika na il itumika taratibu gani kuweza kuwapatia vikundi vile 
mifugo ile? Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili. Yes Hon. Kitula? Are you a 
Committee Member for Agriculture? Are you going to reply to the Statement of Hon. Fadhili?  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nafikiri uliweza kumruhusu 
Naibu Mwenyekiti kukaa kwa kiti chako . 
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Lakini suala hilo liliulizwa ni leo tupate majibu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, leo ndio 
majibu tunasubiri nafikiri ni vyenye haikuwa katika kumb u kumbu za siku ya leo lakini inastahili 
kujibiwa leo.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes the Chairperson for Agriculture?   
(Laughter)  
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika swali liliulizwa na Bwana Kitula na 
nataka kuomba nipewe muda zaidi  
(Consultations ) 
 Kwa sababu Bwana Spika juzi tulipata ripoti ile kutoka kwa Wizara ... 
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Members, Order! Order! Hon. Members please ! 
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika .  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 Hon. Wa mbua:  Juzi tulipata ripoti kutoka kwa department lakini Bwana Spika haikuwa 
sahihi tukasema irudi tena tumuite Afisa Mkuu  aje ili atuelezee zaidi ili niweze kui leta Alhamisi 
ijayo.  
(Applause)  
 Naomba.  
(Applause)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika kuweza kumpatia muda Mwenyekiti mwenza ni  
kumpatia muda kuhakikisha ule mgao umalizike kugawanywa, zile mbuzi zinamalizika 
kugawanywa pamoja na kuku wake. Kwa hivyo hakuna muda ni  tupate leo mbuzi, tupate kuku 
leo. 
(Lau ghter)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika nat angaza msimamo mimi nikiwa pia 
Mwanachama katika Kamati ya mifugo ripoti ama taarifa ilioletwa kama Kamati si kwamba 
haikuwa sahihi lakini tuliikataa kwa sabab u mipangilio hii haikuhusishwa Kamati wala 
Mheshimiwa yeyote na pendekezo letu ilikuwa ni mhusika kuitwa na si tu kwa Kamati bali kwa 
waheshimiwa wote, Jumba nzima aweze kuyajibu kifaragha kisahihi masuala haya.  Sababu vile 
vikundi vyenye walituandikia Mhe shimiwa Spika sisi tunatoka mashinani hatuvijui hatuvitambui 
na hiyo miradi kwengine hatuioni.  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika suala hili kupitia kwako siku ambayo tutakuwa tumepata 
tarehe na chief officer lisiwe ni jambo la Kamati ya ufugaji na Ukulima pekee  yake bali 
waheshimiwa wote tutawakaribisha ili waweze kuyasikia na kuchachawiza pale panapostahiki. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Hon. Members I think we need 
to give time to the Committee, let the Committee do i ts work and by next Thursday we will have 
the full report back into the House.  
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante Spika.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you .  
(Applause)  
 Yes Hon. Bwire?  
STATUS OF RENOVATION AND SUPPLY OF TEACHI NG AND LEARNING MATE RIALS IN ALL ECD S 
ACROSS THE COUNTY  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I happen to present my Statement in the House 
Business Committee unfortunately it was not captured here. Mr. Speaker I seek to know from the 
Department on Education on the Status of renovation and supply  of teaching and learning 
materials in all ECDs across the County. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire. Yes Hon. Ibrahim Bomoa  please . 
 Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you . Mr. Speaker Sir this is a very serious concern from your 
Chair I want to request that you allow us or you give us at least one week so that we may come 
up with a very comprehensive and satisfactory report on that issue. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim , so next Thursday make sure  you 
bring the report. Yes Clerk?  
Statement  
 Yes Hon. Juma Renson Thoya?  
RESPONSE BY CHAIRPERSON LABOU R AND SOCIAL WELFARE  COMMITTEE HON . THOYA TO 
STATEMENT REQUEST ON  30 PER CENT RULE ON EMPLOYMENT IN JOMVU  KUU WARD  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think the 30  per cent rule is all about the public 
companies but because the company that Hon. Shebe wanted to know the information on is 
private we have discuss ed with the C lerk yesterday and we were issued with the introductory 
letter for us to visit thos e companies and get the facts, the truth as alleged by Hon. Shebe 
Athuman we should believe that by next week we will bring a conclusive answer. Thank you.  
[The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri ) Exited the Plenary ] 
[The  Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ) in the Chair]  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Shebe Athuman?  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Mwenyekiti Mwenza wa 
Kamati ya Leba hii Taarifa  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nafikiri imechukua sasa takriban majuma 
mawili na mtu huanzia kwanza akamal izia mwisho lakini Mheshimiwa Mwenza mpaka saa hii 
yuko mwa nzo sijui mwisho atafika lini? H akuna hatua yeyote hii Kamati imepiga Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti na watu wangu kule wanaumia , mimi kila siku naulizwa Mheshimiwa Mukono  
kampuni ziko hapa watu wanatoka nj e wa Congo, watu wanatoka wageni  mpaka leo sisi 
hatujaandikiwa kazi.  
 Kwa h ivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi naomba ikiwa mpaka hivi sasa ni majuma 
mawili na hii kazi haitafanyika, haijafanyika mimi naona hapa kuna utepet evu fulani . Kwa hivyo 
ningeomba nime ona barua imekuja pole Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ningeomba hii Kamati ya 
Leba iweze kuwajibika kwa sababu mimi nikienda nyumbani nashindwa mahali pa  kupita 
Mheshimiwa kwa sababu ya hizo k ampuni. Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Noted Hon. Athuman Shebe I think the Chair for 
Labour was clear when he responded that they have written an introductory letter to the 
companies so we shall wait the Committee to respond by the t ime they were given by this 
Honourable House.  I think they have asked for more t ime so we are giving them more time but 
take the matter as an urgent matter because it i s a concern from the Hon. Member. Yes Clerk?  
 Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Mr. Speaker thank you am st anding on a Point of O rder 41(  2) (c).  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu  Fadhili) : Standing Order or a Point of Order?  
 Hon. Samba:  Standing Order, I want to seek a Statement .  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): So Hon. Samba then proceed Hon. Samba . 
 Hon.  Samba:  Mr. Speaker I would  wish to seek a Statement from the department 
concerned , as we are all aware that the rains are looming; we are expecting heavy rains so I 
would wish to know from the department concerned our prepared ness as the County g overnment 
is as far as disaster mana gement team is concern. I wish to know how they are prepared 
especially Tudor stage they has been a collection of water there Hon. Speaker and we have not 
deviated from the norms and we know very well that prevention is always better than cure, how 
prepare d are the y so that at least t his House may know as a County g overnment. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Chairman for Environment?  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Mr. Speaker I thi nk that docket is not under my C ommittee ; that 
falls und er Transport an d Infrastructure Hon. Speaker.  I guess my fellow Chair should be in a 
better position to answer that.  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Prischillah Mumba 
Transport Chair?  
 Hon.  Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . It has come now to my attention so please bear 
with me because I also have some other queries I should combine them all together so that I can 
get the answer when I would come after summoning the Chief Officer so that I can reply in this 
House , please Mr. Speaker . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRMAN COMMIT TEE ON ENVIRONMENT H ON.SHEBE ATHMAN ON 
UNCOLLECTED GARBAGE IN KONGOWEA WARD  
 Yes Hon. Athuman Shebe?  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Leo ilikuw a ni siku yetu 
mahsusi ya kuleta Taarifa  hii hapa Bungeni lakini tumekubaliana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
kama Kamati ya Mazingira kuwa ripoti tulioipiga msasa haijafika hadhi ya kuletwa katika Bunge 
hili. Kwa hivyo tumeomba tena takriban  wiki moja Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ili tuje na ripoti 
ambayo itaweza kuridhisha kila Mheshimiwa na nimeiweza kuipanua na kuomba kuwa hii ripo ti 
itaweza kugusia katika kila Wo di 30 za mji wetu wa Mombasa . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes H on Abrari ? 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Hili litakuwa ni juma l a nne 
nikiregesha taarifa  hio hio ya K ongowea ; Mwenyekiti nadhani nikipitia ripoti hii kusema la 
kweli haijaambatana na vigezo nilivyoviweka ama nilivyovitoa juma lil ilopita. Kigezo cha 
kwanza ambach o nilimwel ezea Mheshimiwa ni kuwa jaa la Kongowea kwa K arama ambalo liko 
katikati ya mji ilikuwa nimemueleza kuwa hilo liwe litaondolewa kabisa kwa sababu jaa lile 
halina lesen i ama haliambatani na kanuni za NEMA.  
 Jaa kwa K ongowea pale linafaa kama lingekuwa linafuata kan uni lingekuwa na leseni 
kutoka NEMA  kuwa lile ni jaa la pili lingekuwa liko Kenya gazette kuwa  hilo jaa linatambulika 
katika orodha ya majaa katika Mombasa , na la tatu ni kuwa jaa lile liko kati kati ya mji a mbayo 
mvua ikinyesha wanao athirika wote wale ambao wako karibu ni wenyeji ama ni wale 
wanabiashara ambao wako karibu na lile jaa . Na ya pili taarifa  hio hio nikawa nim eelekezea 
kidole Mwenyekiti wa M azingara kuwa jaa la sok oni  atupe ratiba ya kuwa ni lin i na lini 
watakuwa wakitoa taka ndani ya soko kwa sababu ndani ya soko kuna mlima takriban mkubwa 
kushinda mjengo huo na nikamuelezea hasa sisi twataka kujua mimi kama M CA wa K ongowea 
nataka kujua hasa ratiba iliowekwa ni kuwa jaa lile litakuwa latolewa ni kila siku , ni baada ya 
siku mbili , ni baada ya siku tatu , ni wiki moja ili nikilegea kule chini mashinani niwe naweza 
kuelezea wananchi ni kuwa ni vipi ama ni mipangilio gan i tumepanga kuboresha hadhi ya 
Kongowea . 
 Kwa hivyo Bwana Mwenyekiti naregea kwako tena nikikuambia  jaa la K ongowea kwa  
Karama ni  lifungwe kuambatana na kanuni za NEMA , ni lifungwe kabisa ni pale hapafai  kuwe 
na jaa na jaa la sokoni Kongowea ndani ya soko mtupe ratiba ni kuwa ni lini na lini mtakuwa 
mkitoa taka zile , ahsante . 
 
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 (Applause ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Athm an. As you have heard the 
Member who raised the  Statement  wants to know the program of when you are  going to clear the 
garbage at K ongowea and please w hen you respond just be précise on the issue of Kongowea 
saying that you are going to compile an issue of all the Wards just the issue of all the W ards be a 
supporting document to this H ouse that the depart ment is prepared has be précise  on what the 
Honorable  Member has said and it  is a concern that ha s taken almost a month because the more 
time we are giving you it will take a month so take it as an urgent matter now that the rain s are 
coming in our next Sitting Thursday make it next Statement hour when we are going to sit in this 
Hono urable H ouse have  a good response to this issue . Hope am clear Hon . Member . Yes Clerk . 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRMAN COMMITTE E ON TRADE , TOURISM AND INVESTME NT HON . 
OPEYA ON MAMA NGINA DRIVE FACELIFT  
 Yes Hon . Kizito Opeya ? 
 Hon.  Opeya: Thank you Mr. S peaker. This is i n response to the S tatement that was asked 
by the  Hon. Moses Aran about the Mama Ngina Drive face lift that was l aunch ed by His  
Excellency  the President Uhuru Kenyatta ; he wanted to know whether the locals had been 
employed , and two he also wanted to know the status of food vendo rs and others who do 
business there , and  after the project is completed whether they would still be there .  
 Twice now the Chief O fficer has written a letter to the national government t hrough the 
Ministry of T ouris m but they have yet to reply ; it is very st range because according to the 
Constitution the national and County government s are supposed to mutually co -exist and work 
together but we have yet to get the reply up to yesterd ay evening when I was with the Chief 
Officer Mr. Inn ocent Mugabi . So I told him  to write the third letter and hopef ully they will reply 
this time and g ive us the details because the C ounty is only providing the land but the funding 
and everything is done through the national government . They are the only on es who are in 
position to answer this S tatement which is requested by Hon . Mose s Aran so I beg for more time 
till maybe next week hopefully if they w ill have replied I will tell the H ouse or not may be Mr. 
Speaker you can guide me. T hose are the issues thro ugh the national government on how we can 
know about it  but the national government is refusing to answer the S tatement that we have 
asked here, thank you. 
 
 The De puty Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moses Aran ? 
 Hon.  Aran: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika hii Taarifa  niliuliza 
tarehe 14 mwezi wa pili mwaka huu inamanisha ni wiki mbili imepita tangu niulize Taarifa hii. 
Mheshimiwa Spika sielewi kwa sababu twajua kwamba mradi u meanza na inafa a kuisha mwezi 
wa tano au mwezi wa sita na kuangali a ile hali ya kazi vijana wetu wa Mombasa 
hawaja husishwa na hili . 
 Naomba tafadhali na nashukuru Mwenye kiti vile ameongea, ameongea vizuri kwa h ivyo 
mimi kama Mwakilishi wa vijana kutoka B unge la Kaunti ya Mombasa kama hawataweza kutoa 
kujibu itabidi tuta fute mbinu tutakazotumia kwa sababu hatuwezi kaa tuone kwamba lazima 
vijana wa Mombasa wafurahie ugatuzi na hiyo ni ukweli ukienda kila K aunti  la zima watu 
wafurahie ugatuzi wa K aunti yao .  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Hatuwezi kuwa kazi inafanyika inaendelea hatujui wale waliokuwa w anafanya kazi pale 
kama watarudishwa vizuri ama ni mpango kabambe ya serikali ni kinukuu karibu Mheshimiwa 
Mwam wiri vile husema kutoka tujue yule yuwauza chakula pale yule yuwan g'ang’ana kupata 
riziki yake kutoka pale kulipa  karo ya shule  watafaidaika vipi  na wale watu wameandikwa pale 
ni vijana wetu watapata kazi vipi . Kwa hivyo mimi naomba tafadhali Mheshimiwa Spika 
utusaidie ili tuweze kutatua hili jambo , ahsante Mheshimiwa . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you, are you up on a Point of O rder o r 
Statement?  
 Hon. Murfad Amur: Mr. Speaker if you allow me I want to inform the H ouse in regard 
with the S tatement that I am th e area M CA or the place where Hon . Aran is talking about . Mr. 
Speaker I just want to inform the House that the S tatement t hat we have already ... 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
 Hon. Murfad Amur: Mr. Speaker we had a meeting with the Minister o f Trade at the 
site with all the stake holders , it was done under the Chief O fficer the museum  me being there 
and other stake holders. As we talk Mr. Speaker we are in process of  doing a Memorandum of 
Understanding  (MOU ) making sure that all those who are benefitting from that site will be given 
first priority and that we are soon meeting with the national government  and a  way forwa rd to be 
confirmed so that our people do  not lose their places at Mama Ngina drive . That  is the 
information I can  give Mr. Speaker but we are in the  forefront in fighting for our people , thank 
you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you for the pie ce of information Hon . 
Members unless you are on a different opinion but  Hon. Opeya next time have  a copy of the said 
letters for the M embers to at least see for themselves because it has been for the second time you 
are respondi ng and you are saying that t he Chief O fficer has said he has writ ten the letter and yet 
the Hon ourable  House is yet to see the letters .  
 Hon. Opeya: Thank you Mr. Speaker I will bring the letter tomorrow to your office so 
that it can be ta bled next Thursday because the Chief O fficer  is complaining that the national 
government has not replied to him .  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay  i note also the area Member of the County 
Assembly has said that there is a meeting that is schedule d to take place just make sure that you  
are part and parcel of that meeting .  
 Hon. Opeya: Maybe they bypass ed the Chief O fficer because he  is not aware of anything 
but what I can do is maybe call  a meeting and also bring the Chief O fficer and the area M CA 
since he is also in the Committee then the C hief O fficer can be told exactly what is happening , 
maybe some of those officers are sleeping on that job , thank you .  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you. Y es C lerk? You  are on the same 
issue ? Okay th en wait a moment we follow the Order P aper th en I will appoint you to raise your 
Statement.  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ROADS , INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC 
WORKS HON . MUMBA ON THE ROAD FR OM JUNDA DISPENSARY TO NG 'OMBENI MISSION . 
 Yes Hon . Prinscilla Mumba r esponse to Junda dispensa ry to N g’ombeni mission road .  
 Hon.  Mumba: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nik inukuu ilikuwa najaribu  na Mheshimiwa 
aliye leta hii Taarifa  kuna wakati ilikuja na akasema aliend a kwa sehemu husika na Engineer 
wakaangalia ile kazi ilipokuwa inafanyika lakini kwa sababu ya walipokuwa wanafanya ile kazi 
waliachia nusu ya njia ya ani hawakuimaliza sasa ndio imemlazimu tena alete hio  Taarifa  ili 
inataka msaada sana hata kama ninavyojua kuwa kazi yake inaendelea lakini ameniarifu kuwa 
kazi kumbe imesimama . Kwa hivyo nit achukua juhudi ya kuweza kujua tatizo pale lilitokea 
katikati kwa ajili tunajua kuwa kazi ilikuwa inaendelea . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika .   
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk, the Hon. Member is up . Yes Hon . 
Bwire ? 
 Hon.  Bwire: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ni kweli vile Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
anavyosema ila ni  kwamba baada ya kuwaandikia barua ya idara  ya Uchukuzi  walileta 
mwanakandarasi na akafanya kazi kupungua mita 50  akajaza shimo lililokuwa na maji akaweka 
murram kisha akahepa na Taarifa yangu Mhe shimiwa Spika ilikuwa inazungumzia … 
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Use Parliamentary language !  
 Hon.  Bwire: Kisha akaondoka shukran na  Taarifa uli oletea mwaka jana kuhusiana na 
barabara hi yo Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa nazungumzia kuhusu urekebishaji wa barabara ya 
Safari J unda  - Mwembeni Junda M isheni na ikaseme kana kuwa barabara itatengezwa 
mwana kandarasi akasema pesa iliishiwa hajalipwa pesa aje alipwe pesa ndio arudi aje 
atengeneze barabara . Mheshimiwa Spika huu ni mwezi wa tatu tunael ekea wakati mgumu sana 
wakati wa mvua , kuna sehemu ambazo zinabidi vijana walio na misuli wasimame wabebe 
wamama na watoto wa shule wavukishwe walipwe shilingi 20. S asa una weza fikiria kwamba 
hali hiyo itaenda kwa mda gani na hio ndio barabara peke yake am bayo inapitisha watu . 
Ahsante . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : It is well noted and the C ommittee will work on 
the issue and bring back the report as soon as possible. Y es Clerk ? 
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Renson Juma Thoya . 
 Hon. Thoya: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I want to bring  to the attention of this H ouse tha t I 
have seen the C lerk of the Committee and the C ommissionair e sharing a S tatement ; I want to say 
that S tatement  is not signed by me and in that regard I do  not own it nor the Committee . I want to 
say this ; this is a very serious issue Mr. Speaker , efforts to get the necessa ry information about  
the said S tatement are b eing derailed by staff of this A ssembly and I would wish that Hon . Kitula 
give the detail part of this . Thank y ou.  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula .  
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Ni kweli 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa K amati  katika Kamati yetu ya Leba  tulikuwa na kikao siku y a leo 
waliweza kupanga na sisi W anaka mati tuliweza kufika na tukaweza kufahamis hwa kuwa barua 
imeenda kufika katika sehemu husika  ambayo  ni Kaunti Public Service  B oard  ili tu weze kufika 
maelezo kamili kuhusiana na yale yalioweza kuulizwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Lakini  yale 
yaliweza kutumiwa katika K amati ni kwam ba tayari barua ilitok a katika B unge hili na Katibu  
alikuwa ameandika barua katika  Bodi ya kuajiri wafanyikazi wa  Kaunti yaani, County Public 
Service Board lakini majibu hayakuja na kusema kweli hayakuja kwa sababu Katibu  katika 
Kamati yetu alikuwa tayari amewez a kumualika mwa nasheria katika B unge letu kuja kuzuia 
barua hii kutoenda katika sehemu husika . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ndio hapo sisi kama 
Wanachama tungetaka kujua ni nini kinachoendelea katika Kamati yetu maana yale yaliokuwa 
yameandik wa na Karani  sio yale Karani wa K amati anastahili kufanya kuandika ndio hadi 
kufikia sasa hayo ndio yanaajiri.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you.  Yes Hon. Shebe ? 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa M wenye K iti kunipatia fursa hii . Ni 
masikitiko sana Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti kwa habari tulioipata kwa Kiranja wa B unge na hii 
inaon yesha kuwa B unge hili linahujumiwa kwa kila upande . Ni masikitiko sana Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kuwa hata jogoo halijameza pu nje tayari tunaanza kukabiliana na mambo mengine 
mapya; ni leo tu mimi nimepata  simu tena Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ya vitisho. Vitisho vitaisha 
lini Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti? Sisi tunatumia mamlaka yetu ya kidola na nguvu zetu 
tulizokabidhiwa na Katiba hii ya Kenya kuhudumia wananchi wetu, mbona tunapata vitisho? 
Waheshimiwa wameanza kuin gia baridi katika maswala haya l akini tumesema hatutarudi nyuma , 
hatutarudi nyuma!  
(Applause)  
 Mimi nimeambiwa leo Wallahi  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni vile tu sifa yetu wanaadamu 
ya kughafilika, l akini nilikuwa ni merekod i yale nilikuwa nimepigiwa simu ; Mheshim iwa 
Mukono kumbe sisi tulikuwa tunaona ni rafiki  kwa mabano na nilikuwa nadhania kuwa ni rafiki 
kumbe nalia  na mwewe, kumbe hasidi ni wewe ! Yote haya Mheshimiwa ni sisi ku wajibika katika 
majukumu yetu t utakuon yesha sasa ! Nataka munieleze Waheshimiwa wenza neno 
‘tutakuonesha’  inamaanisha nini katika m chakato mzima kwa majukumu yetu?  Vitisho hivi 
vime anza kuingia katika kila pembe l akini mimi nasema japo pweza alimuambia ngisi twende 
twende tukajiimarisi maji yakiacha wangwa Mheshimiwa tutwafutwao ni sisi Waheshimiwa ...  
(Applause)  
 Tusirudi nyuma na ni  kutaka kujua tu je wewe ambaye unapatiwa cheo kwa Kaunti hii 
twataka kujua kuwa cheo chako kiko katika category  gani? Je umeandikwa na s erikali ipi? Sioni 
sisi tuna ubaya Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , kuna ubaya hapo?  Makaratasi yako yako wapi na 
umeandikwa lini? Leo sisi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Bunge hili karibuni litakuwa na njaa tupu , 
bali maanake utasikia kila mahal i siku zote hapa si Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti wa Fedha hakuna 
pesa! Hakuna pesa! Na watu wengine wameandikw a wanakula mishahara na hujui kam a 
wameandikwa kweli na serikali ... 
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 (Applause)  
 Tuna mamluki katika serikali hii, tusiseme Mheshimiwa Mwenyek iti? L azima tuseme. 
Mheshimiwa ambaye vitisho hiv i vilikuwa vimeelekezwa katika K amati iende kuchunguza 
angalia mam bo vile yako mpaka Karani inakuwa frustration ; amekuwa  frustrated  huyu 
Mheshimiwa mpaka analetewa wakili . M imi nanukuu  kipengee cha K atiba ya Kenya 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, 195, ‘A County A ssembly or any of its Committee s has power to 
summon any person to ap pear before it for the purpose of giving evidence or providin g 
information ’,  ibara ya pili , ‘for the purpose of the clause (1)  an A ssem bly has the same powers 
as the High C ourt to; - 
(a) Enforce the attendance of witness and examining them on oath, affirmation  or otherwise;  
(b) Compel the production of documents; and ,  
(c) Issue a commission or a reque st to examine witnesses abroad   
 Sasa haya yote ni  majukumu yetu Mheshimiwa tumekabidhiwa na Katiba. Kwa hivyo 
hatuna budi sisi kuwajibika , nataka uweze kulian galia swala  hili Mheshimiwa Mwe nyekiti k wa 
uzito kwa sababu changu naona nishaanza nyolewa W aheshi miwa na nyinyi chenu mwaambiwa 
mukitie maji. Kwa hivyo sisi hatutakubali vitisho, h atuko tayari kwa vitisho na mimi nitachukua 
hatua kama Mheshimiwa binafsi katika hili swala nihakikishe kuwa na mimi nitajiaangalia 
namna gani lakini nawahakikishia wakaazi wangu wa Mombasa na wa  Jomvu Kuu nime jitoa 
muhanga kuhakikisha kuwa s erikali inawajibika…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Your time is up!  
(Applause)  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti .  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Shomari are you on a S tatement or?  
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii , mimi 
ningependa kutaka kujua huyo Karani aliyezu ia ni nani tumjue na ni  sheria gani itachukuliwa juu 
yake. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): That is an administrative issue we will work on 
it administr atively. We cannot discuss the C lerk in this House. Yes Clerk?  
(Consultations)  
 Yes Chairman Labour Committee, still make follow up on whatever that was raised 
yesterday for the Assembly to come and witness the documents and whatever that was raised, so 
in our next sitting I think you will be having ample  time for you t o make the proper follow up 
and whoever that was not in the office may be will be back in the office for you to get whatever 
that you were looking for and bring back to this Honourable  House.  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker thank you very much , I want to assure the House that this 
Committee we just wanted to bring this observation before the Hono urable Members b ut we 
shall go on to get the necessary  facts about the said officer , nobody will stop us from reaching 
the destination. .. 
(Applause)  
 But we wanted to bring th at into this attention that amongst us in this building are 
frustrating these efforts. Thank you . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
PAPER  
COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY PAPE R 2019/2020  
[Laying of Paper]  
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Thank you M r. Speaker. Mr. Speaker as per Section 117 of the 
Finance Act , I wish to lay the Strategy paper 2019/2020. Thank you.  
(Paper laid ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Use the microphone they have not heard what 
you are laying. It is just laying of a paper . He is laying the County Fiscal Strategy Paper (CFSP) 
which as per regulation it is supposed to be in the Assembly by 28th of February , 2019 and after 
14 days the Speaker will commit it to the Committee.  
(Consultations)  
 So Hon . Members now that we have the Fiscal Strategy Paper it is now time for the 
sectorial Committees and the Hon. Members to look on the said Fiscal Strategy Paper and you 
are also allowed to organise the public participations for you to go back to your el ectorates and 
see if whatever i s in the Fiscal Strategy Paper was coming from your electorates so it is now 
committed to the Finance Committee and sectorial Committees. So y ou will work hand in hand 
with Finance Committee and see how you are going to plan for the public participations and 
whatever that is needed for you to scrutinize the Fiscal Strategy Paper . Is it okay Hon. Mohamed 
Hatimy?  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy bow ed before the House)  
 Thank you. What is it Hon. Amur?  
 Hon.  Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker since the Paper has just  been committed I would urge 
so that each Member could get atlea st a copy so that we can be able to go through it . I know it  
will be hard to go to that at Ward level there will be no money to hold that public participation 
Mr. Speaker.  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): I think it was decided by this House, yes we 
were to be atleast  to be trained th en we go back to our electorate  and come back with the good, I 
am not saying that this document is not good but we come out and compile whatever tha t is 
coming from our electorate  and this that is coming from Executive for the County to move 
forward. So as the Chair Finance has said he has got no problem with our mode of moving with 
this document if we will go organize the public participations it is upon  the Members to decide 
and plan. So Members the document is with you le t us work on it and put in mind  that we also 
have a timel ine of  about 14 day. Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think Mr. Speaker this document if 
you go  through the Standing order 206, is very clear and I want to inform this House that the 
public participation we go by our Act. We do have the Mombasa County Public Participation Act 
so I think if we follow the Act there will be no problem. Thank you Mr. Sp eaker . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk?  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT TO ALLOW MCA s TO ATTEND THE SIXTH  ANNUAL DEVOLUTION CO NFERENCE IN 
KIRINYAGA COUNTY  
 Hon. Chief Whip? 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
That pursuant to Standing Order 25(3) of the County Assembly Standing orders, the 
House resolve s to adjourn on Thursday 28th February , 2019 to attend the  sixth  annual 
devolution conference schedu led to take place at Kirinyaga County from 4th to 8th March, 
2019 and resume its sittings on Tuesday 12th March, 2019.  
 Mr. Speaker may I ask Hon. Athuman Mwamwir i to second my Motion.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mwamwiri ? 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker I do second the Motion .  
(Silence)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.Mwalimu ): Okay I n ow propose a question that the Motion 
by Hon. Charles K itula be debated in  this House but  put in consideration t hat a question will not 
be put i t will pass as it has been  moved. Yes Hon. Members it is on the floor.  
(Silence)  
 Yes Clerk?  
(Consultations)  
 Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimi wa Spika nasimama kuunga mkono Hoja hii ya 
kupeleka Bunge likizo ili kupeana fursa kwa Waheshimiwa kuweza kuhudhuria vikao vya 
ugatuzi katika sehemu ya Kirinya ga. Mheshimiwa ifahamike ya k wamba kuwepo kwetu sisi 
katika Bunge hili ni kwa s ababu ya ugatuzi na  ni wajibu kwetu kuhudhuria vik ao hivi vya 
ugatuzi ili tuweze kupat a na kujifunza kwa yale ambayyo gatuzi zengine yameweza piga hatua 
na mipangilio kwenda mbele ili na sisi tuwe kati ka mazingira sahihi na imara ka tika kuendeleza 
Jumba hili kwa minaajil ya mustakbal ya wakaazi wa Mombasa  na wale wananchi w etu 
waliotuchagua. Itakuwa hujuma kwetu sisi kama tunajivunia ugatuzi halafu tusipeane heshima na 
nafasi kwa vikao hivi vya  ugatuzi na kuweza kuv ihudhuria ; ni ombi langu kwa Bunge hili 
hususan kwa Waheshimiwa wenzangu tuweze kusimama ki dete na kuhudhuria vikao hivi na  
kujifunza yale mema na mazuri kutoka kwa gatuzi zeng ine tuweze kujatekeleza katika Kaunti 
zetu ikiwemo kukabiliana na kina mamluki na hali kadhalika. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.Mwalimu ): Yes Hon . Ibrahim?  
 Hon. Omondi : Okay thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for the opportunity . I would like also  to 
air o ut my views on this particular Motion.  Mr. Speaker Sir it is indeed true that it is very 
important that we give this a priority.  
(Consultations)  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, protect me f rom the noisy makers in the House. Kindly! There is a lot of 
noisy Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.Mwalimu ): Proceed Hon. Ibrahim . 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I wanted to emphasise that it is very…  
(Interruption)  
(Loud consultations ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.Mwalimu ): Order! Order Member! Consult on a low tone.  
 Hon.  Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I wanted to emphasise that it is very  important for the 
Members to attend this particular devolution conference and the importan ce of this is very much 
outlined , in fact it is in our Constitution…  
(Applause)  
 It is in our Constitut ion that devolution is the back bone of the forma tion of this particular 
County government and therefor e it is very important that Members will attend that particular 
conference, l earn from each other and also get important points which we can also use in our 
County and therefor e I do not think if there is anybody who can oppose this particular Motion. 
Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you . Yes Hon. Rosemary ?  
February 2 8, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           12 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18  Hon.  Mukavi:  (Technical hitch). ..To support the Motion. I think I do  not have much to 
say, it is common sense that all the Counties are attending and we are not spec ial I also expect us 
to attend s o I support we go on recess ,w e adjourn the House to attend to this Confer ence Mr. 
Speaker. It is a very important conference Mr. Speaker ... 
(Interruption)  
(Loud consultations ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Order Members! Order! Proceed . 
 Hon. Mukavi : So I support the Motion Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk?   
(Silence)  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Having there no other business the House stands adjourn ed until Tuesday the 12th March , 
2019 at 2:30p .m. 
The House rose at 4:08p.m. 