March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 4th March , 2020.  
The House met at 3:01p .m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATE MENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON HEALTH SER VICES HON . 
KIBWANA SWALEH ON TRANSFER OF HEALTH O FFICERS AT SUB -COUNTY LEVEL COUNTY  
 
Yes Chairperson Committee on Health Services , please respond or the Vice Chair?  
(Silence)  
Committee on He alth Service?  
(Silence)  
Any Member?  
Hon. Ngare:  (Tapping microphones)  They are all dead. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am 
a Member of the Health Committee, I would just like to ask for more time because the 
Chairman is on the way and he has a response on the sa me s o it can be among the last items 
we would be able to respond.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok. Yes Clerk next Order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON EDUCATION , INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY AND MV 2035  HON. IBRAHIM OMONDI ON TH E OFFICIAL OPEN ING OF DIGIRIKANI 
ECDE IN MWAKIRUNGE W ARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim respond to the S tatement.  
 

March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker  Sir I stand to respond to the 
Statement regarding the official opening of Digirikani ECDE in Mwakirunge Ward. We 
received a communication from the CEC in charge of Education and the communication went 
through the Clerk and the Clerk confirmed having received this particular information that 
the CEC Education and his County Chief Officer are not ready  to respond on this  particular 
Statement by today, but t hey have requested to be given two  days and that means they will be 
ready with a very comprehensive S tatement on the same by Monday, 8th March , 2020. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited  the Chair)  
(The Temp orary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) in  the Chair)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So H on. Chairman when will you be 
presenting the response to the S tatement to this House?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  We shall do the same on Monday. ..on 
Tues day sorry, on Tuesday Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : On Tuesday you will have the response?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes on Tuesday Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON  HEALTH SERVICES HON . KIBWANA 
SWALEH ON THE OPERATIONALIZATION /OFFICIAL OPENING OF MWAKIRUNGE WARD 
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Health Services?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 The Vice Chair?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Any Member from the Committee?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Mr. Speaker I will st ill request for more time because the Chairman is 
on the way and he will respond to the same , if you will allow Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON LABOUR AND  SOCIAL WE LFARE 
HON. RENSON THOYA ON SAFEGUARDING RESIDEN TS AGAINST EXPLOITAT ION BY 
AGENTS /EMPLOYEES PROMISING FOREIGN JOBS  
 
 The Speaker Temporary  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Chairperson Committee on Labour and 
Social Welfare, yes Hon. Renson Thoya.  
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3  Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr . Spe aker. I want to respond to the S tatement in regards to 
safeguarding of the residents against exploitation by agents. It is with a deep sadness that you 
understand that our re sidents are being exploited by a gents who do not follow the law b ut 
again we need to inform this House that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is it Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to inform you that the Hon. 
Member on the air is not audible enough s o kindly let him be more audi ble so that we can 
hear what he is telling the House.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Nzai. I think the problem is 
with the system, so we will…  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I thin k the technical end...  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You can as well use this of the Clerks here . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Hon. Speaker I just wanted to say that the prob lem that was facing the 
speaker, that is the Chairman of Labour is the same problem that the same speaker has faced 
so he has understood. I was sayi ng that we understand as a Committee that most of our 
residen ts are being exploited by a gents that do not follow the law b y promising them foreign 
jobs. But as much as we have these problems our Committee has no jurisdiction towards the 
same, but being a p roblem of the County and people that are being exploited ar e our own 
voters and electorate  we promise that we want to work with the relevant national agencies  to 
identify  the agents who do not follow the law to ensure that this problem is addressed. Thank 
you. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Amriya Boy ? 
 
 Hon. Am riya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker for allowing me. I think I am the one, 
not I think, I am actually the one who brought the request to thi s Statement and it is in light 
and we had a lo ng deliberation of the same and the issue even about the mandate of the 
Labour Committee was raised , I think by Hon. Kitula, b ut that issue was over ruled Mr. 
Speaker by your b rother who was sitting in your Chair Mr. Speaker by reason that when we 
are inte rpreting the Constitution … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 We are saying that when we were looking  at the interpretation of the Constitution you 
cannot selective ly interpret the Constitution; you cannot interpret the Fourth S chedule alone , 
you have to interpret the Cons titution by the princip les that promote the purpose and values 
of that Constitu tion. You cannot only stick on F ourth Schedule without and being blind with 
Article 185 and Article 195 Mr. Speaker because this House has the mandate of oversight and 
this Hous e has the same mandate as the same as the High Court . Mr. Speaker s o you cannot 
interpret the Constitution selectively you must interpret the Constitution that promotes the 
spirit of this Constitution that promote the values and principles.  
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4   It was ruled that this Committee will bring a response after two weeks. In fact I had 
negotiated that they bring because this was a matter by then that had attracted a lot of publ ic 
interest in the social media.  I had requested that they be given only seven days b ut yo ur 
Brother sitting on that Chair Mr. Speaker gave the Committee two weeks to look into that 
matter and also your Brother the Hansard is here had ruled that as much as this House has an 
oversight authority over any person in this County in matters that are affecting the County. 
 These are our residents that we make sure that all the laws if you are talking about 
trafficking in persons Act, are these institutions, the immigrations officers are they following? 
Why are these agents at freelance? What is happeni ng? What is the nature of prosecutions? 
How  many cases have been reported? How many cases are ongoing? How many cases have 
been implemented? What  is the Ministry doing about these  cases because this is something 
that has  been re occurring to  our youth s because of their desperate nature are unemployed and 
they are seeking alternatives but they are landing in wrong hands .  
 So it is in the mandate of this House to look into these issues and your Brother here 
gave a ruling that this day we ar e supposed to get a response.  I am concerned that the Chair of 
the Committee has said it is not in their mandate, I do not know if he did not get a brief from 
his Member or from his Vice, I am just concerned. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya : Thank you. Mr. Speaker I think I wish I was one of the learned friends 
to know those Articles ; unfortunate ly I am not one but I will be learning from the same but it 
is not about the law , I think w hen the same S tatement was being debat ed when you are 
talking here I was not in and I have been out the country but again I have promised you and I 
want to tell you personally I just wish that you give me  tomorrow I will be seeing the C ounty  
Labour officer on the same , that is I want to bring on board the government agencies and see 
how we can safe guard our people. I have seen the issues of articles na vifungu  spare me.  
Thank you. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : So Hon. Chairman as a C ommittee you have 
not deliberated on this from the is sue raised by Hon. Member?  
 
 Hon. Thoya : I think I have said that I was not here . I have been following my 
Members on the same,  I think give us more time and I am committing myself towards the 
same thing because th ese people that are being exploited som e of them are my own voters i 
feel whateve r you feel. S o please give us time we will follow the relevant officers of the 
national government to ensure that the problem is addressed. I understand that huko kwa 
vifungu ! 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Chair but I just want to remind 
you that in case the C hair i s not there, there is always a Vice C hair and  there are C lerks so 
you consult with them (Inaudible )... the C hair has asked for more time  (Inaudible )…. i give 
you two weeks Honourable C hair so that you br ing a very comprehensive report.. . 
 
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 REQUEST FOR STATEMEN T BY CHAIR , WOMEN CAUCUS HON . MILKA NGARE ON PREPARATIONS 
FOR  THIS YEAR 'S INTERNATIONAL WOME N DAY CELEBRATIONS I N MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Milka Ngare , the nominated MCA?  
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Probably I should just sa y this before I read the 
Statement ; I had expected this S tatement much earlier knowing that the function i s on 
Sunday,  this coming Sunday. W e don’t have any other sitting be fore then because as the 
Chair of women caucus and female legislator plus my fellow Hon. Members we needed to be 
kept in the loop on the preparations so that we can also prepare the women from the 
grassroots to be aware of what we are going to celebrate.  However it ca me today I hope that 
the Chair Y ouths, Gender and Sp orts will have an answer for me immediately so that we are 
aware.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 So pursuant to S tanding order 41 (2) and (c)  I request a statement from the 
Chairperson C ommittee on Youth s, Gender and S ports and cultural  on what plans that the 
County Government of Mombasa has to celebrate the international W omen’s day that is 
scheduled to take place this coming Sunday 8th March, 2020.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Y es Chairman on Youth, 
Gender, Sports And Cultural Affairs Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba : Yes thank you Hon. Speaker. The request has come  late and may be if I 
reques t for more time it will be over taken by event s, but I did my follow  up when I saw it 
appeared on the  Order paper and I talk ed directly to the in -charge and preparations are on -
going . If you allow me through Standing order 41(2) c ... if you allow me I will respond to it 
right away.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Go on Honorable Member.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank y ou so much. The Mombasa County g overnment will be hav ing 
a women conference at the AS K show ground as from 9 :00a.m until the function end s and 
then there will be a procession at Kengeleni as from 8 :00a.m towards  ASK Show ground and 
then the meeting shall commence at 9 :00a.m and Chief Guest of Honour will be the Women 
Representative Hon. Asha Hus sein and in that respect also Hon . Members are also invited . 
Several Hon. M embers representing our constituencies and al so this Hon ourable  House  
Members have also invited , I think the letter is in the Clerk’s office and also I have m y copy 
here and each and every W ard as p ar his communication will have 50 people per W ard and 
the mandate has been given to the Ward A dministra tors they will work hand in han d with 
Hon. Members or MCAs represent ing in various W ards and there will be lunch provided, 
transport and also the common campaign ... so called Dera . I don’t kno w how to call Dera in 
English s o that is so far the communicatio n that I got from the department for now, thank you 
so much Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Milka are you satisfied  with the 
response given by the Chair?  
 
 Hon. Ngare : The Chair has tried to give a response putting in mi nd that you also did 
not get it on time . I think I can give him 60 out of 100  however and I congratulate the Chair 
he has made a good effort. However it’s alwa ys a good practice to keep the M embers 
especially the women Honourable M embers, legislators in th e loop early enough so that we 
are also thoroughly prepared for this event.  This is a very important event for us as women 
so it is always good and fair to keep us in the loop from the beginning , let us get involved so 
that we know what we are doing on th e ground .  
 You know we look funny that something is happening and it’s for us women and we 
know nothing . We are not given any details only to go to appear there that like any other 
person, for next time which will be next year God willing if we get there we req uest that 
these  kind of preparations we should get involved early enough so that we are aware about 
what  is happening and how we are going to celebrate the event wit h our women from the 
grassroots. So Chair of Youth , Gender and S ports next time pleas e ensure that we are there 
from very beginning , thank you so much.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you.  Hon. Chair you gave a response 
and I was just…  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I gave a response and she is not somehow satisfied…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : She ha s said she is  60 per  cent satisfied.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  No! Upon her closing remarks I wish you could have listen ed to her the 
only problem that we have here we don’t listen we are eagerly waiting to contribute but  we 
don’t listen. Upon her finishing remarks she  said that next time Hon. Chair  make sure that we 
are totally involved , I wanted to add something on that if you allow me. If you won’t allow 
me I will just sit down Hon. Speaker. Yes ? 
 
 Hon. Ngare : I support . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You are allowed.  
 
 Hon. Samba : Thank you so much . I know that everybo dy looks at me with fishy  
eyes I is still the Chairman and I will  respond. Hon. Milka and other M embers there is 
separation of duties and powers , that it is only by goodwill that  the executive can also include 
us in their duties and…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
            Hon. Ngare : No. 
  
            Hon. Samba : Yes it is stipu lated in the County Government A ct and if you allow me 
Hon. Speaker I will show th em then it requires good will and it does stop from there we will 
do follow up we will make sure that we are in order…  
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7 (Interruption)  
 
            The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member you are out of order! Order 
Members!  
 
            Hon. Samba : Yes, I am responding.  
 
            The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member you are out of order!  Order! 
Order! Hon. Chair we are all representatives of the p eople and we do speak, resume  your 
seat Hon . Member!  And we all speak the voice of the peo ple where everyone does in one way 
or another and we all have powers to ask on behalf of the people we represent , it is not a 
favour by the executive to furnish this H ouse with any information that has anything to do 
with those we  represent . So I am r uling  out Hon. Chair that it is not a favour but it’s a 
mandate of the executive to be informing you on anything to do with the people we 
represent … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
            And I think Hon. Members I will not take much more discussion on that ; whoever 
asked fo r… 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
            What is it Hon. Ibrahim? I have given you one minute Hon. Ibrahim . 
 
            Hon. Omondi : One minute?  
 
            The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes? 
 
            Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker S ir thank you for the one m inute you have given me. Mr. 
Speaker before I actually say something on what the Honourable  has said I just want to 
remind him  that those people who elected us. .. I just want to remind him on that point they 
gave us ...the honourable M embers the power; the power to fulfill  their dreams that is number 
one. Number two they a lso gave us the wings,  the wings to fly…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
            The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order Hon. Memb er! Order! You are out of 
Order!  
 
            Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speak er Sir I am trying to correct the M ember  who said that the 
Members do not have powers . 
 
            The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member I  ruled on  that statement by 
Hon. Samba y ou should not again discuss it.  
 
            Hon. Omondi:  Okay tha nk you Mr. Speaker. Now let me go to the point ; what I 
wanted to say is that the concern ed department should come up with a structured and  
organized program  on how this one is going to take place . 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 8             Mr. Speaker Sir,  I am saying this because it h as happen ed several times and some of 
us as the Members of County Assembly we j ust hear, we are just told that  they are going to 
this program, it’s going to take place . Mr. Speaker we don’t know and you ’ll find that most of 
the times these women even thems elves  come int o our houses and to our offices  wherever 
there is this day taking place. S o Mr. Speaker S ir we need to be taken to through about how 
the Deras will be  distributed , lunch and also the transport and we must be in charge of that , 
thank you.  
 
            The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members, it was  a concern and the 
statement raised by Hon. Milka  was responded to by the Chai r. The Hon. Member is satisfied 
with the response and she has asked the Committee to do more next time  so I don’ t see the 
reason as to why we are debat ing it,  it’s okay . Yes  Clerk?  
 
LEVEL OF PREPAREDNESS  TO TACKLE CORONA VIRUS OUTBREAK  
 
 Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker I need to make the following request:  
 
THAT AWARE that, Corona virus outbrea k is so deadly and has affected an estimate 
of 87,000 people globally. The virus that emerged in Wuhan, China has spread to 
dozens of countries  that include Africa ; 
 
FURTHER AWARE that, there are allegations that a suspe cted case of C orona virus 
has been r eported at a hotel in Nyali Sub County ; 
 
CONCERNED  that, r esidents of Mo mbasa are a worried lot as the C orona virus 
outbreak co ntinues to spread across Africa  as there are increasing questions being 
raised about measures t he County g overnment is taking to protect its residents ; 
 
Mr. Speaker S ir, I therefore , pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2) (c )  stand to request  a 
detailed statement from the C hairperso n Committee on Health Services on the level of 
preparedness and readiness to tackle the virus by the Coun ty government of Mombasa 
considering that Mombasa is a tourist destination . 
 
Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Chairperson of Committee on Health. 
You can use the other mic rophone  Hon. Member.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank yo u Hon. Speaker . Hon. Speaker today we  really  have  
a hitch, the thing called technology is bea ting us here in this Hon. House . Anyway I think I 
will just appreciate the question that has been raised by my colleague, which is very 
important for all of us Ho n. Speaker so the mentioning of detail ed report ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Chair the issue is more weight y and it 
need s to be captured by the Hansa rd, I would ask you to move to C lerk’s mic rophone . 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 9  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank y ou Hon. Speaker, Hon. Speaker,  earlier I stated that 
the question raised by my colleague is very important to everyone, that needs to be answered 
in details in this honourable House . So I will just request if you allow me we  are about to 
make  a form al written letter to the department to ask the same, so i wish that if you allow me  
I will be able to give a very detailed response next week Wednesday Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes, Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Hon. Juma Ch arles Kitula?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee on 
Finance & Economic Planning on : 
 
1. When will County Treasury submit to the Assembly second  quart er budget 
implementation report;  
2. Preparedness of the County g overn ment in managing tough economic times 
experienced in the County ; 
3. By tabling evidence, the C ommittee to prove beyond reasonable doubt that residents 
through public participation were involved in preparation of Mombasa County 
Finance Act and that charges in this Act were proposals from the public . 
  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I think the Chairman concern ed is in the 
House. You can make use of the Clerk’s mic rophone .  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spik a nimeona kuna maswa li matatu n ataka 
kusema swali la tatu siwezi kulijibu chini ya Kanuni ya Bunge  25. I think we are all aware  
that the matter is in  court  so we cannot talk about it.    
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes go on Mr. Chairman.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Swali la kwanza ilikuwa 
naomba Mhe shimiwa  aniambie ni Kanuni ya Bunge  gani because what I know  it is the 
Executive Finance who deal with the process of the budget,  kwa hio  sijui iko wapi . Mimi 
naona County Treasury , kwa hio taratibu  ya bajeti wajua ni upande wa Executive , kwa hio  
sijui hii imetoka wapi. Alafu  swali la pili I need to be given time I will come maybe on 
Tuesday or on Wednesday to reply the question . Thank y ou. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Kit ula? 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningependa kumj ibu kwanza kuhusu 
swali la tatu;  kwamba a matter  ambayo iko before the court  ni kuhusiana na  parking  peke  
yake Mhe shimiwa  Spika, but not the whole document ya Finance Act,  ni kuhusu tu  malipo y a 
kuegesha magari  peke yake na sio Finance A ct. Alafu ya pili ni kuhusu second quarter 
budget implementation report  ni section  166 of the Pu blic Finance Management Act 
Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 10  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What does it say?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Inasema hivi, ‘Accounting officer to prepare a quarterly report for 
County Government entity : 
 
1. An a ccounting officer for a County g overnment entity shall prepare a report for each 
quarter for financia l year in respect of the entity;    
2. In  preparing a  quart erly report for a County g overnment entity the accounting officer 
shall ensure that the report contains information on the financial and unfinancial 
performance of the entity and is in a form determine by the accounting standard 
board ;  
3. Not late than 15 days of the end of each quarter the accounting officer shall submit 
the quarterly report to the County Treasurer ;  
4. Not late than one month after the end of each quarter the County Treasurer shall  
(a). Consolidate the quarterly report and submit them to the County Assembly . 
  
166 S ection (1)(2)(3) ahsante Mhe. Spika. Kifupi kwa Kiswahili ni kwamba, sa a hizi 
inastahili mwisho tarehe 21 Januar i, County Treasurer ilikuwa inastahili kuleta hapa jinsi 
walivyotumia pesa zao kwa mda  wa miezi sita Mheshimiwa  Spika ah sante.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member, can you  make  use of the 
microphone  so that it’s captured.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa  Spika nimesema vizuri sana accounting 
officer,  Wizara  zote ita fanya ripoti iende kwa Treasury , Treasury  hai deal na Bunge la 
Kaunti , it’s the Executive Member of Finance who is the one to submit the report  hapa and 
not at the Treasur er, while even though the Executive M ember is the Chair of the T reasur er 
so it’s the Executive M ember to submit the report .  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Kitula I think it’s a matter of re -
writing the statement.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa  Spika sio mimi kuandika, ni sheria  na Waziri  tayari 
amekiuka hii  sheria;  ilikuwa inastahili kuja hapa tarehe 21 Januar i. Mhe shimiwa H atimy 
amejaribu kufanya ni geuz e Kiswahili ili iweze kumfaa yeye mwenyewe, lakini sio sheria . 
Sheria iko wazi;  the County Treasurer through Assembly  hapa inawakilishwa na yeye kama 
Mwenyekiti na  inawakilisha County Treasury  katika Bunge  hili. Kwa hio taarif a zote 
zinakuja hapa kupitia yeye kama mwa kilishi wa County Treasury  hapa, kwa hio  asibadilishe 
Kiswahili kumfaidi yeye kwa manufaa ambayo iko hapa.  
 Article  iko wazi,  the County Treasurer  inakuja hapa kupitia yeye kama Mwenyekiti 
na ku  submit  hizi stakab adhi kama ilivyokuja first quarter ; first quarter  ilikuja vizuri sana 
kupitia yeye ilikuja  stakabadhi  hapa na tukaipitia vizuri mbona second quarter  hakufanya the 
same process  na wakati deadline imepita Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire ): And I think according to Hon. Hatimy, he 
does no t represent the County Treasury , he represents the department o f Finance, so it’s the 
Treasury  that submits the report to the department then . 
 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 11  Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti County Treasurer  ina maan a hii, County 
Treasury  department  ya Finance , the whole department  ya Finance  ndio County Treasury  
kwa ufahamu wangu, interpretation  naweza kukusomea hapa iko wazi  kwa sheria  what 
County Treasury  inama anisha. The whole department of  Finance is the County T reasury . 
  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes kindly read for us and again Hon. 
Kitula according to the traditions of the House you stick to one language .  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa  Spika ni  mazoea, nasoma na naweza ku interpret  
mwenyewe kwa lugha ya  Kiswahili . 
  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  I am just reminding you of the House 
traditions . 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika , nimeipata ndio hii section  103, the re is 
establish ed for each C ounty govern ment, an entity to be known as C ounty Treasury:  
 
2. The County T reasury shall comprise of : 
 
a. The County Executive Committee Member for F inance  
b. The Chief O fficer  
c. And the departments of the County T reasury responsible for financial and physical matters .  
Iko wazi kabisa Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon . Hatimy . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika sio mara ya kwanza kufungua hii 
stakabadhi , nafikiri quarter  ya kwanza iliweza kuletwa na haikuletwa na treasury  ililetwa na 
Finance department.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa M wenye kiti nisingepe nda Mheshimiwa Hatimy aipoteze 
Nyumba hii ; there is no difference between County Treasury and department of F inance . 
  
(Noise ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Hatimy I will emphasis on use of 
microphone again.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika sio mara ya kwanza stakabadhi  hii 
kuja; ukifungua Kanuni za Bunge  nionyeshe Mwenyekiti wa Treasury  ni nani nataka kujua 
hiyo kwanza . Mimi ni Chairman wa F inance planning but not treasury  na treasury  sio mtu 
mmoja treas ury ni watu wengi .  
 Kwa hi yo mimi nikitaka kuuliza swali kisawasawa nilete ile ripoti hapa kama mara ya 
kwanza aliku ja ikaulizwa hapa ndani ya hii Nyumba, hivyo basi  akubali kuibadilisha hii 
statement  yake vile inatakikana 128 . Yeye anayo sheria  128 iko wazi process ya budget  
inafanywa na nani ; PFM 128 iko wazi  kwa hivyo ni kubadilisha hii taarifa itaje Chairman  wa 
Finance  ambae ukitaka ripoti kutoka kwa finance department and not treasury . Ahsante 
Mheshim iwa Spika.  
 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 12  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : But I thought you have heard the 
components of the County T reasury Hon. Hatimy,  when Hon . Kitula was reading there was a 
component on what makes up the County T reasury ; the CEC Member F inance, the 
departments and the Chief O fficer , in other words Hon. Member  County Tr easury is just the 
finance department.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika , treasury ni kitu nyengine na 
department ya finance  ni kitu nyengine.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : So Hon . Kitula it’s a matter of either 
seeking leave and co rrecting the sentiments by inserting the words ; the department of finance 
or go and rewrite again the statement , there are two options.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika taarifa  yangu iko sawa kabisa ; nimekueleza County 
treasury  inama anisha nini na iko sawa kabisa, siwezi rekebisha kitu nika jifunge mwenyewe , 
nimeeleza County treasury  yama anisha nini nikakusomea sasa nitaandika vipi department ya 
finance  wakati County treasury  ndio hiyo department  ya finance ! Itakuwa yaniregelea 
mwenyewe kinyume.  
 Jambo ninal osema sasa first quarter implementation report  ilikuja hapa vizuri kupitia 
County treasury  ambayo inapeleka stakabadhi kwake yeye kama M wenyekit i wa fedha 
inakuja hapa katika N yumba . La pili  ni jambo rahisi yeye aandikie County treasury  wajue lini 
wataleta  hiyo second quarter  implementation  report  wailete hapa kwa N yumba .  Kwa hiyo 
sasa nashangaa anabadilisha lugha nyingi kubadilisha Kiswahili kingi na wakati sheria iko 
wazi, County treasury  iko department ya finance  iko wazi kabisa na ni vizuri hapa katik a 
meza yako uwe na County Government Act, PFM Act na C onstitution of Kenya itakuwa bora 
uweze kunielewa zaidi lakini useme nibadilishe taarifa  yangu kwa kweli sio haki, taarifa 
yangu iko sawa kwa sababu County treasury  iko department  ya finance . Na sitaki 
kujiregelea.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Hatimy can you write to the 
department of finance to compel  the C ounty treasury to bring the sa id report on the second 
quarter?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes but the question is the treasury and not fina nce. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : It’s okay Hon. Hatimy...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: I need to be given a proper statement ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hold on Hon . Members ! Hon. Hatimy what  
I am saying  is the department of finance is under the treasury , right? Now as a Committee of 
Finance can you write to the department that you represent , that is finance and  the finance 
will write to the C ounty treasury on the report of the second quarter.  
 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 13  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Unless Mheshimiwa Spika maneno yako unayosema ni  to 
write to treasury.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Seems no one is representing the C ounty 
treasury . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: (Off mic rophone).  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : I have made  a ruling on the same Hon . 
Member ! Now t hat no one is representing the C ounty treasury , the Hon . Chair and his 
Committee will write to the CEC Member Finance and the CEC Finance will compel the 
Treasury to bring the second quarter report  through the department of finance in this House 
through the Committee . So I think that is the only way we can get to the bottom of this , it 
seems we will never g et the person to represent the T reasury so it’s a matter that affects the 
department of financ e Hon . Chair, please with your  Committee I give you two weeks.  Thank 
you, yes C lerk. 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mwenyekiti  hii kitu ishapita timeline  alafu unasema wiki 
mbili ? Point of information  Mheshim iwa Spika ! 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon . Bwire) : You see Hon . Mwamwiri you are 
challenging the ruling . 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Am not c hallenging the ruling even the C hair can be (??) 
position.    
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Mwamwiri even if the report comes 
today.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: It’s just a point of concern . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes, what is your point of concern . 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  My concer n is that according to the PFM A ct there is a 
timeline on budget implementatio n and everything so the raised concern by Hon. Kitula ... the 
document is supposed to be brought by 21st January . We are now in March , giving two weeks 
will be going to another qu arter and according to the PFM Act this is a breach of an A ct and 
the Minister  was supposed to be subjected to harsh penalties for not tabling the document on 
time. So giving two weeks is giving her a leeway to just roam , relax and not do what she is 
supposed to on time, so according to 166 the deadline was supposed to be 21st , the time has 
already expired . 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 14  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member they are out of time already 
even if they bring the report today because today is not January.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  So you’re supposed to put a harsh penalty on it for 
failing ... for breaching this A ct, you should include a penalty.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member you ar e out of order! Y ou are  
challenging the Speaker, where are you getting this au thority? So like I told you H on. 
Member, Hon. Chair and your Comm ittee make use of the two weeks and bring a very 
comprehensive response on w hat Hon . Member has raised. Yes C lerk. 
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Hon. Milk a you must have consulted your C hair. 
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :  Who do you want to inform?  
 
  Hon. Thoya: We were told that th e Chairman was on his way coming, you do not 
need to request the D eputy...  
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :   Order Hon . Member she is standing in for 
the C hair, the problem i s the response and she is standing in for the C hair. 
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Once again I am a M ember of the Committee 
on H ealth  and i have consulted with the C hair who walked in , he asked me to tell the House 
that next week the responses will  come . We only need one week to bring the responses so 
Hon. Thoya have order in the House.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :  Hon. Member are you the one who said the 
response is on the way with the C hair?  
 
 Hon.  Ngare : Yes and he has brought the respo nse that we need one week, thank you . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : That is a request you are requesting for 
more time that is not a response.  
 
 Hon.  Ngare : We need one week.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You are requesting for more time yo u have 
no response on the issue raised Hon Milka.  
 
 Hon. Ngare : Yes, thank you . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes C lerk? 
March 4, 2020                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         12 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 15 STATEMENT  
 
 Hon Milka ? 
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker. O nce again we are requesting for more time on 
the same , again next week and we shall bring a detailed response, thank you.   
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Kindly don’t fail to bring.  
 
 Hon. Ngare : We will not . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there  being no oth er business the H ouse stands adjourned until 10th of 
March , Tuesday at 10 :00a. m. 
 
The House rose at  3:54p.m. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 