November 8 , 2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        133 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic ver sion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesda y, 8th November , 2016  
The House met at 2.35pm . 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ): Have your seats  Hon.  Members , yes Hon.  
Dunca n Onyango . 
       Hon. Onyango : Mr. Speaker Sir  I wish to inform  this Hon.  House that there's no 
quorum . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ): Clerk can you ascertain if there's a quorum . 
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
       Sergeant At Arm s can you  ring the  Quorum bell . 
(Sergeant At Arms r ung the quorum bell ) 
       Members you cannot go out because the bell has rung , Hon.  Nzai . 
       Hon. Nzai:  Am going to whip the Members . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ): Only the Whip can get out and the Whip is 
going. ..  
(Sergeant At Arms rung the quorum bell)  
(Consultations ) 
(Members  entered the Chamber)  
     Yes Clerk .  
(Clerk confirmed quorum)  
       Thank you very much, yes Clerk . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Ruling on Mode of replies to requests for Statements  
       Hon.  Members I stand here before you on a ruling on mode of replies to requests for 
Statements ’ 
       Hon.  Members of this County Assembly,  
       You will recall that on Thursday,  3rd November 2016  there arose  a matter regarding the 
mode of reply to a request for statement by the Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations on the Status of Remittances of Gratuity for Hon . Members as to whether it 
was through a Report or Statement by the Committee.  
       The request for statement was worded as follows:  
“Status of Gratuity for Members of the County Assembly  
Mr. Speaker Sir,  I wish to bring to the attention of this Hon . House about the status of 
gratuity of Members of County Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker Sir,  during our Team Building with County Executive at Swahili Beach 
Hotel in Kwale County,  it was broug ht to our attention at the County Executive 
Committee Member for Finance confirmed to us that the gratuity funds for the past three 
years will be disbursed to t he respective institution.  
November 8 , 2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        133 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic ver sion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r 
Page 2 Mr. Speaker,  I humbly request the Department concerned to bring before this Hon . 
House an updated statement on the disbursement of the funds in question.”  
From the request what was required was  “updated statement on the dis bursement of the 
funds in question.”  
According to our interim County Assembly Standing orders, the following is provided for 
concerning statements:  
“PART X – STATEMENTS   
Member ’s general statements  
40. (1) Notwithstanding Standing Order 27 (Hours of Meeti ng), the Speaker shall 
interrupt the business of the County  Assembly every Tuesday at 6.00 pm to facilitate 
Members to make general Statements of topical concern.  
(2) A Member who wishes to seek leav e to raise a matter under this Standing order shall, 
before 3.00 pm on the day the statement is to be made, hand to the Speaker a written 
notification of the matter, but the Speaker shall refuse to allow the request unless 
satisfied that the matter may properly be discussed in the County Assembly.  
(3) No Member  making a Statement under this Standing order shall speak for more than 
three minutes, unless with permission of the Speaker.  
Statement Hour  
41. (1) Notwithstanding Standing Order 37 (Sequence of Proceedings), there shall be 
time, to be designated Stateme nts hour, every Thursday,  commencing not later than 
3.00pm. 
(2) During the Statements hour- 
(a) A Member of the County Assembly Business Committee designated by the 
Committee for that purpose shall, every Thursday or on the last sitting day, for not 
more than ten minutes, present and lay on the Table, a statement informing the 
County Assembly of the business coming before the County Assembly in the 
following week;  
(b) the Leader of the Majority Party, or the Leader of the Minority Party as the case 
may be , or their designees may make a statement relating to their responsibilities in 
the County Assembly or the activities of a Committee;  
(c) A Member may request for a Statement from the Committee Chairperson relating 
to matters under the mandate of the Comm ittee and the Speaker may either appoint 
a day for the Statement or direct that the Statement be issued on the same day ”. 
(End of Communication from the Chair)  
       The Request for Statement above by Hon. Mary Akinyi should have been brought under 
Standing order 41(2)(c) which would have been repl ied to by the Chairman.  
       However, the request contrarily specifically requests an updated statement from the 
Department which is not catered for under the above Standing order.  
       Standing Order 41(2)(c) clearly states: ''A Member may request for a Statement f rom the 
Committee Chairperson...”.  
       So far the practice for reply for request for Statements has been through Report s tabled 
and considered by the House as brought by the respective Committees to which the Hon. 
Speaker has directed the matters to.  
November 8 , 2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        133 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic ver sion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r 
Page 3        From the clear reading of the Standing orders, the procedure has been breached and it is 
high time that corrective measures be taken to align our procedures with the law and 
parliamentary practices in other jurisdictions.  
       I therefore rule that from now henceforth a ll request s for Statements be handled pursuant 
to Interim Standing order 41(2)(c) or as amended and all Members and Table Clerks are 
herby instructed to comply forthwith.  
       In giving replies to Statements, Chairmen of Committees have leeway to work with thei r 
Committees, consult departments, experts or any person or entity as the situation allows or 
demand within their mandates and available time and resources.  
       Where any Member is unsatisfied with any Statement issued by a Chairman of any 
Committee then the H on. Speaker may issue further directions as the situation may 
necessitate.  
       I therefore hereby direct the Chairman of the Committee on Finance, Budget  and 
Appropriations to issue a Statement on the matter of status of gratuity remittances for Hon . 
Members.  
Thank you very much.  
(Applause ) 
       Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENTS  
STATUS OF REMITTANCES OF GRATUITY FOR HON.  MEMBERS  
       Yes Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read the S tatement)  
1.1 Mr. Speaker Sir,  I am pleased to present to this August House a Statement on the 
status of r emittances of gratuity for Hon.  Members.  This matter arose from a 
request for statement by Hon. Mary Akinyi on 4th October 2016.  
 
1.2 Gratuity is a monetary gift  from an employer to an employee especially for 
services rendered. The Employment Act provides for its definition and also for 
instances when it should be given.   
 
1.3 Gratuity is a lump sum amount that an employer pays an employee if he or she 
retires or resi gns from employment. An employee does not contribute any portion 
of her salary towards this amount. Gratuity is only paid out at the time of 
retirement or resignation, and in the event of death or being rendered disabled 
because of an accident or illness.   
 
1.4 However, it is important to note that gratuity is given at the discretion of the 
employer, especially in cases where the employer has registered with a pension 
scheme and is contributing on behalf of the employees or the employer pays out 
service pay at the end of the contract.  
 
November 8 , 2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        133 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic ver sion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r 
Page 4 1.5 Your employer pays out gratuity at the completion of a contract. There is nothing 
wrong with this. The employer is not in breach of the Employment Act because 
the employer expects the employee to perform work, which takes time to 
complete, and if the employee leaves midway then it means the employer has to 
employ someone else to complete the job. If the employer is to do this it means 
the organisation will lose out every time an employee leaves without complet ing 
the project.  
 
1.6 It should be noted that it is the duty and responsibility of the County government 
to pay gratuity at the end of the contract term and not through any scheme or 
monthly remittances to a provident fund. Channelling  these funds through 
LAPFUND was merely a favou r and private arrangement with Members.  
 
1.7 Gratuity Law and Practice in Kenya states : 
 
“Gratuity is a lump sum amount that an employee (on contract) when he retires or 
resigns from the organization. An employee does not contribute any portion of his 
salary t owards this amount. The rationale for gratuity is to encourage employees 
to offer longer service to the employer and to ease the termination of contract of 
employment by offering the sum of gratuity as consideration.  
 
Gratuity is not provided for as a cond ition of employment but it has developed as 
a good practice in employment and employees have come to expect it from their 
employers.  
 
Gratuity is unusually paid in the following circumstances:  
 
(i) When employee retires  
(ii) When the employee resigns  
(iii) In event of de ath of the employee  
(iv) In event of disablement i.e because of accident or illness.”  
 
1.8 The Kenyan Worker and the Law  states:  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
       Mr. Speaker Sir there's loud consultation … 
 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ): Hon.  Members maintain silence in the  
House an d listen to Hon.  Hatimy's statement  
 
“Deduction from Wages:  
  
November 8 , 2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        133 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic ver sion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r 
Page 5 Other than the statutory  deductions,  an employer is generally not allowed to 
make any deductions from an employee’s wages. However there are several 
exceptions:  
 
a) If the worker is absent fr om work without leave,  the employer can deduct 
wages equal to the amount of time the worker did not work.  
 
b) An employer may deduct any contributions by a worker to his or her 
retirement or provident fund.  
 
c) An employer may deduct any contributions by a worke r to his or her 
retirement or provident fund.  
 
d) If the worker damages/loses goods or money at the work place,  the 
employer may deduct the value of the lost goods or money from the 
worker’s wages.  
 
e) Salary advances or loans can be deducted from a worker’s wag es.” 
 
1.9 With respect to remit tances to the LAPFUND to which Members have 
arrangements for their payment of gratuity, the County Treasury and County 
Assembly   have remitted Kshs. 19,066,660.89  in three installments as follows : 
 
a) Kshs. 10,011,894.14  
b) Kshs. 6,458 ,315.13  
c) Kshs.2,596,451.62.  
 
1.10 The Kenya Gazette Supplement No. CXV No.  33 Notice No.2885 of 1st March 
2013 states inter alia as follows:  
 
       I do have a copy from the Kenya Gazette.  
 
“Retirement Benefits: A County State officer shall serve on contra ct and be paid a 
service gratuity at the end of the five year term at the rate of 31% annual basic 
pay for every year served.”  
 
1.11 Mr. Speaker According to letters of appointment issued to every MCA,  the terms 
and conditions stipulated include the following  Mr. Speaker : 
 
I do have a letter which was signed by all of us  Mr. Speaker that state that;  
 
“Retirement benefits will be a service gratuity at the end of the term at the rate of 
31% of the annual basic pay for every year served.”  
November 8 , 2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        133 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic ver sion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r 
Page 6  
1.12 Mr. Speaker Sir , all pending remittances will be paid once the Mombasa County 
Supplementary Budget 2016 has been passed and improvement of the cash flow 
situation in the County. What I would like to assure Members is that the County 
government will fulfil  its responsibility  of ensuring Members are paid their 
gratuity by remitting all outstanding gratuity arrears in due course.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Clerk . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Thank you Members there being no other business this  House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow morning at 9:00 am. 
The House rose at 2:59 pm  