November 1 6, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 16th November , 2016  
The House met at 2.30pm. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Clerk . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon Membe rs we have two communications ; first from the communication, I’ll not go by 
the date but by the urgency.  
We have received a letter from the County government of Mombasa;  reference 
CGA/CGH/CEC/11/7/GEN/ADM/  (22) dated 15th November 2016.  
All County Executiv e Members of the County government of Mombasa . 
Re: Invitation to the launch of Afya Elimu Fund on the 17th of November 2016 at the 
Treasury Square ground s in Mombasa County . 
The Mombasa County Health Department in collaboration with Funzo Kenya is 
organizing  the launch of the Afya Elimu fund on 17th November at Treasury Square ground s at 
8.00am. 
The Afya Elimu Fund aim s at funding qualified Mombasa County students to  undertake 
medical related courses  in the Kenya  Medical Training  Colleges in Coast region.   
The purpose of this letter is to invite you to attend this important event which will be 
officially launched by his Excellency  the Governor . 
Thank you . 
  
Hon. Mohamed Ibrahim .  
CEC Health   
It was copied to the Chairman of Health Committee.  
The second communica tion from  county government of Mombasa , department of 
Education, Children and Environment , it’s reference is G:8/22B/VOL1/34 8th Nov 2016.  
The County Assembly Clerk, County Assembly of Mombasa, Mombasa County.  
Tukuza Vipawa registration at the four cities of  Mombasa County . 
Tukuza Vipawa sensit ization programme was organised with the designed to create 
awareness to the residents of Mombasa on the training opportunities available in our training 
institutions.  
The participants in this activity were youth leaders , ward administrators and area chiefs.  
The department of Education and Children aims to equip the youths with skills that 
would enable them to be self -employed or get employment in the industries and other 
organisations . 
November 1 6, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page  2 Kindly inform all Members of County Assembly (MCAs ) to relay the information to the 
youths in their area of jurisdiction that the department of Education and children will be 
registering/recruiting potential trainees for  short and long courses in all Sub counties on dates 
indicated on the at tached list on the reverse . 
Areas of interest are vocational skills from grade test to artisan/certificate levels.  
Our contact person at the department is Nancy Gathagia and can be reached on 
0721900416 . 
Thank you for your continued support in transforming l ives in Mombasa County . 
Tuni Mwalu kumbi  
Chief Officer department of Education and Children Mombasa County,  
Copy to H.E the Governor,  
Speaker -Mombasa County Assembly,  
County Secretary,  
County Executive Member  - Department  of Education and Children .  
 
We have so me dates maybe Members we can look at when your area is scheduled and the 
dates are Island Mvita 15,  16, 17th November the venue is Tononoka Social Hall, contact person 
is Eric . 
North Kisauni that is 22,  23rd November Mla Leo Primary Education Office contac t 
person is Chris . 
North Nyali 24th and 25th November M la Leo Primary Education Office contact person is 
Chris . 
South Likoni 17th, 18th and 19th November Mtongwe  City Polytechnic contact person is 
Carol . 
West Changamwe 21st, 22nd and 23rd November Changamw e Fire Office contact person 
is Magdaline . 
West that is Jomvu 24th and 25th November Changamwe  Fire Office contact person is 
Magdaline . 
Thank you very much . 
This communication will be available in the Speaker’s  office.  Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
GRANT OF DISCOUNTS AND WAIVERS  OF PENALTIES ON PROPERTY RATES  
 Hon Hatimy , Chairman  Committee  on Finance, Hatimy.  
Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed O mar): Madam Speaker on  behalf of the Hon Chairman of 
Finance .  
(Interruption ) 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): You are standing in for Hatimy, 
okay.  
Chief Whip (Hon Ahmed Omar ): I beg to give notice  of the following Motion . 
November 1 6, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page  3 Grant of Discounts and Waivers of Penalties on Property Rates  
THAT  AWARE  that Section 159 of the Public Finance, Management Act, 2012 gives 
authority to the County Executive Member for Finance to grant waivers on penalties for property 
rates subject to certain stipulations.  
CONCERNED  that there are escalating debts o f unpaid property rates due to penalties 
and therefore there is need to give incentives to property owners to pay up through discounts and 
waivers.  
I therefore urge the County Assembly to RESOLVE  that:  
1. That pending enactment of the Mombasa County Tax Waive r and Variations Bill,2015  
(Bills No.13) and promulgation of regulations thereof, His Excellency the Governor be 
hereby granted authority to appoint a committee to consider and grant discounts and 
waivers of penalties for properties subject to criteria.  
2. That the County Treasury be hereby granted authority to collect and expend the 
discounted and waived property rates after deduction of the penalties in accordance with 
the approved county government budget.  
3. That the Mombasa County Tax Waiver and Variation Bil l, 2015 (Bill s No.1) be fast -
tracked by the County Assembly to enable formalization of discounts and waivers.  
Thank you.  
Hon A mur: Madam Speaker I  have a concern . 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Yes Hon Amur what is your 
concern .  
Hon Amur: (Inaudible ). 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Kindly use your microphone.  
Hon. Amur:  (Inaudible )…When appointing  a Committee,  the Governor be given…  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Mwalimu:  A point of order !! 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Yes Hon Fadhil i.  
Hon Mwalimu : Than k you Madam  Speaker . The Hon Member who is on the floor it is 
as if he has started debating   ….. 
(Interruption ) 
(Loud consultations ) 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Hon Fadhili is on the floor.  
November 1 6, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page  4 Hon. Mwalimu:  Madam Speaker even if it is a concern, in front of us it is just a Notice  
of Motion and it is as if the Hon Member is in rejection of this Notice of Motion and the Hon 
Member is  out of order by engaging this Notice of Motion. Thank you . 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Hon Mary ?  
Hon (Ms) Akinyi:  Thank you Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker I just want to concur 
with the Hon Member who h as just spoken that this was a Notice of Motion and if incase he 
wants to amend anything he still has the time . 
He can amend by writing and the n he brings it back when there w ill be a Motion, thank 
you Madam Speaker.  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Hon Amur the reason Motions are 
given Notice is to prepare  ourselves for that particular Motion.  
What we are talking about is preparation so anything which you find you might want to 
alter then y ou have  the opportunity to do that . 
As we know Hon Amur is that amendments can come to the Speaker ’s table two hours 
before the date and this will be amended.  
So what I was saying Hon Amur I can see what you are saying and I do concur with our 
colleagues that this is a Notice and if you have seen something so go and work on it so as the 
Motion comes to this House you are ready and prepared and I know you are a very good debater 
you will be able to do it the best.  
Hon Muriuki, I hope it not o n the same issue .  
Hon Simi nyu: Madam Speaker  mine is a concern because I raised a similar matter last 
week on ferry …. And the Mombasa people are waiting …  
(Interruption ) 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Let us give it a date then we will 
proceed . 
Hon.  Simi nyu: We need a date we  should do it as soon as possible Madam Speaker that 
was my main concern . 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Hon Chief Whip. You have brought 
a Notice of Motion on behalf of Hon Hatimy , when should we bring the Motion, give me the 
date will it be next week . 
Chief Whip (Hon Ahmed Om ar): Next week will be okay Madam Speaker . 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Next week same time? Morning or 
afternoon . 
Chief Whip (Hon Ahmed Omar ): Afternoon Madam . 
November 1 6, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page  5 Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): So this Motion will be back here 
next week on Wednesday in the afternoon. Please advise the mover. Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT ON STATUS OF MEDICAL SCHEME F OR COUNTY 
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES.  
Hon  Odari : Thank you Hon Speaker for according me this opportunity.  
Madam Speaker I arise to request for a statement for the County government of Mombasa 
on the st atus of medical scheme for the County government employees.  
Hon Speaker we are aware that some employees or som e staff or some members of the 
County government are benefiting from medical insu rance schemes ; the vast maj ority of the 
employees of this County are suffering because they are unable to raise money to cater for 
medical expenses when they fall sick.  
Hon Speaker most of our workers in t he various departments of this County do not h ave 
medical schemes and we know Madam Speaker how expensive it can be for one to personally to 
raise money to go for an operation or go for specialized treatment and even when one is admitted 
at the hospital the bill is normally very high.  
So Madam Speaker  am requesting for the government to provide this Hon House with 
information of what they are doing with regards to or in connection to providing medical 
insurance for the vast majority of the employees of this government, thank you Hon Speaker . 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Ms) Serah Nyamvula ): Okay Hon Jimmy Odari, this 
statement needs to be referred to the Committee of Health to know the status.  
Is the Chairman of Health in? So we can give them a week from today they can come up 
with a  report and bring back to this House. C lerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon Members the House stands adjourned until tomorrow Thursday 17th in the afternoon.  
The House rose at 2. 53pm . 
 