March 12, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 12th March , 2019  
The House met at 2:57p.m. 
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON T HE FINANCIAL STATEME NT OF COUNTY EXE CUTIVE  OF 
MOMBASA  
 
 Yes Hon.  Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Majority Leader please lay down the P aper?  
 
 The Leader  of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker , let m e take this 
opportunity to lay P aper, report of Auditor General on the financial statement of County 
Executive of Mombasa for the year ended 30th June, 2018. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
(Paper  Laid)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani , the Majority 
Leader. Yes Clerk?  
 
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL  ON THE FINANCIAL STA TEMEN T OF THE COUNTY ASSE MBLY 
OF MOMBASA  
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani again ..., yes Hon. Amur please lay down the P aper?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Paper? Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker S ir I wish to 
lay a Paper for report of Auditor General of the financial year statement of the County 
Assembly of Mombasa for the year ended 30th June, 2018. I wish to lay Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
(Paper Laid) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Murfad Amur. Y es Clerk?  
 

March 12, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 NOTICE OF MOTION  
IMPEACHMENT  OF CEC M TRANSPORT , INFR ASTRU CTURE  AND PUBLIC WORKS MR . TAWFIQ 
BALALA  
 
 Yes Hon. Shebe Athu man. Please give the Notice of Motion?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Notice of Motion , 
Impeachment of CEC Transport, Infrastructur e and Public works pursuant to Section 40 of 
County Government Act, 2012.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish t o give notice to the following 
Motion that this Hon ourable  House resolves that Hon. Tawfiq  Balala be removed from the 
office of Mombasa County Executive Committee Member for the Department of Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works pursuant to Section 40 of the County Government Act, 2012 
and Mombasa County Standing Orders in so far our Standing Orders are in line with national 
legislations. The g rounds thereof:  
 
(a) INCOMPETENCE  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir Hon. Tawfiq Balala is incompetent and therefore unsuitable to serve  as a 
Member of Mombasa County Executive Committee for Transport, Infrastructure and 
Public Works as:  
a) The CEC is overwhelmed with technical secti ons which has failed to deliver ; 
b) The Department lacks laws and regulations to guide their Departmental functions.  
 
(b) ABUSE OF OFFICE   
   
a) Misappropriatio n of funds e.g. Incomplete projects that have overlapped financial 
years; 
b) Mismanagement of advertisement boards and other advertisement activities . 
 
The other reason s, Mr. Speaker  are; 
 
(c) GROSS MISCONDUCT  
 
a) Failure to hono ur invitation by Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public 
Works.  
 
(d) GROSS VIOLATION OF C ONSTITUTIONAL LAW  
   
a) Failure to submit documents requested by this Honourable Assembly in discharge of 
their oversight role over the Executive (County Government Act , Section 40(f), 
Article 183(3) of the Constitution of Kenya.  
 
 Mr. Speaker I requ est Hon. Shomari to second the Motion.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Shomari . 
 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  I second.  
(Applause)  
 
March 12, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Honourable Members this is just a Notice of 
Motion, so a Notice of Motion you do not need to second , just sit down Honourable Member 
please. Honourable Members you do not need to second this is just a Notice of Motion and if 
you go to the Standing Order it is very clear , you just give the Notice of Motion and now 
according to Standing Order 62 ..., if you read Standing Order 6 2(3) it is very clear that the 
Motion will be moved upon the expiry of  three  days and after notice given the Motion shall 
be placed on the Order Paper an d shall be disposed within the three  days. So Hon . Members I 
think we are in li ne with the procedures and the Motion shall be put in the Order Paper within 
three  days.   
 Hon. Members I have the two documents whic h have been tab led by The Majority 
Leader and Hon. Murfad Amur which the Papers laid here are both committed to the 
Committee on PAC – Public Accounts and Investment Committee , Hon. Fadhili, thank you. 
Yes Clerk?  
 
STA TEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  ON THE SUPPLIES OF M EDICAL DRUGS AT JUND A DISPENSARY  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Priscilla Mumba?  
 
(Consultation s) 
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh because you are the Chairperson of Committee on Health 
it is not Hon. Prischilla Mumba , yes can yo u please give the reply to the Statement?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. 
Hon. Speaker being the Chair of the Health Committee we are aware of the problem they are 
facing in Junda Hospital which my colleague Hon. Bwire who was given on this Junda 
Dispensary.   Hon. Speaker my Com mittee ha s decided to do a site visit on that hospital for us 
to know or to get to know information on the issue of the supplies of medical drugs in that 
Hospital. So Hon. Speaker I think within two week’s time we are going to come up with a 
comprehensive repo rt on the supply of drugs in this Dispensary . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Swaleh. Yes Hon. Bwire ? 
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker indeed I agree with  the Hon. 
Member who happens to be the Chairperson on Health but I raised thi s issue and it is over  
three  weeks now again the Chairperson is coming up with a request of two more weeks ! Mr. 
Speaker  it is not making sense so I would wish to call upon this House and the Chairmen of 
the several Committees to be serious.   
 Mr. Sp eaker , I raised the issue of lack of drugs in only a pub lic facility that I have in 
my Ward which is a Dispensary and it is now taking more than one month for a Committee 
just to have a site  visit to come up with a report . I therefore , Mr. Speaker disagree w ith the 
two weeks request made by the Chairman and I would wish to pray that you give the 
Committee at least one week so that they come up with a report , two weeks is too much Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh?  
 
March 12, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker .  I am aware of what  my col league  
is going through being the only dispensary in that facility .  Mr. Speaker we were unable to 
visit because we had a Devolution Conference but through his request and I feel that it  is very 
urgent we can do that visiting in one weeks’ time. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Consultations)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fadhili, the Deputy Speaker?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am up even though 
I can see am o ut of or der but am in order Mr. Speaker ! Mr. Speaker I just want you to revisit 
the decision on the Notice of the Motion because you said as per the Order Paper it give s us 
three days and the thre e days will fall on a Friday . So we n eed your guidance as on when are 
we actually revisiting the Notice of Motion Mr. Speaker, will it be on Friday or next 
Tuesday ? Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili . Hon.  Fadhili I think we all 
know we are in this Hous e and it has it s orders ; we really need to follow the orders which 
have been set by this House and the Standing Orders; and the Standing Order is very clear 
saying that you need to give the three days so three days will elapse on Thursday and as you 
all know  our Sittings are Tuesdays afternoon, Wednesday morning and afternoon and 
Thursday afternoon , so on this matter I think the earliest we can say  is go ing to  be on next 
week Tuesday afternoon.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 So the Moti on will come next week Tuesday  afternoon , thank you very much Hon. 
Fadhili. Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Spika nimesimama na niko na dharura ama natafuta 
Taarifa  kutoka kwa Kamati husika ya Fedha na tatizo langu ni kujua kwamba hii mikato yetu 
ya National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) hizi pesa zinapelekwa wapi? Kwa sababu ni 
jambo la kusikitisha kwamba wiki nzima nimekuwa pale Pandya na familia yangu 
nilipokuwa nafuatilia mambo ya NHIF niliambiwa kwamba Bunge hili halilipi .  
 Kwa hivyo nataka nijue hizo pesa mnapeleka wapi? N a zitatusaidia namna gani kama 
kitendo kama kile jana ilibidi nikatafute laki mbili na elfu hamsini kutoka kwa mikopo ya 
hapa na pale . Hii ni aibu na ni lazima tufike mwisho wa matatizo haya. Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya . I think I shall direct the 
Committee of Finance, the Chairperson Committee on Finance is not here, so the Vice Chair 
is here Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani please make sure t hat we know if the outstanding bill has 
been paid or if not  so tha t the Hon. Member can know where he is standing and it  is his right 
for the bills to be paid and if we do  not have the money just tell this House if you have not 
received the money or anything .  
 So Hon. Deputy Chair make sure we get the response by next week if possible. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
March 12, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday morning at 9: 00a.m 13th 
March, 2018.  
 
The House rose at 3: 15p.m. 