February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 28th February , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Thirteenth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  10:18a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Temporary Chair  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 DESIGNATION OF SMOKING ZONES IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga, MCA Chaani Ward please issue your Notice of 
Motion.  
 
Hon. Makanga : Thank you Mr. Spea ker Sir . I beg to give n otice  of the following Motion;  
 
THAT AWARE THAT,  under the Kenya Constitution, non -smokers have the right to safe 
and healthy environment. This includes the right to be protected  from adverse effects  of 
second -hand smoke. Article 42 , of the Constitution sta tes that every person has the right to 
the highest attainable standards of health and wellbeing, including reproductive 
healthcare. The Constitution also guarantees to clean and  safe water, air and an 
environment that is not harmfu l to health;  
 
FURTHER AWAR E THA T, tobacco Control Act of 2007, section 33 provides that no 
person shall smoke in any place expect in designated smoking areas ; 
  
NOTING THAT, smoking in public can cause significant health risk to both smokers and 
non-smoker s. Secondhand smoke which is  the smoke exhaled by the smoker is a 
combination of the smoke coming from the burning end of the cigarette and the smoke 
exhaled by the smoker. T his inhalation increases risk of developing cancer, heart diseases, 
stroke, chroni c obstructive pulmonary dise ase a mong other diseases;  
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT, smoking in public can also contribute to air pollution. 
Burning tobacco releases toxins and particu lates into the air which can be inhaled by 
other peo ple in the area;  
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 COGNIZANT TH AT, smoking in public can lea ve un pleasant odor in the air which can be 
difficult to get rid of. This smell can linger long after the smoker has left the area and can 
be very unpleasant for people in vicinity;  
 
FURTHER COGNIZANT  THAT, cigarettes are a majo r cause of fires with an estim ated 20 
per cent  of all fires caused by smoke. Smoking in public can increase the risk of fires which 
can lead to severe property damage and loss of life; 
 
CONCERNED THAT,  cigarette butts are on the most com monly found items o f litter on the 
streets and public plac es. T his indicates that the consumption of cigarettes is real in the 
County and thus posing the following risks;  
 
1. Health Risk  
2. Environmental po llution  
3. Fire occurrences  
 
FURTHER CONCERNED THAT, there ar e no designated ar eas or zones for smoking in 
Mombasa Coun ty;  
 
I, therefore, urge this Assembly to RESOLVE THAT : 
 
1. The County government to provide designated smoking zones. These specially 
designated areas to be clearly marked and able to provide a safe and comfortable spa ce 
for those who wish to smoke ; 
 
2. The County government to ensure that the designated smoking areas are 
regularly maintained and monitored to ensure that they are clean and safe . Any litter 
should b e disposed of in the proper receptac les and all smoking mat erials should be 
extinguished before leaving  the area; 
 
3. The County government should come up with smoking policy and any other 
regulation to ensure that both the smokers and non -smokers rights are not infringed . 
 
The Temporary Chair  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulk adir): Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
SUSTAINABLE BEAUTIF ICATION OF MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Hawa Abdulrahman, please move the Motion.  
 
Hon. Hawa Abdulrahman:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I beg to move t he following Motion:  
 
THAT AWARE THAT Mombasa  Coun ty is a major business hub and a popular tourist 
destination in Kenya, attracting both local and foreign entrepreneurs, investors and 
tourists;  
 
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 FURHER AWARE THAT  there is a need to promote the County’s aesth etic beauty to 
enhance attracts foreign inve stors , promote tourism, create employment opportunities, and 
improve the socio -economic development of the region;  
 
NOTING THAT  the Constitution of Kenya, pursuant to Article 69 provides for the 
sustainable exploi tation, utilization, management and conserva tion of the environment and 
natural resources, with environmental con servation and management being devolved  to the 
County governments as provided for in the Fourth Schedule of that document;  
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT  the Mombasa County Solid Waste Management Ac t, 2020 
advocates for the reduction, recovery and recycling of waste among a raft of measures to 
manage and enforce responsible garbage disposal sustainably;  
 
APPRECIATING  the efforts by His Excellency the Governo r, Abdulswamad Sheriff Nasir, 
in the ga rbage collection in his first 100 days for his Mombasa ni Yangu initiative, aptly 
implemented the County Assembly’s resolution to employ 2000 casual employees to clean 
the CBD  and suburbs;  
 
CONCERNED THAT , without taki ng strong and urgent measures, Mombasa will l ose its 
competitiveness as a major business hub and popular tourist destination, thus affecting 
revenue by both levels of Government and impinging on socio -economic development;  
 
SERIOUSLY CONCERNED THAT , without  taking enhanced policy and practical 
measure s, Mombasa will be an eyesore and be plagued with filth, noxious diseases which 
will pose public health risks and hazards;  
 
I, therefore, urge this Ass embly to RESOLVE : 
 
1. Garbage Collection and Disposal:  
 
a. THAT the C ounty government purchase additional garba ge collection and 
disposal vehicles to increase the efficiency of garbage collection and disposal services ; 
 
b. THAT the County government establishes a wast e separation program to promote 
the prosper disposal of garba ge and minimize pollution ; 
 
c. THAT the Coun ty government encourages and involves residents and 
stakeholders in community -based solid waste management programs ; 
 
d. THAT  the County government consider wor king with partners to establish a 
garbage recycling facility and explore other uses of garbage such  as for po wer generation.  
 
2. Street cleaning and washing:  
 
a. THAT  the County government purchases street cleaning and washing vehicles  to 
improve the cleanliness of the streets ; 
 
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 b. THAT  the County government develops and enforces laws that promote the cleanlin ess 
of streets and impose penalties for littering ;  
                                                                                                   
c. THAT  the County government involves residents and stakeholders in keeping the 
streets clean by organiz ing regular cleanup exercises.  
 
3.Enhancing the Aesthetic Beauty of Mombasa County:   
 
a. THAT  the Count y government seek certification and compliance with the ISO 14000 
Certification family of standards for an Environment Management System o f the 
County to en sure the environmental management practices are consistence and 
measure to global standards and best  practices; 
  
b. THAT the County government plant flowers, indigenous fru it trees,  and others plants 
along the streets and in public places t o enhance the aest hetic beauty of the County ; 
 
c. THAT the County government sensitizes and encourages landlords to p aint and 
refurbish their buildings to improve their appearance and promote tourism ; 
 
d. THAT the County government construct and rehabilitate  public parks, recr eational 
facilities and tourist attraction sites to enhance the attractiveness of the County.  
 
Thank yo u, Mr . Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Member , I now 
propose the question ; the Motion by Honourable ...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Who is going  to second?   
 
Hon.  Hawa Abdulrahman:  I beg Hon ourable Leila Nyache to  second the Motion.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Leila.  
 
Hon.  Nyache : Mr. Speaker I stand to second the Motion.  Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you . I now propose a 
question that th e Motion by Hon ourable  Hawa Abdulrahman on sustainable beautification of 
Mombasa County  be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same opin ion as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
 Yes, Honourable  Hawa m ake your contribution . 
 
Hon.  Hawa Abdulrah man:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir for giving me this opportunity to 
lay this Motion in the House. As you are aware that we have lost over 40 ,000 acres of the 
Aberdares forest for the past three  weeks due to outbrea ks.  
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 This is an alarm to our County because the c limate expert s say ther e are future traits of 
drainage and water shortage, prolonged dry seasons leading to dangers of curbing a disaster . As 
we come up w ith the sustainable beautification measure s, we not only pro mote tourism or create 
employment opportu nities but well also curb the  climate change. I would also like to appreciate  
his Excellency the Governor Abdulswamad  Sheriff Nasser for his continued eff orts in garbage 
collection and for his Mombasa ni Yangu  initiative  where 2000 casual employe es were employe d 
to clean the CBD . I thank you Mr . Speaker Sir and I welcome Hon ourable  Members for this 
House to contribute to this Motion. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Kai, please make your 
contributio n. 
 
Hon. Kai:  Ahsante Bwana Spika  kwa kunipatia fursa ya kujad ili na kutoa maoni  
kuhusiana na swala hili ambalo Mheshi miwa Hawaa  ameweza kuleta katika  Nyumba hii . 
Kiukweli naunga  mkono kwa asimilia zote . Kwanza inanipatia pia fursa ya kuweza 
kuwapon geza wale ndugu zetu ambao wa lifanya lile zoezi muhimu la Mombasa ni Yangu ; ki 
ukweli tuna kila sababu kama Nyumba hii kuwapongeza kwa  sababu  walifanya kazi nzuri 
ambayo ilionekana . Nataka niseme  kukosekana kwao kwa takriban mwezi mmoja inaweza 
ikaonekana k wa sababu pia vile tulivyozoea katik a mac ho yetu katika barabara zetu z a kila siku 
tunatumia ni tofauti na vile walikua wako katika zoezi hi li hivyo ni sawa na kusema pia Nyumba 
hii iw eze kufikiria ni jinsi gani watawezeshwa ili wa weze kurudi tena na kuendel ea na zoezi hili 
muhimu .  
Pili, katika ha li hiyo ya kuimarisha mji wetu  uweze ku wa msafi ni vizuri pia ukiweza ku wa 
salama . Nimetembea katika barabara tofauti hususan z a huku upande wa Nyali, Bwana S pika 
nimeweza kwa uchunguzi wangu nikaona kuna miti mi ngine am bayo iko karibu sana na barabara 
na ina ning’inia sana barabarani na wak ati mwingine hii miti huvunjika yenyewe na kuanguka 
katika barabara . Hivyo ni sawa na kusema iweze kukatwa  kwa wakati isije pia ikaweza kuleta 
madhara mengine ya kuumiza watu  na hakuna m tu alie na insurance Mheshimiwa S pika. Hivyo 
basi ni kwamba iwapo haya yatatokea wananchi wetu ambao watakua wameweza kupata ajali 
kama hiz i hawatakua na njia yeyote ya kuweza kujitetea . Kwa swala lengine Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimeona kwamba katika hoja hii ime fikia mahali pia ikasisitiza wenye majum ba ya kibinafsi ; 
hawa landlords  wakaweze kuambiwa warembeshe nyumba zao lakini mimi  nimeweza kuwa 
katika shughuli  zangu  katika mji huu  nikapatwa na haja  hivyo  ikanilazimu kutembelea hizi 
sehemu z a kujisaidia katika majengo hayo  hali sio ya kuridhisha kwa sababu utakuta labda jengo 
nzima ambal o ni la kibiashara li natumia labda choo kimoja  pekee yake .  
Mheshimiwa Spika lakini utapata mwanzo k una choo kimoja mimi nak uchukia san a 
nilivyofika hapa Assembli kwanza niliangalia v yoo v yetu viko namna gan i nikashukuru sio vile 
vya kukaa kwa sababu vile vyoo vya kukaa  vina hali ambayo mimi huwa nashindwa kuvitumia 
kwa sababu Mombasa tu na shida ya maji , utajipata umeenda  shughuli halafu maji ni machafu na 
bado yanaku rukia  yanakuja katika seh emu za makalio inakuwa ni hali ya kuhatarisha afya yetu 
na kus ababisha magonjwa ambayo wakati mwengine yanakosa tiba ikiwemo magonjw a kama 
hemorrhoids . Hivyo ni sawa na kusema vyoo hivi ingekuwa ni uwezo  wangu havingeruhus iwa 
kutumika katika majengo yoyote ya umma Mheshimiwa Spika.  Na nikimali zia niseme ya 
kwamba ninaunga mkono asilimia mia chini ya mia  lakini pia niulize yale ambayo nimeweza 
kuyazungumzia yakaweze kuo ngezewa katika suala hil i. Ah sante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa 
kunipa fursa ya kuchangia s hukran.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you Hon ourable  Kai.  
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Members,  please let us stick to the subject matter of the Motion , let us not deviate from the 
Motion. Yes , Honourable  Priscilla Mumba, Chief W hip please make your contribution.  
 
The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumb a): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi pia 
nimesimama kuunga mkono suala hili lililoletwa na Mheshimiwa Ha wa. Umuhimu wa kusisit iza 
hali ya kurembesha mji wetu  na kupanda maua na  kujali mazingira na kuangalia usafi katika 
kuzoa taka, kuajiri vijana kwa sababu  hayo ni majukumu ya Kaunti na kama alivyonukuu 
nikiona ame eleza umuh imu wa huu mji wetu kuwa msafi kwa sababu sisi katika Mo mbasa 
Kaunti uchumi we tu mk ubwa tunategemea utalii  na mtalii atakapo  ingia huu mji wetu akikuta 
mji wetu una kasoro ya uchafu, mji w etu hauna mandhari ya kupendeza inakuwa ni matatizo 
manake pengine  katika miji mengine kando  na nchi  hii yetu tunapata kama sifa kutoka Rwanda 
tunaambi wa ukifika mjini  wewe mwenyewe mandhari yatakupendezea . Kwa hivyo ni wakati 
mwafaka wa kuwa sisi ka ma Mom basa Kaunti tujaribu kusaidia Gavana wetu kama vile 
alianzish a huu mradi wa Mombasa ni Yetu na M ombasa ni Yangu ili tusaidie  mji uwe msafi . 
Kwa hakika Mh eshim iwa Hawa u metumia wakati mwafaka kwa sababu hata sisi kama viongozi 
kutoka mradi huu tangu us imame tumekuwa hatunywi maji manake watu wanatusifia uzuri wa 
mradi  huu na watu wanatusifia kazi nzuri  ambayo vijana walifanya ma zingira yalikuwa ya 
kupendeza  na w alihakikis ha kila mahali wamegusa waki toa uchafu  ili tuwe na mazingira bora.  
Ningependa kusema  ikiwa  Mswada  huu tutaupitisha leo ni tuhakikishe pia Gavana wetu 
amesisitiza kuwa hii kazi iliyokuwa ikifanywa na vijana wetu irudi haraka sana kwa sababu 
tumeona  tofauti y a wale vijana walivyo  fanya kazi kwa mwezi mmoja na tofauti ya sasa ilivyo.  
Mombasa ni kub wa na mpaka ishikwe kusaidiana kazi ili iweze kuweka mandhari  yake ; kuna 
fuo za bahari ambazo zinataka mara kwa mara kufanywa usafi , kuna kupanda miti, kuna kupanda 
maua kando kando mwa  barabara haswa karibu na mjini tunao na kuna kwengine tayari 
kume pand wa, kwengine b ado kunaendelea  na kazi hizi haziwezi kufanywa na  wafanyikazi wa 
Kaunti  pekee yake manake hawa wafanyikazi n i kidogo lakini wakiongezewa ha wa ambao ni 
vibarua ambao walipewa ahadi ya kuwa watafanya kwa miezi mitatu na mpaka wakati huu 
wamechu kuliwa tu huo mwezi mmoja na mpaka dakika hii hawajajua hatima  yao na ikiwa 
tunataka kuanza kubad ilisha mji huu ni tuhakik ishe Gavana ameregesha hawa vi jana wetu kazini  
kwa sababu kazi yao tuliiona na tuliona vile walirembesha mji . Kusema ule ukweli  ikiwa kama 
tuko viongozi katika hili Jumba la sheria kando na kupi tisha ni wajibu wetu pia kama viongozi 
twende  tukakutane na Gavana na tumwambie b osi tunakuomb a kwa  unyenyekev u wale vijana 
ulio waweka wakisafisha mji hebu waregeshe kwa sababu kazi yao tuliion a... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Na tukiwa tuko n a sauti moja kama Jumba hili hata Gavana pia ataona umuhimu wa sisi  
kwenda kumrai kwa niab a ya watoto  wetu, vijana  wetu waliofanya ile kaz i hata wao 
wata shukuru kuona sisi pia tumewatambua kama viongozi wa Kaunti . Kwa hivyo  usafi unaanza 
na mimi na wewe na unaanza na sisi viongozi kushika mkono walioko nyuma yetu . Kwa n iaba 
ya huu mji wetu, hii  ni kazi nzuri na tunaiombea M ungu ikiwa itapi ta isichukue hata mradi wa 
wiki b ila sisi kuona mafanikio yake  kwa sababu huu ndio uti w a mgongo wa Mombasa Kaunti . 
Tukiwa na sura ya uchafu hatutapata wageni , tukiwa na sura ya uchafu tutakaribisha magonjwa , 
tukiwa na sur a ya uchafu hata s isi viongoz i tutakuwa hatuna sura mitaan i tunatukanwa hapa na 
pale lakini  tutakapokuwa tumetekeleza hay a majukumu ambayo yamenukuliwa hapa na 
Mheshimiwa  Hawa . 
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 Hata sisi tutaonekana kweli kuna kitu tuliona ka tika wale watoto we tu na s asa t unaenda 
kusukuma ili wa reges hwe k azini  ndio waendele e na kazi zao na sisi tuweze kuona utalii uki ingia 
na uchumi wetu ukiwa una inuka . Kwa sababu wakati mtalii akiwa hapa hata sisi tutapata ushuru 
mzuri local, international  zote zitak uwa ni faid a kwe tu. Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
The Tempo rary Speake r (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Hamida , 
please make your  contribution.  
 
Hon. Noor: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker , I rise to support the Motion by 
Honourable  Hawaa for beautific ation of Mombasa. Mr. Spea ker, as you know we are a tourist 
desti nation and for us to have thi s beatification  in Mombasa County i s a big deal for us , as you 
know the Governor last time-initiated  Mombasa Yangu  which was a very good initiative for the 
whole of Mombasa because of t he beautification  so that when  we g et our visitors in Mombasa,  
they find it as a beautiful one. I want to urge that the building s in Mombasa right  now are worn 
out and w e had the initiatives of  paint ing the buildings in blue and whit e, which was very 
attract ive as you all know  that it wa s attractive whoever came to Mombasa  saw that there was a 
different tow n with a blue and white colour th at was attractive with the symbol of the ocean that 
God has given us. So Mr. Speaker I rise to su pport this Motion of Honourable Hawa which is a 
good one fo r Mom basa C ounty ; and to the Implementation Committee  when this comes to you, 
please make sure it is going to  go through because  it is a very important one because since we 
are a tourist destinatio n, we need this to go ahead . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speake r (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank y ou. Yes, Honourab le 
Juma Manuari proceed.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika kwa kunipa nafasi adimu  kuchangia 
katika swala hili la d ada yetu Mhe shimiwa  Haw a. Mhe shimiwa  Spika , kwanza nimuunge mkono 
kwa sw ala hili na mimi nimwambie ku wa nimeku unga mia kwa mia ; mimi hata si fikiri ila  la 
zaidi Mhe shimiwa  Spika  kama walivyo tangulia wenzangu  wakati wa  nyuma tulivyo kuwa 
tumewa weka hawa vija na mji wetu ulikuwa mzuri sana . Ulikuwa msafi sana hata ilikuwa mtu 
akinywa ma ji na chupa anaogopa pa kuitupa, lakini hivi sasa jiji limerudi ka ma lilivyokuwa  
chafu na halielewek i laenda m bele ama larudi nyuma . Ila mimi kuunga mkono Mswada  huu ni  
kusema ya  kwamba  Mheshimiwa  Gavana wale vijana wetu waliosimama mimi ningeomba 
awarudishe k azi iendelee ilivyokuwa  ili jiji letu lirudi kuwa safi kama lil ivyokuwa . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdul kadir ): Yes, Honourable  Jackto ne 
Madialo proceed . 
 
Hon. Madialo:  Ahsante Bwana Spika . Nilikuwa nasimama haraka haraka maana ilikuwa 
nataka unipatie nafasi  baad a ya dadangu mpendwa  Kiranja wa Bunge  kwa sababu f ulani ambapo 
utajua nikiendelea . Karibu niseme Bwana  asifiwe… 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Nimesimama hapa kuunga hoja hii ya Mhe shimiwa Hawaa . Nimesoma  ni hoja safi na haya 
maandishi  pia nikashuku ya  kwamba ni maandis hi ya Bwana Spika wa leo, maana pia ako na 
akili safi kama ya Hawa  kuhusu hii  maneno… 
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 8 [Applause ] 
 
Kwa hi vyo naunga  mkon o na pia nime taka kuungana na wenzangu  ambapo  kuwa 
wametangulia kusema kwamba  Kamati ya Bwana Mwaura tutawaangali a, tutawaangazia, 
tutaw asukuma na tutawakumbusha ili mam bo haya yaanze kutekelezwa , hata kwa nzia wiki ijayo 
tutakuwa  kwa mlang o wako Mhe shimiwa  Mwaura. Mwisho ningependa kuhakikishia Kiranja wa 
Bunge  ya kwamba ninaamini wale vijana ambao walichukuliwa ni kwamba hivi karibuni pia 
bado hio k azi itaendelea . Kwa hivy o musi jisumbue sana kube bana W aheshimiw a wote , maana 
mimi pamoja na Mheshimiwa  Nusura na Kamati yangu we are up to the task … 
  
[Applause ] 
 
Na kwanzia s aa hii mambo ya vijana ku wa kazini itabebwa na Kamati  ya L eba na Public 
Service Bo ard A dministration  na sisi tutaibeba vizuri . Ahsante ni. 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you . Honourable  Leila 
Nyache MCA Kipevu Ward, the floor is yours.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimi wa Spika na mi mi kuweza kunipa fursa hii  ya 
kuweza  kucha ngia hoja hii iliyokuja na Mhe shimiwa Haw a. Kusema la kweli hii h oja ni ya 
muhim u sana na inafaa Waheshimiwa sote tusimame , tuungane na tuiunge mkono iweze kupita 
ili tuweze kuona faida yake na tumeona hapa vijana wetu ambao waliokuwa wakifanya 
Momba sa ye tu ndio walioweka jiji letu safi hio miezi ya nyuma . Na sasa hivi jiji limekuwa 
limerudi vile vile limeanza  kurudi kama vile mwanzo,  ambapo jiji limechafuka ; kwa hivyo hapa 
la muhimu tu ni hawa watoto wetu warudishwe k azini . Tunaomba Mhe shimiwa  Gavana 
Abdulswam ad Sherrif Nassir , aweze kuturudishia vijana wetu kazi ni ili jimb o letu liweze  kuwa 
safi na  hawa hawa waweze  kuendelea kama vile walivyo  ahidiwa . Maanake sasa hivi wameanza 
kurudi maskani na inaleta sura  mbaya kwa sisi viongozi, ukipita hivi wanakuuliza  ni vipi , ukipita 
kule wanakuuliza ni vipi Mheshimiwa na sisi tunawa pa ahadi, tunawaambia subiri ni laki ni 
tunaomba jambo hili liweze kutekelezwa kwa haraka ndio hili jimbo letu litaweza kuwa safi na 
pia kwa upande wa watalii tutaweza  kuleta natija k wa sababu hiki ndio kitovu cha watalii hapa 
Mombasa . Kwa hivyo tutawez a kup ata natija kubwa sana Kaunti  yetu ya  Mombasa itakapoku wa 
safi hivyo basi  mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii na naomba wenzangu pia tushirikiane 
tuweze kuiunga iweze  kupita mara moj a watoto wetu waweze kurudi kazini. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulka dir): Thank  you. Yes, Honourable  
Mbega Frankline Makanga  make your contribution ? 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwanza nianze kwa kukupongez a kwa 
kutuongoza vyema vizuri kabisa katika kikao chetu cha leo. Pili , nimpongeze dadangu 
Mheshimiwa Hawa a kwa sababu  ya ku ja na Mswada  huu ambao unaangazia vile tutaliendeleza 
Jimbo letu kuwa salama , safi, la kuvutia na la  kupendeza kama Waheshimiwa waliok o katika 
Jumba hili . Mheshimiwa Spika , nasimama kuunga mkono hoja hii  kwa sababu  imegusia 
maswala ambay o katika Wadi  yang u ambayo ni eneo la Chaani, Wa di ambayo nimeipata ikiwa 
katika hali mbaya kwa sababu ya u ongozi uliokuwa mbaya .  
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 9 Hivi sasa tukiwa katika harakati za  kuleta mabadiliko mojawapo ikiwa yale mabadiliko 
ambayo Mhes himiwa Hawaa ame fanya iki wapo swala  la ku zoa taka na kufanya usafi kila mara 
tukiwahusisha wananchi . Na lengine pia katika zoezi la kupanda miti, ambalo katika Wa di yangu 
hivi sa sa tumepanda miti karibu elfu 500 tukishirikiana na wananchi . Kwa hivy o mi mi naunga 
mkono hoja  hii, kwamb a itiliwe maanani na tuweze  kusukuma ifanyike  ili mitaa yetu iwe safi na 
tuweze  kuinua viwango vya afya katika jamii yetu.  Mheshimiwa Spika,  waheshimiwa wenza 
wameweza kuzungumzia swala la Mombasa yangu, vijana wale ambao  walikuwa wameajiriwa 
kwa kipindi c ha mwe zi mmoja na wakafanya kazi nzuri sana. Mimi ningependa kuwapongeza na 
niwashukuru wote ambao walihusika katika kufanya hilo zoezi na tu naomba, tunaomba na pia 
kwa kusisitiza kwamba vijana hawa waregeshwe kazini .  
Mimi kivyangu si kwa m iezi miwili  ifike miezi mitatu lakini warudishwe kazini na 
waweze kutafutiwa terms  ambazo zitawasaidia kufanya kazi kwa kipindi cha kuendelea  ili 
waende lee kupata rizki yao na mji wetu uendelee kuwa msafi . Tunaju a licha ya kwamba 
Mombasa Kaunti ina wage  bill kubwa l akini njia zipo ambazo zinaweza kutumika ili hawa vijana 
wetu waajiriwe zaidi ya m iezi mitatu, wapate rizki z ao na waweze pia kutusaidia hata  kuimarisha 
usalama katika zile kata zetu ndogo tunazotoka. Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mim i nasimama 
kuunga mkono na hii Mombasa yangu jamani irudi  Mwenyekiti  wa L eba unasema tukuwachie 
jukumu hilo wewe ukiwa na Nusura  yaja, tunaomba hiyo Nusura  ije hara ka, mtuletee  hawa 
vijana waweze kufanya kazi na Mombasa iweze  kusonga mbele . Ahsanteni sana Mheshimiwa  
Spika, naung a mkon o. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you for your 
contribution. Yes , Honourable  Joshua, make your contribution pleas e? 
 
Hon. Ong’ao: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Leo nitajaribu kutumia Kiswahili na 
Kiswahili simd omo wangu ; kwa hivyo ikiw a nita kosea mahali mutaniwia radhi  nami niungane 
na wenzangu kuunga mkono hii hoja iliyoletwa  na Mheshimiwa  Hawa , niseme kw amba  imekuja 
kwa wakati wa sawa kwa sababu wakati wali weka ile program  ya Mombasa yangu  ungeweza  
kutembea h uu mji hata mita ani uk aona mitaa ikiwa misafi na sisi  wale wengine tuna  imani ya 
kikristo hata Bibilia  inatuambia cleanliness is next to go dliness. Kwa hivyo mj i ukiwa msafi ni 
vyema zaidi na utaweza  vutia watalii , hali zetu za afya zitakuwa  nzuri, break out kama  za 
magonjwa  kama cholera  hazitakuwepo . 
Na pia sisi hapa Mheshimiwa Hawaa ametutajia ya kwamba recycling , ku recycle  kwa 
Kiswahili inaitwa nini? Recy cling  ya garbage, uchafu  kulingana na mimi hakuna kitu kinaitwa 
uchafu , kila kitu kinaweza  kutumika kwa mara ya pili na ya tatu na itakuwa wale vijana 
wakiwekwa katika ile mitambo ya ku recycle ule uchafu, tutakuwa tumetengeza nafasi za kazi, 
tutaku wa tume tenge za vifaa ambavyo vimetengezwa huku ambavyo vinaweza kuuzwa kwa bei 
nzuri tuka wa tuna kwa kizungu wanasema , you buy Ken ya bui ld Kenya . Kwa sababu hata bidhaa 
nyingi kutoka nje kama China nyengine zimetengezwa kutokana na taka hivyo basi ni  vyema, 
huu ni Mswada m zuri na vile wenzangu niungane na wenzangu kusema kwamba Kamati ya 
Mheshim iwa Mwa ura hii tukipi tisha tutakufw ata we we nyuma tu hakikisha imeweza  
kutekelezwa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Ab dulkadir ): Thank  you. Honourable 
Members , just to bring to your attention this particular  Motion is premise d on three aspects ; 
garbage  collection and disposal , street cleaning and washing , enhancing the aesthetic beauty  of 
Mombasa County . So, I guide you please let us n ot just fo cus o n the Mombasa ni yangu  project , 
there are other aspects of this Motion . 
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 10 Key am ong them just to draw to your attention that the County government sensitize s and 
encourages  landlords to paint and refurbish  their  buildings  to improve their appearance s. So, 
Members let us not just  get excited Hono urable Members as you make your contribu tion kindly 
consider the  prayers of the Motion , keep in mind that the prayers are key subject . Yes, please 
Honourable  Mbaya  make your contribution . 
 
Hon.  Hamisi Mbaya : Ahsante s ana M heshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia f ursa hii  adhimu. 
Hawaa kuzungumzia hususan k utokana na yale ambayo n i rasmi tulioweza kuchambuliwa ama 
kuchaguliwa kupitia Kata zetu , haswa kama mimi amba ye nimet oka katika Kata ndogo ilio 
kubwa kwa mipaka na ilio na idad i kub wa ya jamii.  Mheshimiwa  Spika, mimi napenda 
nimuunge mkono dadangu Mheshim iwa H awaa Abd ulrahman kwa jina la kubana Bibi  harusi  
namuunga  mkono  99 kwa 100 kwa sababu hoja hii ambayo ame ileta moja kwa moja ilipoanza tu 
ule mfumo wa hizi nyu mba a ma majengo ambayo yako ndani ya Kaunti  yetu yal ipoweza 
kupakwa rangi rasmi kumeweza k uonyesha kwamb a hii Mombasa Kaunti ni jiji ambalo linajua 
kujipanga .  
Vilevile kulipoingia hili swala la u pandaji m aua nafikiri tukitembea kwenye mabarabara , 
tunaona wa zi na  dhahiri  tukiwa tutasema hakuna uzuri tunauona tupinge basi itakuwa  kaniki 
tunaifanya s huka na shuk a pia tutakuwa tunaifanya iwe kaniki  na itakuwa sio sawa ukweli 
ubakie ukweli na u ongo ubakie kuw a uongo. Mheshim iwa Spika tukirudi kwenye swala la w ale 
vijana ambao  waliweza kupata ajira mimi kwanza naipongeza Nyumba hii rasmi kwa 99 na kwa 
100 kuweza kupitisha ule Mswada  wakati ule . Kwa sababu msaada uliopatikana kwa vijana wetu 
waliweza kupata ajira na ni vijana ambao wanategeme wa vi levile jiji letu la Mombasa kama kule 
kwetu ama kul e kwangu Timbwani tumeweza kuona fuo za bahari ziliv yokua na usalama , 
vilevile ziliv yo kuwa zikivutia kuhusiana na maswala ya utalii.  Mheshimiwa Spika , sitokuwa 
mwingi wa maneno nikaweza kuchosha Waheshimiwa wenza, bali n amuunga mkono rasmi 
kama nilivyotan gulia 99 kwa 100 Mheshimiwa Hawa Abdirahman jina la  mabano bibi harusi. 
Ahsante sana.  
 
[Appla use] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Ab dulkadir ): Befor e you proceed  
Honourable  Milka Ngare , my sincerest condo lence s to you and our support , our deepest 
sympath y from all the Members of this House,  we are with you. So please kindly make your 
contribution.  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you so much Mr. Speaker. You just to uched the button of what I 
would have loved  to say before I make my contribution ; I want to since rely appreciate my 
colleagues  each and every person who w as involved  and especially  those who travelled to my 
home County to condole with us  as a family of Ng are. It gave us a lot  of wa rmth , we were 
touched  and my family  sent greetings back , they recognized  your contribution and your presence 
back at home. Ahsante sana Mungu awabariki nyot e… 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Secondly , I am up  on a point of support on the Motion introduced  in this House by 
Honourable  Haw a on sustainable beau tification of Mombasa County  and especially looking at 
the three prayers ; garbage  collection  and dis posal, street cleaning and washing and enhancing the 
aesthetic beauty of Mombasa Cou nty.  
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 11 My first point is  that I hope this Motion will not be one of those Motions that will go to 
gather dust in the archives like has been before ; I remember in this same Ho use we passed a 
Motion on installation of l itter bin s so that we could not have litter  all over the Momba sa Co unty 
CBD . I have not seen any action and that g oes b ack no w to the Implementation Committee 
headed by Hon ourable  Mwaura  because when we pass  this Motion wh ich I am sure we are going 
to pass , let us have concerted  effort and team  work so tha t you go back to  the archives  also a dd 
to the prayers of Hon ourable  Hawa  so that a sustainable  as she call s it susta inable beautification  
of Mombasa County . 
And h aving heard what m y Chairman of Labour said I am 100 per cent  sure that 
Honourable  Madialo , the Chairman of Labour  assisted by Hon ourable  Nusura and the 
Committee at large they are up to the task to make a follow up on the Mombasa Yangu Program  
whereby the  youth s should come back . Let us not say three  months ; if it is sustainable even that 
one it should be sustainable because then this cannot succeed i f we have the youth s coming in 
two months and going  back  again, it should also be a continued exercise so t hat our town can 
remain . They can be engaged in the three  prayers that Hon ourable  Hawa has touched on so that 
we have a clean town all through for us to be able to attract tourists, to attract other people and 
also now have more revenue coming to our Count y.  
So, I do believe in you Ho nourable  Madialo, I know you are goi ng to make a  follow up on 
the same and we are here to give you our support so that the youth s can come back and continue 
with their work in order for the three  prayer s to be enhanced. Thank y ou so much Hon ourable  
Hawa, a very nice Motion tha t really has a lot of meaning in our County t owards raising more 
revenue. Thank you , Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdi rahman Abdul kadir): Ok. Hon ourable  Mwaura 
make your co ntrib ution.  
 
 Hon. Mwaura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipat ia fursa na mimi  pia 
naungana na wenzangu kumshukuru Mheshimiwa Hawa kwa ajili ya Mswada  mzuri ali ouleta 
katika Bunge hili  kuhakikisha ya kwamba Mombasa yetu imekuwa safi . Na kwa wale wengi 
amba o wameweza  kutembea katika miji  nilikuwa ninasoma se hemu ka tika mitandao  ninaona 
mtu mmoj a akizungumzia  Rwanda;  mji mkuu wa Rwanda jinsi uli vyo msafi na wa Rwanda 
huchuku a siku moja  wenyewe binafsi kwa wiki ili kuhakikisha mji wao uko msafi n a baa dhi yetu 
wengine wa mepata fursa kutembea mji wa Dubai na wakajionea j insi mji ule ulivyo msafi na 
miji mingine mingi ambayo ni misafi na imeweza kuvutia watalii katika miji yao kupitia kwa ule 
usafi .  
Mimi naamini na sote wale ambao wamechangia wanat ambu a mji wa Mombasa  kama 
kivutio cha utalii ; tukiwa kivutio cha utalii , ni kweli tunahitaji usafi ili tuendelee  kuvutia zaidi na 
watalii wakija na hata sisi wenyewe tunahitaji huo usafi. Ila Mheshimiwa Spika katika 
utekelezaji wa Mswada  huu, kuna sehemu  amba zo ni lazima tu weze kuz iangalia kwa undani na 
kwa upana kwa sababu tunaju a Serikali zetu kuna ma mbo ambayo  huwa wanakimbilia zaidi 
kutekeleza na mengi ne hawakimbil ii kutekeleza . Tukiweka sheria ya kupiga watu faini  ama 
kuwatoza kwa sababu ya kutupa taka taka ovyo ovyo hio itatek elezwa kesho  lakini 
tukizungumza habari ya  kuweka zile ambazo tunaita mapi pa ya kuweka taka, tukiweka sheria 
kama hio, inatekelezwa baada ya mwa ka mmoj a au miwili ama hata tusione ikitekelezwa . 
Kwa hivyo kuna maswala ya kuangazia na  pia kun a swala  kama li le Mheshimiwa Spika 
umelitaja kuhusiana wenye m anyumba kuweka ama kuweka rangi upya ama kufanya 
marekebisho katika majumba yao na tuliona  kwa wakati mmoja  wakikimbizana sana na Serikali 
wengine wakipelekana kortini .  
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 12 Maswala mengine yako na uz ito wake yanahi taji Serikali kuzungumza na wanan chi na 
kufany a uhamasisho ; si yale ambayo yanaweza kutekelezwa kwa haraka lakini hata na  mimi  
naweza kusema katika Jumba hili ya kwamba tutakimbizana na kuhakikisha yale kama yale 
ambayo ni ya kuweka yal e map ipa taka, tutah akikisha kwamba tunauliza Serikali ni kwa nini 
hatujayaona yakitekelezwa ili kwa sab abu hio ndio msingi wa kuhakikisha kuwa Mombasa iko 
safi. Ila hatuwezi kushika mtu na hatujamuonyesha mahali pa kutupa ile chupa, hatujamuonyesha 
mfano mzuri  wa usafi . Ni lazima Serikali ije na mpango na mipangilio kaba mbe ya kuhakikisha 
ya kwamba usafi nd ani ya Mombasa umeweza kutekelezwa na tumeweza kuhakikisha ya 
kwamba mji wetu uko msafi ili tuweze kuurembesha na tuweze kufurahia. Ahsante nauunga  
mkon o Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdul kadir): Thank you. Yes , 
Honourable  Pamela make  your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Ojala:   Thank you M r. Speaker Sir for giving me this  opportunity to contribute. 
First,  I would  like to start by co ngrat ulating my  colleagues special ly-elect  Honourable  Hawa for 
introducing this important Motion in this House . As many ha ve said because we have absorbed 
and dige sted it properly, so I will not say much but it is a very important Motion and we need to 
put it into cons ideration because during those days  our Excellency the Governor init iated 
Mombasa Yangu,  we have even experienced this reduction of security issues because it did not 
require  any qualification , even th ese people called wakali wao , they were absorbed prop erly in 
that organization . So, I stand to support the Motion that  let us not take it for granted but let us be 
serious about  it and I would request the I mplementation Committee to take it seriously  and am 
very happy that the Chairman of Labour has mentioned i t that he will not take it for granted  this 
Motion will be implemented with immediate effect so thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, last but not least 
Honourable  Mariam Baimu make your contribution?  
 
Hon. M ariam  Sharrif : Ahsante sana Bwana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii. 
Pili ningependa kumuunga mkon o na kumpongeza Mheshimiwa Haw a kwa kuleta hoja hii hap a 
mbele ya Bunge. Mimi ningesema tu kwa  uchache kwa sababu mengi yameo ngewa na 
Waheshimiwa wenz a lak ini kusema ule ukweli yale maneno yaliyo ongelewa ama yameletwa 
hapa Bunge  na Haw a yanatakikana tuya tilie mkazo zaid i na nafikiria  vile watu 
walivyozungumza Waheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati ya kutekeleza na pi a Mwenyekiti  wa 
Leba ni watu am bao ni wa chapa  kazi na imani yangu ni  moja kwamba  vile alivyoahidi 
Mheshimiwa Madialo na naibu  wake na Kamati ya ke kwa ujumla watilie mkazo zaidi ili hawa 
vijana wetu waweze kurudi kwa ile kazi ya ku -collect garbage  ili waweze kupata ajira . Kando tu 
ya hiyo ajira  pia nina imani Mombasa itarudi katika hali ya usafi vile ambavyo Mheshimiwa 
wetu Hawaa ameomba ifanyike . Mwisho ningeomba pia kama itawezekana Mwenyekiti  wetu wa 
Mazingira  maanake nimesikia sana hapa ikitajwa hapa Rwanda Rwanda aweze kupanga tufanye 
bench marking  huko Rwanda tuone ni  siri gani wan afanya mpaka mji wao hata Kenya inatajika . 
Ahsanteni sana.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Okay let me take this, we 
start by Hon ourable  Patrick Mbelle?  
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 13 Hon. Mbelle : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I just on ly want to be in record that I also supported 
this Motion and congratulate our sister and Hon ourable  Hawa a, thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Ab dulkadir ):  Thank you . Yes Hon ourable  
Nusura make your final con tribution?  
 
Hon. Nusura Mwinyi : Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Kwanza 
nataka nimpe kongole sana Mheshimiwa Haw a ambaye ndiye Mheshimiwa mdogo zaidi katika 
Bunge hili . Mimi nilikuwa nataka tu niongezee kidogo nafikiri yamezungumzwa mengi kuhusu 
hoja iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Haw a lakini nilikuwa nataka kusema wakati tulichukua wale 
vijana tukawapatia kazi kupitia Mheshimiwa Gavana wetu Abdulswamad kulikuwa na 
mabadiliko makubwa kule vijijini . Nafikiri kulikuwa na watu wanaitwa wakali kwanza , 
kuliku wa na watu wan aitwa chafu  kulikuwa na mateja ambao mpaka sasa wapo la kini wakati 
tukiwapatia zile kazi nafikiri ile hali ya usalama ilibadi lika kidogo . Wale chafu  walikuwa kidogo 
walibadilika wakawa wazuri lakini sasa hivi naona ile hali inaanza kurudi wale  wale chafu na 
mateja  walifanya mj i ukaw a msafi , kukawa kumekuwa kuzuri .  
Mheshimiwa Manuari  amesema hapa alikuwa akinywa maji hajui chupa pi a aitupe wapi , 
hata mimi nilikuwa nikinywa maji chupa naibeba hadi nyumbani naona haya kuitupa sehemu za 
barabarani ama  njiani . Kwa hivyo mimi nilikuwa n asema sisi kama Bunge  la Mombasa Kaunti   
tukishirikiana na Kamati yetu ya Leba  wale vijana ningependa kum ezungumziwa hapa mambo 
ya sustainability  kwa wale vijana kut aka wale vijana wawe sustain ed. Ni kwamba wale vijana 
wapate kuajiriwa na ile hali ya kuchukuliwa  mwezi  mmoja ama miwili wakikaa zile hali mbaya 
huwa zinajirudia tena na hakuna lisilowezekana kwa sababu  tuko hapa Mombasa Kaunti  kuna  
watu ni  wafanyi  kazi wanafikisha wakati wa kustaafu. P ole kwa kusema hivyo kuna watu amba o 
wanaaga dunia na zile nafasi h uwa zi ko ndani ya Kaunti ya  Mombasa .  
Kwa hivyo  mimi ningependa katika wale watu ambao wamechukuliwa zile kazi waw eze 
kuchukuliwa kidogo kidogo wakijaza zile nafasi za wale watu ambao  watakuwa hawako tena 
ndani ya kazi na tuweze  sana kuangalia sana wale ambapo wame fikisha miaka ya kusta afu wawe  
watastaafu  kwa wakati ili wale wengine waweze kupata kuajiriwa . Na nasema h ivyo nikiwa 
katika Kamati ya Leba  kama Naibu  Mwenyekiti  na Mwenyekiti  tuko pale pia kuangalia hali 
kama zile tukitia msukum o ili wale wengine waweze kupa ta aj ira na wengine waende 
wakapumzike . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abd ulkadir ): Thank you considering the 
opinions , input and contribution of Hon ourable  Members , now I may ask Hawa Abdulrahman  to 
please respond to the Motion? 
 
Hon. Hawaa Abdulrahman : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I would like to thank my 
colleagues for their con tributions and support to this Motion , kindly note that I have been taking 
notes on the positive comments , additional stateme nts and constraints . The  Members of this 
House ha ve anonymously sustainability of this program and I thank them for that, it is my 
highest believe that the Committee at hand as they have said that they will put effective 
consideration of this Motion and I be lieve they are up to  the task. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abd ulkadir ): Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
February 28 , 202 3                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         13 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses o nly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 14 Okay, I now put the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Hawaa Abdulrahman on 
sustainable beautification of Mombasa County  be app roved by th is Ho nourable House in the 
same terms as moved . 
 
[Question Put and Agreed to ] 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOUR NMENT  
 
This House stands adjourned until Tuesday 28th February , 2023 at 2:30p.m.  
 
The House rose at 11:20a.m. 
                  
 
  
 
 
 
 