October 1 2, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                          1 3 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY   
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 12th October, 2017  
The House met at 2:42p .m. 
 (Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS   
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members you may be seated,  yes Clerk ? 
PAPERS  
 Yes Hon. Hamisi  Musa Mwidani , Leader of Majority .  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker may I take this opportunity to lay 
the P aper, resolution on appointment list Select C ommittees. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 The Hon. Mwaka Zahora Juma kindly give us the notice of Motion . Yes, Hon. 
Mwaka Juma Zahora . 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to give  the 
notice of the following Motion;  
(Hon. (Ms.) Juma moved the Notice of Motion)  
AMENDMENTS TO COUNTY ASSEMBLY STANDING ORDERS  
 THAT AWARE that the current Standing O rders are transitionary in nature;  
 FURTHER AWARE  that, from usage in the First Assembly,  some gaps have been 
discovered which need to be plugged and some issues  have emer ged which need to be 
resolved;  
 CONCERNED  THAT  if the existing gaps are left unattended they may impede on 
the proper  functioning of the County  Assembly ; 
 I urge this Assembly  to RESOLVE that:  
 The County Assembly Rules and Procedure Committee to undertake a 
comprehensive review of the Standing Orders and recommend appropriate amendments for 
the approval by the County Assembly.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Clerk ? 
MOTION  
The Hon. Lead er of Majority please move  the M otion . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. S peaker I want to move a M otion , 
Adoption of  Resolution on Appointment list to Select C ommittees  and I would like Hon.  
Rosemary Mukavi to second the M otion . 
Hon. (Ms.) Mukavi:  I second .  
Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Members I would like remind you under Standing 
Order 156 Approval of nomination, 156 (2) , whenever a Motion for approval of a list under 
paragraph (1) is moved in the County Assembly, no objection against the proposed 
memb ership of a Member in a Select C ommittee shall be permitted and objections, if any, 
shall be formulated against the proposed membership as a whole . 
 Hon.  Members, I now put a question  that this House considers the Resolution of the 
Committee on S election on Appointment list to Select C ommittees  as tabled by the Hon. 
Leader of Majority in the same terms as moved. Will  as many as of the same … 
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir, we want the names to be read so that we know who the 
Members are . 
October 1 2, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                          1 3 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker let me remind my M ember that I 
will read the names after the Assembly has a ccepted this M otion to carry on ; I have the list , I 
have the resolution of the C ommittee of which I will have to read it before I read the list of 
the Committees. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon. Chizi .  
Hon. (Ms.) Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika, mimi ningependelea kabla 
hujazungumza ha yo yote tukubaliane ya kuwa Mwenyekiti akishazungumza kuwe kutakuwa 
na ma rekebisho ; ni lazima kuwe na mab adiliko. M imi naweza nikawa nimewekwa mahali 
ambapo sipapendi, kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba kuwe na marekebisho, kama 
tutapitisha, tupitishe lakini tuwe na marekebisho. Ahsante . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank. Hon.  Members  I now propose the question that 
this House considers the resolution of the Committee on Selection on a ppointment list on 
Select Committees as tabled by the Hon. Leader of Majority in the same terms as moved . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
…yes, Hon. Hamisi Mwidani ? 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you M r. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker these are  
the minutes for the Committee Select held at the Mombasa County Assembly Building in the 
Committee Room on Thursday, 12th at 10:37 a.m.  
Mr. Speaker M embers present :  
1. Hon. Hamisi Mwidani   - Chairman  
2. Hon. Rosemary    - Vice Chairlady  
3. Hon. Ahmed Khamis Salim  - Member  
4. Hon. Ahmed Salama Omar  - Member  
5. Hon. Charles Juma Kitula  - Member  
6. Hon Fadhili Mwalimu   - Member  
7. Hon. Faith Mwende Boniface  - Member  
8. Hon Feddis Mbura   - Member  
9. Hon. Kibwana Baya   - Member  
10. Hon. Kizito Okoth Opeya  - Member  
11. Hon. Maimuna Salim Mwawasi  - Member  
12. Hon. Murfad Amur   - Member  
13. Hon. Mwaka Bakari   - Member  
Officers in Attendance  
1. Mr. Mazarino Lunani   - Clerk Assistant II  
2. Ms. Mwaka Mohamed   - Clerk Assistant III  
3. Ms. Nasra Omar    - Hansard Reporter  
4. Mr. Mohamed Bangush   - Princip al Clerk Assistant ( Taking M inutes )  
Mr. Speaker Min SC1/17 : Approval of Appointment list to Select Committees  
The Chairman tabled a draft list of nominees to Select Committees, County Public 
Investment and Account Committee, Committee on County Delegated Legislation and 
Committee on Implementation and Liaison Committee as  submitted by various Assembly 
parties and which is annexed hereto.  
Members co nsidered that, the draft list of nominees to Select Committee an d after 
considerable discussion, Mr. Speaker it was proposed by Hon. Fadhili Makarani and 
seconded b y Hon. Kibwana Baya and it was r esolved to approve the draft list of nominees to 
Select Committee annexed hereto and recommend the same to the County Assembly for 
adoptio n, and this is what now we are  moving Mr. Speaker Sir with your permission.  
October 1 2, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                          1 3 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 Mr. Speaker Sir ... 
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir he has not completed the minutes, he  should read the 
minutes as per the paper . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Amur, just give him some time to finish . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I think am not all that ... maybe 
crazy, somebody with proper mind and this is the record of the resolution, so I will just move 
to the Motion.  
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) moved the Motion)  
THAT, pursuant to the provi sion of Standing Order 186 , this Assembly approves the 
appointments of the following M embers  nominated by the County Assembly Select 
Committee in consultation with the County Assembly parties . I repeat, Committee in 
consultations, consultations with the County Assembly parties to b e the Members of the 
County Assembly Committee on Public Investment and Accounts .  
Mr. Speaker the Members of the County Public Investment and Accounts Committee 
are as follows: - 
1. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani   - Chairman  
2. Hon. Amriya Boy Juma    - Vice Chai rperson  
3. Hon. Mwaka Zahoro Juma   - Member  
4. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya   - Member  
5. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy    - Member  
Mr. Speaker I also move another M otion … 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) moved the Motion)  
THAT, pursuant to the provisi on of Standing Order 189, this A ssembly approves the  
appointments to the following Members  nomi nated by the County  Assembly Selection 
Committee in consultation with the County Assembly parties, to be the Members of the 
County Assembly Committee on Implementation . 
Committee on Implementation  
1. Hon. Salim David Kalume   - Chairman  
2. Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri   - Vice Chairman  
3. Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai   - Member  
4. Hon. Robert Nyiro Mwaega   - Member  
5. Hon. Fahad Abdalla Kassim   - Member  
6. Hon. Tobias Otieno Samba   - Member  
7. Hon. Ibrahim Omondi    - Member  
8. Hon. Bernard Ochieng Ogutu   - Member  
9. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani   - Member  
10. Hon. Mwalimu Hamad Mgwisho  - Member  
11. Hon. Juma Renson Thoya   - Member  
12. Hon. Mary Evelyn  Osongo   - Member  
13. Hon. Mary Naliaka Wafula   - Member  
Mr. Speaker I also move another  Motion… 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) moved the Motion)  
THAT, pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 190, this Assembly approves the  
appointments to the following Members  nominated by the County  Assembly Selection  
Committee in consultation with the Coun ty Assembly parties, to be the M embers of the 
County Assembly Committee on County Delegated Legislation . 
October 1 2, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                          1 3 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 County Delegated Legislation Committee  
1. Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri   - Chairperson  
2. Hon. Milka Moraa Ngare   -  Vice Chairperson  
3. Hon.  Abrari Mohamed Omar  - Member  
4. Hon. Musumba Raphael Bwire  - Member  
5. Hon.  Ali Mohamed Shomari  - Member  
6. Hon. Ali Omar Shariff   - Member  
7. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani  - Member  
8. Hon.  Junior Wambua Kyaka  - Member  
9. Hon. Shebe Athman  Salim  - Member  
10. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy   - Member  
11. Hon. Moses Aran Oi ndo   - Member  
12. Hon. Leila Mughazo Nyache  - Member  
13. Hon. Hamida Noor Sheikh Ali  - Member  
 
I would like to move the  other  Motion Mr. Speaker Sir, with your permission . 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwid ani) moved the Motion)  
THAT, pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 192, this Assembly approves the  
appointments to the following Members  nominated by the County Assembly Selection 
Committee to be the Members of the County Assembly  Liaison Committee . 
Mr. Speaker on the Liaison Committee , the Chairman of the Committee will be ; 
 Hon. Fadhi li Mwalimu Makarani and , 
All Chairpersons of all Committees .  
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members , I now put the question that this House 
adopts the r esolution of the Committee on Selection on a ppointment list to Select Committees  
as tabled by the Hon. Leader of Majority , Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani  in the same terms as 
moved.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
…Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
The Assembly stands adjourned until Tuesday, 17th October , 2017 at 2:30 p.m.  
The House rose at 2.5 8 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 