November 22 , 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 22nd Nove mber , 2016  
The House met at 2.36pm. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : You can have your  seats. Yes Clerk. 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon Members we acknowledge  the presence of Hon Members from Nairobi County 
Assembly , the C ommittee on Agriculture and C omm unity S ervices headed by their Chairman 
and D eputy Speaker .  
The Deputy S peaker Hon… 
(Hon. Speaker read  out names of Members  from Nairobi County A ssembly seated at the public 
gallery ) 
Thank  you Members and welcome to the Mombasa County Assembly, people of 
Mombasa are friendly and we welcome anybody in Mombasa. Yes Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
 
Yes Hon  Ibrahim Kondo . 
Hon Ibrahim K ondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama 
mbele ya Jumba  hili kutaka kujua hoja ya nidhamu iliyoletwa kipindi cha nyuma kuhusu 
maswala ya mkusanyiko w a wana nchi wetu katika Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa .  
Mheshimiwa Spika  tunafahamu ya  kwamba  tulifanya t aratibu zote na hatm a ya mwisho  
taratibu tuliz ozimaliz a hoja hii tuliirudisha katika N yumba hii ili iweze kufanyiwa marekebisho . 
Lakini mpaka  sasa Mheshimiwa  Spika  hatujaona hatm a yoyote kupitia kwa hoja hii na  ni 
hoja ambayo inahusisha maswala mengi kati ka Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa .  
Kwa  hivyo ning eomba kupiti a kwa kiti chako tupate ufahamu wa hoja hio imefikia wapi 
na iko katika hatamu gani ya kuleta  katika N yumba hii.  
Ahsante  Mheshimiwa  Spika. 
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The Leader of M ajority will report that in 
your statement concerning the issue of public participation and you have two weeks to respond  
to this issue. Yes  Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon Amur M urfad. 
Hon Amur : Mr Speaker  sir, I stand to raise  statement on  the Finance department i n 
particularly the  first reading  land rates .  
As we know many counties have given land rates waiver but  we as Mombasa  County to 
date we have not given that  and it is high time we consider here the waiver the rates  Mr. Speaker 
so that we can collect as much  money as possible .  
If we give the waiver Mr S peaker on the penalties I believe  the princi pal amount will be 
paid by the defaulters  so that  the County can  collect  as much  money as possible .  
The amount outstanding on the  rates is too big Mr Speaker  out th ere.  
The Department of Finance should work closely with  the executive to grant the waiver to 
our people for our people to pay the outstanding bills easily.  
November 22 , 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 If we can collect half of the amount Mr Speaker is better rather than collecting nothing .   
So we beg the waiver should be considered immediately so that our people can be 
granted that waiver and  be able to pay Mr Speaker. Thank you.  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : We want to know the status of the Bill. 
Hon Amur :  Mr Speaker last week the i ssue was brought in the Assembly and I want to 
believe that it has been taken into consideration that  we are going to get the waiver but the 
procedure that was supposed to be used has not been given to us yet Mr Speaker .  
We are begging so that it can fast tracked so that people can know which procedures are 
allowed  to pay Mr Speaker.   
Last week we thought it had gone to the Governor so that  he can a scent and maybe 
gazette it. 
I don’t know if it has reached that stage Mr Speaker  so tha t we can give a Christ mas 
bonus to our people Mr Speaker . Thank  you. 
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon Hatimy the Hon Member is 
requesting for the status of the waiver Bill, do you have any  response ?   
Hon Mohamed  Hatimy : Thank you Mr Speaker M r Speaker I raise unde r Article 41  (2) 
c, I need more time to respond . 
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon Siminyu you know you cannot …, 
pardon . 
Hon Siminyu :  Mr Speaker I remember the last time … 
(Interruption)  
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : If it’s the sam e issue the Hon Member 
has requested for more time so let us wait for him .  
Hon Siminyu  just wait for Hon Hatimy.  
Hon Hatimy we give you one week to respond to this Hon House. Yes C lerk. 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon Members the H ouse stands adjourned until tomorrow m orning .  
 
The House rose at  2.47pm. 
 