Nove mber 23, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          142 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 23rd November , 2016  
The House met at 9.07am . 
(Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats. Yes  Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon Mary . 
Hon (Ms)  Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir . Mr Speaker  sir I have  a statement on 
shortage of water in public primary schools .  
Mr Speaker  sir there is a great need to ensure that our Primary schools have adequate 
supply of safe water for drinking and sanitation.  
Most of our public scho ols lack water for pupils  to use, this leads to poor hygiene in 
schools and therefore causing diseases like diarrh ea, cholera and other skin diseases.  
Mr Speaker  sir I humbly urge the department of water to liaise with donors and construct 
boreholes in pub lic schools to ensure constant and adequate supply of water.  
Thank  you Mr Speaker . 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon Mary Akinyi . Your statement is 
clear that you are urging the department , you are not requesting to he ar from the department 
what have they do ne to make sure the shortage of water has b een noted correct?  
You are urging the department to look for donors to ma ke sure there is sufficient  water in 
schools . 
So we ask the Clerk to communicate to the Committee on Early Childhood so as to liaise 
with the  department to make sure they fast tr ack and they initiate to work with donors or the 
County to make sure there is sufficient  water in the government schools.  
Yes Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon Enock Mwinga … 
(Interruption)  
Yes what is it Hon Mary . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi : Thank you  Mr. Speaker ...  
(Interruption ) 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes what is it Hon Mary .  
Hon (Ms)  Akinyi : Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika , Mheshimiwa  Enock  
aliomba  ailete hii taarifa  mchana. 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): But he has not communicated to the Clerk or to 
the Speaker.  
Nove mber 23, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          142 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Let him communicate you just communicate to him to inform the office of the Speaker 
for us to communicate in the afterno on.  
Yes Clerk, what is it Hon Serah?  
Hon (Ms)  Nyam vula: Thank you  Mr. Speaker I would like to r equest so that I can make 
a positive statement . 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes proceed . 
Hon (Ms)  Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker i f all the time we request 
and we condemn when we do get good results we sh all also  come back and say that good work 
was done . 
Mr. Speaker at the beginning of this year in particular  on 20th January , 2016 and well 
before that I  was very bothered with the parking at the Coast Provincial General H ospital  
(CPGH) . 
There were lorries parking b ehind the Ra hmtulah and the place was  congested and 
somebody there with  the garage and parking lorries and am very happy to report after a very long 
strugg le calling the County Secretary, invading him with phone call s and everything I’m very 
happy to repor t Mr. Speaker that those lorries are no more… 
(Applause ) 
The parking now is left for Tuk tuk and the big lorries are no more  so am very happy I 
thought it is something I should come back and report because those  Tuk tuk are doing a good 
business making money the big  lorries  when they set up their businesses can find places to park.  
Furthermore is that the  patients  at Ra hmtula h have a peace of mind and talking to one of 
the nurses she told me there were spanners making noise and that's why M r. Speaker I felt that  it 
is important I appreciate the work done .  
Thank you Mr Speaker . 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon Sarah  Nyamvul a for the 
appreciation statement. Yes Clerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon Member s having no other business the House stands adjourned until today  in the 
afternoon.  
The House rose at 9:17 am. 
 
  
            