November 23, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          143 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 23rd Nove mber , 2016  
The House met at 2.40pm. 
(Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs .) Serah Nyamvula ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Have your seats Hon members. 
Clerk. 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon Members I have three communica tions from different departments and the f irst 
communication is from the Committee of Fisheries, I was expecting the Chair to be here to 
expand on this . 
Tomorrow Hon Governor Ali Hassan Joho and the Committee Fisheries and the 
Department of F isheries will be launching a boat at the old po rt Mji wa Kale from 8 o’clock , you 
are all welcome . 
Another communicat ion is for Friday this is from Department of Youth Gender and 
Sports dear Hon Members  invitation for  the official launch of 16 days of activism . 
The cons titution 2010 , Section 53 , 54, 55 and 56 aims to provide for  an ……. November 
25th every year stands as the introduction day of the elimination of violence against women as set 
by the United Nations since the year 2000.  
This day aims to  raise awareness of vi olence against women ; for instance rape and 
domestic violence.  
In view of this and as a way of sanitizing the society on the infringement of the right of 
wom en the department has formed a Committee that will focus on setting up programs that will 
counter the  level of abuse against girls and women.  
The theme of the year 2016, “Raise Man to end violence against women and girls”.    
It is therefore in this regard that we invite you to th e launch of the 2015/2016 at 8: 00am 
at Best Western  Hotel, Nyali Bridge.  
Looking forward to your cooperation.  
Joseph  Kamau   
Acting for Chief Officer.  
(End of Communication)  
November 23, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          143 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page 2 In addition to that Hon Members the following week the department with the staff will be 
going round to the six Sub Counties and a very quick touch on that is that after the launch.  
The launch will be at 7:30 am to 10:00 am, then from 10:00 am to 12:30 pm, the 
universities and colleges will still going back to this university talk but on 28th will be N yali sub 
County . 
 29th Kisauni Sub County at Mwakirunge, Wednesday 30th November from 9:00am to 
12:00 noon will be at Likoni Sub County, Kenya Ferry Services will be hosting us.  
On Friday the 2nd December will be Jomvu Sub County Mikindani Hall Monday, the 5th 
December will be Changamwe Sub County Social Hall and on Tuesday 6th December wi ll be 
Mvita Sub County Mandazi area beside Coast General Hospital.  
Hon Members  this will be available at the Clerk’s office.  
The last communication, it’s for the 26th November 2016 ; the Inter -constituency soccer 
extravaganza hosted by Hon Ali Hassan Joho, Governor, at MTTI Sports ground from 3 .00pm.  
This is Saturday the 26th of November. Thank you  Hon Members. Clerk.  
PAPER  
Hon Patrick Simi nyu, Chair of Committee on Disaster Management.  
Hon Patrick Siminyu , Chair of Committee on Disaster Management. Yes Hon. Amur . 
Hon. Amur : Madam Speaker  am a Member of that Committee,  the report is ready but 
the Chairman was held in somewhere it hasn't been signed we ask for tomorrow afternoon  
please.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ):  So okay the report will be ready 
tomorrow 24th at 2:30 pm . Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
  Hon Patrick Simi nyu, Okay he is not here, his statement was on overflowing of  drainage 
in Tudo r , Clerk. 
(Matter deferred ) 
STATEMENT  
Before I call upon Hon Mary I just want to alert Hon Nasser Rashid I will g ive him 
opportunity to expand on the boat launch tomorrow  when we get there, yes Hon Mary . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Thank you Madam Speaker I was to bring a statement on  asbestos 
roofing of public prim ary schools but after some consultations i have made my mind that through 
request i urge this House to allow me so that i may turn  it to Motion, thank you Madam Speaker . 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Very well  Hon. Mary there is no 
time limit to it so when you are ready yo u bring it a s Notice of Motion , then Motion.  Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
Hon Karisa Nzai was to give us  a statement in shortage of water in Jomvu, Yes Hon 
Kibwana . 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Madam Speaker, i would like to stand for my 
collea gue (Inaudible… ) 
(Interruption ) 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Use the mic please .   
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : My neighbour from Jomvu Kuu told me to present this 
statement, Hon Speaker the issues of wate r in Jomvu Kuu ward .  
Hon Speaker the issue of water in Jomvu Kuu ward is very pathet ic; the ward being the 
largest in the whole constituency w e find that the wate r is a very necessary commodity . 
November 23, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          143 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page 3 At the moment the Jomvu Kuu people who voted Karisa Nzai are up in arms regarding 
the issue of water.  
Madam Speaker the Hon Member would like to  urge this Hon House that the Water 
Board should put into consideration the Jomvu Kuu plight so that at least the people get this 
necessary commodity  not only in Jomvu as p er such but also the Jomvu Kuu Constituency in 
general including Mikindani and also Miritini ward.  
Madam Speaker I think through this statement this Hon House will take it serious ly and 
put into consideration so that the people can have water , thank you Madam Speaker.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Thank you Hon Baya  this is a 
really weighty one so what I will say is I direct this statement to the Committee of Water and 
Natural Resources to look into it and I can see the Chair. 
Look into the issue  and report back to us next week same time Wednesday a t 2.30pm 
next week.  
Hon Kasa ngamba I have seen you stand ing. 
Hon Kasa ngamba : Madam Speaker I am the Chair of Water and Sanitation and we will 
give a report.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Thank you some things do pass us. 
Yes Hon Mwinga . 
Hon Mwinga : Madam Speaker I know you have made  a ruling but I  was just telling y ou 
so that the Chairman of Water who is going to  give the report should also look for the other 
Wards which have  the same problem especially also in my ward Mwakirunge . 
Madam Speaker we have the same problem of water so am  just telling you through your 
Chair that report should also include my Ward, thank you.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Now I would like to tak e this 
opportunity to give the Chairman of Fisheries  to just expand on the  boat launch tomo rrow.  
Hon Nasser  Rashid : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kesho saa tatu itakuwa tuna  launch 
tutakuwa boat…  
(Laughter ) 
Mheshimiwa  Spika protect me  tafadhali.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Hon Members , let the Chairman of 
Fisheries expound on the boat launch. This is very important, it i s about fish … 
(Laughter ) 
Hon Nasser  Rashid : Mheshimiwa Spika naomba wanachama  wa fisheries  na 
Mheshimiwa  wa sehemu  hiyo Mheshimiwa Amur Murfad tuweze kufika, tuweze kuhudhuria. 
Ahsante sana.  
(Loud consultations ) 
Hon. Amur: Mheshimiwa Spika point of correction .  
(Interruption ) 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Hold on Mheshimiw a Amur I 
haven’t said you speak . 
Hon.  Amur : Sorry Madam Speaker . 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Yes Hon Amur . 
Hon Amur:  I just wanted to correct the Chairman is not only telling me, it is for the 
Mombasa County MCAs all of them are i nvited not specifically Hon Amur and the committee 
but all MCAs of this Mombasa  County are invited. Thank you Madam . 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Hon Nasser yes . 
November 23, 2016                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          143 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Hon Nasser  Rashid : Mheshimiwa ni kweli  hapa amenirekebisha kidogo ni 
Waheshimiwa wote wanatakikana wafike lakini ni hus usan waheshimiwa wale ambao ni 
Wanachama  wa fisheries  wasikose plus MCA wa sehemu  hiyo. A hsante sana.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Yes Mheshimiwa  Mary I saw you 
standing, yes Hon Mary.  
Hon (Ms) Akinyi : Thank you Madam Speaker . Madam Speaker I have swallowed my 
words.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): So that was a clarification from the 
Chair of fisheries. Yes Hon Kasa ngamba ? 
Hon Kasa ngamba : Ahsante sana Bi Spika. Mimi  langu labda nilikuwa nataka kupitia 
kwako kumuuliza Mwenyekiti kwamba kesho tunazindua rasmi boti la uvuvi, je tunapaswa 
tujiandae vi pi, je tutakwenda kuvua sisi kama waheshimiwa ama tuje na matumbo yetu 
Mheshimiwa madam spi ka tupate kula samaki wale wa  kutoka bahari yetu ya Pwani  
Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Chairman you can respond . 
Hon Nasser  Rashid : Mheshimiwa Spika kitu ambacho hakiru husiwa  mwanachama  kuja 
ni kuja na G-string  pekee yake lakini Wanachama  wanaruhusiwa kuja rasmi  kama kwa function  
nyengine. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ): Thank you Hon Members, yes 
Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon Members this House stands adj ourned until tomorrow the 24th of the November at 
2.30pm. 
The H ouse rose at 2.59pm .  