March 1 3, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            14 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 13th March, 2019  
The House met at 9:25a.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members we may be seated. Yes Clerk ? 
STAT EMENTS  
FACILITATION OF MCAS FOR ATTENDANCE TO DEVOLUTION CONFER ENCE IN KIRINYAGA  
 There is  a  Statement, yes Hon. Faith?   
 Hon. Mwende: Mr. Speaker I am standing under Standing Order 41(c) if you can allow 
me? 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay, proceed.  
 Hon. Mwende:  Mr. Speaker I would like to know from Committee of Finance when  
they are  planning to pay the MCA’s for Devolution Conference  which they went last week. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you. Y es Chair or the Vice Chair any 
response?  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I think I have noted 
and I will take a note and I will make some follow ups . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes, are you sati sfied Hon. Faith?  

March 1 3, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            14 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Mwende:  Mr. Speaker  I am  not satisfied because at least he can give us the 
timeline when because we are supposed to leave with the facilitation money before we leave the 
County and we went without any penny...  
(Applause)  
 So we want  to know why will it last for this trend to happen in Mombasa County?   
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Faith . So Hon. Hamisi Musa 
the Vice Chair the House would like  to know the timeframe of when you are going to report 
back?  
 The Lead er of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I think this is an issue for all of 
us not for an individual Member , even I myself am in need of that money so with your due 
respect I will do all my level best so that I give you the result of this issue before n ext week. 
Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes what is it Chief Whip?  
 The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kulingana na 
maneno aliyoyaongea Naibu Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha ikiwa wale Executive  waliweza 
kupatiwa pe sa yao mbona sisi hatujapewa pesa yetu na ni vigezo gani viliweza kutumika?  
(Applause)  
 Kwa hivyo atakapoleta majibu pia anafaa atueleze ni vigezo gani vilitumika kulipa wale 
executive  na sisi tuweze kulipwa pesa hizi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ahsante.  
 The D eputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you I think the Vice Chair who is also the 
Leader of Majority has noted and as you said the Leader of Majority will need the response in a 
weeks’ time so make proper arrangement even if is to call the Members from the Ex ecutive to 
explain as to why the Executive staff were given their per  diems and the MCAs and the staff 
from the Assembly are yet to receive their monies up to today. Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Bwana Spika nafikiri uzi ni huo huo na ningependa kuzi di kufu atilia, jana 
nilizungumza kuhusu mikato ya NHIF na bado nazungumzia mikato mengine kama ile ambayo 
iko inapelekwa katika LAPFUND, LAPTRUST na zile pesa zetu ambazo ni hatima tukiwa 
tunatoka hapa za gratuity  tukipenda kujua kutoka kwa Kamati husika y a fedha kama mikato hii 
inapelekwa ama tutangoja siku zetu zitakapofika hapa miaka mitano tuanze kwenda mbio .... 
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : It is also noted so Hon. Leader of Majority when 
you respond the issues raised by Hon. Faith an d Hon. Renson Thoya. Yes Hon. Shomari?  
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . Swali 
langu bado linaelekea kwa Kamati ya Fedha ningependa kujua kwamba ni muda gani 
watachukua kuweza kutupatia yale mapeni yetu ya kuweza kuw alipa wale wafany i kazi wetu wa 
ofisi zetu za W odi kwa sababu…  
(Interruption)  
March 1 3, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            14 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. S homari from your S tatement you are out 
of order I can say sorry to say so ; even though it is their righ t our staffs are yet to be paid  I 
understand that the rents are yet to be paid so we will ask the Majority Leader who is also the 
Vice Chair of Finance to make a proper follow up , it seems that monies are yet to be brought to 
the Assembly from the Executive from the  way things are. The Le ader of Majority please make 
proper follow up and bring back a report as you said by next week Tuesday. Yes Clerk?  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE CO UNTY ASSEMBLY  
 Yes Hon. Leader of Majority?  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Spea ker for giving me this 
opportunity . I would like to move the following Procedural Motion on Adj ournment of the 
County Assembly.  Mr. Speaker Sir;   
THAT Pursuant to Standing Order 30 (1) of the County Assembly Standing Orders this 
House resolves to adjourn t oday Wednesday 13th March, 2019 to attend Public 
Participation on the Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy Paper (CFSP) at Tononoka Social 
Hall and I would like Hon. Amur to second the Motion.  
   Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
(Hon. Murfad Amur bowed ) 
(Silence ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : I propose that the Motion by  Hon. Hamis i Musa , 
the Leader of  Majority be discussed in this House. Y es Leader of Majority, what is the urgency 
of the House to adjourn?  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika  kama t unajua sheria ni kwamba 
County Fiscal Strategy Paper  ilitoka kutoka daraja la kwanza  mpaka leo ndio daraja l a mwisho 
ambayo lazima tuirudishe kwa wananchi waone kwamba yale walio yatekeleza ndio yali yoko 
katika ile karatasi kwa sababu tayari ishafika ule m da tarehe  28 na sisi tumepewa siku 14  ili 
tuweze kuipitisha . Kwa hivyo tusipoweza kuipitisha leo ama kwenda kufanya Public 
Participation  tena tutakuwa kinyume cha sheria, hivyo basi ningeomba B unge ili leo tua hirishe 
kikao  kwa kipindi cha asubuhi ili tuend e tukawapatie wananchi fursa yao ya kuangalia kwa fursa 
yao ya mwisho sababu hio ndio fursa yao ya mwisho na sisi twende tukathibitishe kwamba yale 
ambayo yali yomo ndio vile pia wananchi waliona na yako sawa . Kwa hivyo ningeomba Bwana 
Spika hichi ni kikao muhimu na pia ningeomba hususan  wale Wanachama  wa Kamati ya Fedha  
wote wasikose tuweko pale katika ile shughuli. Ahsante  Bwana Sp ika. 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Does it need all the Assembly Members or just 
the Finance Committee M embers?  
 The Lead er of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana  Spika si vibaya hata Wanachama  wote 
wakiwepo lakini ingekuwa muhimu lazima Kamati ya Fedha  wawepo wenyewe pia . 
March 1 3, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            14 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Hata Wanachama  wengine  marafiki wa Kamati ya Fedha  ni haki yao kuwepo , kwa hivyo 
hatujasema kwamba tumebagu a hivyo basi  ningewaomba Wanachama  wale wote watakaoweza 
wangeweza kufika na tukaona tumepitisha hino  stakabadhi. A hsante Bwana Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Kibwana Swaleh ? 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker . Hon Speaker i f he is going to say th at 
we adjourn only for certain Members ... that the other Members will be at the Assembly I think 
we are not unfair , it is a ruling mean ing I do not want to judge your ruling but I think Hon. 
Speaker we cannot adjourn  only for t he Members t o go but the rest of the other Members to be at 
the Assembly ; adjournment cover everybody .  
 Mr. Speaker the other thing I think this  the adjournment thing to me it  is not all that 
crucial because we have the staff who can go through this Public Pa rticipation , it does no t mean 
it requires that the Members should be there . Mr. Speaker I think the people who are capable of 
handling this issue should be given on their own opinion because the participant s or the people 
who are attending this Publ ic Participation are going to give their views and if there  is any 
memorandum so I  think at this j uncture  Hon. Speaker we have a lot of business in this Assembly 
so I think we should co ntinue going through with this Assembly rather than adjourning the  
House . Mr Speaker thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes. Hon . Bernard Ogutu.  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia nina  hisia  kama hio ya Kibwana manake hata 
leo tukiongea ukiulizwa nini ik o ndani ya hio Fiscal Strategy Paper huwez i kujieleza pale 
utaenda kwa wananchi utaulizwa maswali wale wajuzi  watakuwa pale wewe ni mtu wa 
wananchi watataka pengine wewe ujibu pengine hujui chochote , alafu pia vile mambo 
yanaendeshwa kwa hii Bunge  tunashanga a hizi vitu ni vitu zinatakikana tuelezwe  tujue mapema 
manake ni vitu ambazo zina gusa watu wetu mashinani . Kwa hivyo mimi naona haikuwa na 
umuhimu kwetu sisi ndio maana tumeambiwa kuchelewa  kuwa tuna hio Public Participation , 
kwa hivyo sisi tuna mambo muhimu ambayo tu nataka tuendeleze kwa  Bunge  tuwe kwa Bunge  
tuendeleze mambo haya Mheshimiwa Spika .  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon Faith Mwende.  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama na ghad habu nyingi sana kuona vile 
mambo  yanavyoendelezwa katika Bunge  hili ama Kaunti yetu ya Mombas a. Mheshimiwa Spika 
naamini ya kwamba  hii ilikuwa ni wajibu w etu wa oversight na taarifa  tumepewa jana jioni wale 
watu wetu labda hatukuwa tumewatayarisha . Mheshimiwa Spika hii Fiscal Strategy  Paper  
hatujaielewa kindani ni nini inasema na nikienda pale yule mwananchi anataka hivyo vitu vyote 
viwe viko kwa akili yaani viko kwa my finger tips . Kwa hivyo  naona kwangu ni jambo limeenda 
haraka sana na  ni tusome kuanzia saa hii kama ni oversight  tuifanye kikamilifu na vile 
inavyotakikana Mheshimiwa Spika siku 14 wakati ulileta hoja na tukaikataa kuja hapa kwa 
sababu ikasemekana ni ya Executive .  
 Sisi kama  Bunge  tunge anza mikakati kutokea hapo tukiongoz wa na Kamati ya Fedha 
kutuelekeza ni vipi na tulikuwa tumetoa maoni tukasema kama Wabunge  tutafanya mikutano 
yetu kule mashinani kwa vile sasa hivi Mheshimiwa Spika saa zile nimepata ujumbe jana usiku 
ningepata wakati ama na saa ngapi ya  kuambia watu wangu wa Kipevu wafike Tononoka?  
March 1 3, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            14 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Mheshimiwa Spika Bunge hili lilibaini ya kwamba watu w engine kama Wodi yangu 
mtaa wa Maporomoko kupata hata mia moja ya nauli ya kufika hapa haiwezekani labda ya 
kutafuta chakula nitaangalia nitafika Tononoka na labda mtu anasi kia kukunwa yafaa niseme 
yaliyopo moyoni kwa sababu munalipa ushuru. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hivyo mimi naona hiyo 
mipangilio haijafanyika vile inafaa kufanyika na inafaa tubadilike kuanzia leo kuenda mbele, 
ahsante sana . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chief Whip, Hon. Charles Juma 
Kitula.  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mw enyekiti  mimi ni mmoja wapo wa 
Wanakamati katika Kamati ya Mipangilio ya kazi za Bunge kwa almaarufu House Business  na 
nakumbuka Mwenyekiti katika Kama ti hio wakati huo aliweza kutuhakikishia ya kwamba baada 
ya Executive  kufanya Public Participation  sisi kama Wabunge tutaweza kuenda mashinani na 
katika sehemu ambazo zilikuwa Sub-County  level  lakini tulikubaliana, ilikuwa tuende kiwango 
cha Wodi  lakini kwa saba bu ya michakato  ya kifedha labda tw ende katika kiwango cha Sub-
County  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Lakini la kushangaza na ningependa ikiwa Bunge hili ni 
Bung e la sheria na ni Bunge la haki  tuzungumzeni haki na usawa. Je wanakamati wa Fedha 
mshapitia kweli hii nakal a yote? Leo m naenda ambia nini wananchi?  
(Applause)  
 Hilo ndilo sw ali, isiwe hii kitu imet oka kumbe kwa mtu mmoja mw ende kwa wananchi 
jamani itakua hatujawatendea haki wananchi wetu tusemeni ukwe li wanakamati wa Fedha 
amkeni m zungumze, je Fiscal Stra tegy Paper  mmepitishiwa kama Wanachama  wa Kam ati hio  
au mmefanya kuletewa kama vile sisi tumepatiwa jan a na ujumbe mfupi tumepata jana .  
 Mimi si Mwanakamati  Mhes himiwa Mwenyekiti lakini wacha Wanakamati wasimame 
waseme mbele ya Bunge hili na wawe katika rek odi za Bunge kama kweli walivyokula kiapo na 
walipitia katika Kamati yao hii na leo wana ruhusa  kwenda kwa wananchi kuwazungumzia 
wananchi kuwazungumzia s uala hili Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Ahsante Sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Bwana Mwenyekiti nataka kuchukua nafasi hii kwamba tunao wakati 
kwa saa hizi kurekebisha mienendo ya Jumba hili , ule wakati wa kufanya kuletewa jitabu liko na 
kama kurasa 200 na unaambiwa usome kwa saa moja mimi mwenyewe sijajua ba do naendelea 
kusoma naambiwa County Fiscal Strategy Paper  vitu kama hizo sijui hio ni nini? Mbali na mimi 
kupelekwa kurasa kwa kurasa ama se ntensi kwa sentensi ikiwa mimi Mwakilishi wa Wodi ya 
Miki ndani sina ufahamu wa hii  yule mwananchi wa kawaida ali oko kule mashinani ataelewa 
vipi?  
 Na nataka leo niambiwe wale wananchi ambao nawawakilisha wa Mikindani  ni 
wangapi watakuwa pale Tononoka kupeana maoni yao na ndio hii mara nyingi watu 
wanapungukiwa na maoni kwa sababu tuna ngojea Kaunti iweze kufanya kazi kumb e wananchi 
hawakupeana maoni tukawa tunasema ikiwa hamu wezi kuenda Wodi kwa Wodi jar ibuni 
kiwango cha Sub-County  twende kule kwa sababu tunajua  hali ya uchochole wa watu wetu.  
March 1 3, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            14 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  Wakati wa kulazimishana, wakati wa kufanya vitu ndivyo sivyo hakuna tena katika 
Jumba hili let us get it right , thank you . 
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Honorable Members I will not let the mover to 
respond but the Chair has ca ught your concerns but you have to put in mind the CFSP, County 
Fiscal Strategy Paper has timelines but I will ask the Clerk of the Assembly to consult  further 
and see if we can let the timeline pass by tomorrow because tomorrow it is the deadline, the 14 
days lapse tomorrow but I will ask the Clerk to consult  with Senate and bring back a response 
when we s it in our afternoon sitting. If it will be possible then we shall move to the Sub -County 
level to consult  our people and the Honourable Members to be taken through this document for 
you to understand before we go back to the Sub -County level but in the mea ntime we are not 
going to put a question on this Motion or declare that we are not going to pass the CFSP 
tomorrow . But I have said we will do consultations with the Clerks and whatever that is possible 
I will communicate to you in the afterno on sitting.  Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
(Applause)  
(Interruption ) 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  ningetaka  kupata  muongozo  
kutoka  kwako maana  nina habari  kwamba  wananchi  waliweza  kufahamishwa  kupitia  vyombo  
vya habari, kupitia  gazeti  kwamba  hafla hii itafanyika  sasa sijapata  kuelewa  nahitaji  muongozo  
wako  kuhusiana  na hafla  ya leo? 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Come again?  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Nimesema  imeweza  kutangazwa  katika  vyombo vya 
habari  kuwa  hafla  hiyo itafanyika  leo na ikaweza  kuwekwa  katika  gazeti  kwamba  itafanyika  leo, 
public participation  sasa sijaelewa  mwongozo  wako  kama  itaiendelea au la?  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The CFSP; there was a notice in one of the 
newspapers if is two or three I do  not know. But I think there is a notice in one of the newspapers 
that there is a CFSP today at Tononoka and I remember saying that I am consulting with the 
Clerk if possible we might go to the Sub County level  if will be possible after consulting. Yes, in 
the afternoon sitting I will convey the message if the Assembly wil l be at liberty not to pass the 
CFSP tomorrow or the time lines will  be no option other than to pass the CFSP tomorrow . 
 But in the meantime let  us stay until the afternoon sitting after consultation s then I will 
make our ruling on the CFSP or on what is transpirin g today but we cannot stop what is going  on  
today. So the Members of Finance you are at liberty to go to Tononok a and listen to the people’s 
views and in the afternoon you can share what you had fr om Tononoka with the Hon . Members. 
Yes Clerk?  
(Interruption ) 
 Yes Hon. Renson?  
 Hon. Thoya:  I think this is a House of rules and regulation and I have a feeling that we 
are not in a position to see a lot because we are controlled by the rules.   
March 1 3, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            14 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  It is prudent for you to call for a Kam ukunji  on this rel ated matter because yes there is an 
indication that we must pass that CF SP. I do not know the CFS P, I do not know what you call it! 
But again is very sad for me to pass something that I do  not know , please Mr. Speaker we need 
atleast a Kam ukunji atleast you inform  me what I am going to pass ! Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Renson  Thoya . As you know 
this is a House of rules and procedures and as the Chair I cannot plan a Kam ukunji in this 
Honourable  House so as I have said we will consult and see if our neighbo uring Counties are 
passing their CPSP tomorrow or if there  is a way we can break the time line so that we go 
through the CFSP and go back to the Wanjikus  and get their views on what is in the CFSP.  But 
you have to know that in the CFSP the se are just budget ceilings for departments.  Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 There being no other business the House stands adjourned until Wednesday 13th March , 
2019 at 2:30p .m. 
The House rose at  9:25a.m  
 