October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY   
HANSARD REPORT  
Tues day, 17th October, 2017  
The House met at 2:39p .m. 
 (Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS   
 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  you may sit. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
 Yes Hon.  Mwaka move the Motion ?  
(Hon.  (Ms.) Zahoro move d Motion)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERIM STANDING ORDERS  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Zahoro:  
 THAT AWARE that the current Standing O rders are transitionary in nature;  
 FURTHER AWARE that, from usage in the First Assembly , some gaps ha ve been 
discovered which need to be plugged and some issues have emerged which need to be 
resolved;  
 CONCERNED THAT if the existing gaps are left unattended they may impede on 
the proper functioning of the County Assembly ; 
 I urge this Assembly  to RESOLVE  that: 
 The County Assembly  Committee  on Appointments/Rules and Procedure to 
undertake ; 
 i. As a matter of urgency amend pertaining to part xxi of the Interim S tanding orders 
and the second schedule of the standing order to realign the same to the executiv e 
departments.  
 ii. In the long term to undertake  a comprehensive review of the S tanding orders and 
recommend appropriate amendments for the approval by the Assembly . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you,  who will second?  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwa limu): I second.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you , Hon.  Members  I now propose the Motion  on 
proposal to amend the Standing orders as moved be considered . 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwaka?  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mwaka  Zahoro : Thank  you Mr. Speaker, according to S tanding order 52 
that talks about the Senate and here it is about the C ounty Assembly ; so that is something that 
this Assembly  should consider and again on S tanding order 152 (b) it talks about the 
Members hip of the B usiness Committee  whereby it says that not less  twenty one and not 
more than twenty nine . This simply mea ns that it is almost the W hole H ouse and again 
pursuant to S tanding order 234 I request the Rules and P rocedures Committee  to do the same 
concern ing the issues that I raised.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy: Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika  nasimama mbele ya 
Nyumba hii kuunga mkono huu M swada ili kanuni zetu za Bunge  ziwe sawa , nafikiria 
ukipiti a hizi kanuni utapata kuna mambo mengi yanataka kurekebishwa . Kwa hio mi mi 
naunga mkono na kusema kuwa Kamati ya Rules and P rocedures iweze kufanya kwa haraka 
inavyowezekana ifanye marekebisho kusudi tuweze kufanya kazi zetu kwa vile 
inavyotakikana.  Ahsant e sana M heshimiwa Spika . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Honorable ? 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ): Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika , mimi 
nimesimama kumuunga mkono M heshimiwa ali eleta hoja hii . 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 Kwa kusema ukweli ni haki kwa Bunge  hili letu tuweze kurekebi sha kanuni zetu za 
Bunge  kwa sababu ndizo zin azo endesha shughuli za ndani ya Bunge  letu. Kama alivyosema 
mwenye kuleta hoja hi i na zingine nyingi ndani yake M heshimiwa Spika  kwa kweli hii 
ambayo tunaendel ea kuitumia yasikitisha kwa miaka mitano ya Bunge  lililopita mpaka hili 
ambalo tumeingia na tumeanza nal o bado tunatumia Interim S tanding orders . Iko haja ya sisi 
kuweza kurekebisha na kuja na Kanuni  zetu za Mombasa , wengine kwa mfano jirani zetu 
hapa Lamu  katika Kanuni za Bunge  zao upande wa mavazi waliba dilisha hakuna kuvaa 
makoti , nalo pia Bunge  letu lin aweza pitisha tutakapokuja na taratibu zetu tutakuwa ni wenye 
kujinaki kuwa katika Bunge  la pili tumeweza kuhakikisha wale W abunge  watakao kuja 
katika miaka ijayo pia watajua kuwa Bunge  la pili lilipoingi a liliweza kufanya kazi na kuwa 
Kanuni za Bunge zao  za kisawasawa.  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika  na naomba wenza ngu 
tushirikiane kuzisoma na  kuangalia pale ambapo patahitaj ika marekebisho tutaipeleka katika 
Kamati husika ili iweze kufanya marekebisho hay a. Ahsa nte M heshimiwa Spika . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Fadhili , yes Hon.  Salama?  
 Hon.  Ahmed Salama: Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika , mimi langu n i kuunga mkono 
kama alivyosema N aibu Spika  twatakikana sisi wenyewe tuwe tunajizatiti na tunajimudu , 
kwa hi o itakuwa jambo nzuri zaidi kama tutashirikiana na kupitisha hoja hii.  Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Salama , yes M ajority leader?  
 Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I would like to support the Motion  
especially under resolution number one it says as matter of urgency amend  pertaining to part 
xxi of the Interim Standing orders and the Second schedule of the S tanding order to realign 
the same to the executive departments . When we look at that word realign w ith the executive 
department, so Mr. Speaker it is a very good Motion  and I really support it so that we realign 
with the executive departments. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Chief Whip.  
 Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika , vile vile ningependa 
kumuunga mkono Mheshimiwa Zahoro kuileta hoja hii ;  hasa kipengee cha pili ina muhimu 
sana kwamba K amati husika iweze kupitia kitabu hichi ambacho kinatulinda katika Bunge  
hili  na baada e sheria watakazo pitisha tungepen da kama sisi Wabunge  tuweze ku kisoma sana 
kitabu hichi , maana K amati ndio yafanya mabadiliko lakini sisi W abunge  baadhi yetu 
tutaweza kupitia kitabu hichi itakuwa vigumu kuingia katika Bunge  hili na kuweza kukubali 
marekebisho ambayo yataletwa na Kamati pa si kuweza kuyapitia na kuweza kuyafahamu . 
Kwa hio ni jukumu letu kama Bunge  kuweza kusoma kit abu hichi ili yale m arekebisho 
Kamati itaweza kuifanya siku  tutaileta katika Bunge  hili tu sije leta mgogoro wa maneno.  
Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika .  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank You Hon.  Kitula.  Yes Hon.  Fatuma Mote?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  kunipa fursa hii.  Mimi 
pia nimesimama kumuunga mkono Mheshimiwa Mwaka kwa kuweza kuja na hoja kama hii 
iweze kufanywa haraka iwezekanav yo il i tuweze kubadilisha K anuni  za Bunge  na lazima 
tuweze kuipata na mapema ili tuweze kuipitia.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you so much.  Yes Hon.  Abrari?  
Hon.  Abrari Moham ed: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipa fursa hii. 
Mimi pia vile vile naunga mkono hoja yake hoja ilioletwa na Zahoro, Mwaka Zahoro . Sisi 
tunahitaji kuwa na Kanuni za Bunge  zetu kwa sababu kuna vitu vingi sana ambavyo sisi 
kwetu ni tofauti ambapo tunafaa sisi tuwe na Kanuni za Bunge z etu na ikiwezekana ingekuwa 
ni jambo la haraka s ana lifanyiwe kwa upesi ili ndio tuzisome tuzielewe. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank Hon.  Abrari. Yes Hon.  Ramla.  
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 Hon.  (Ms.) Ramla Omar : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi pia naunga mkono 
kuhusu hii hoja ya kubadilisha Kanuni za  Bunge  na natumai italeta, mimi nina  hakika italeta 
mabadiliko mazuri. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Ramla. Yes Hon.  Aran.  
Hon.  Oindo : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi pia nasimama kuunga hoja 
ilioletwa na Mheshimiwa Mwaka na ningep endekeza kwamba wajua W aheshimiwa ni watu 
wako na shughuli kwanza saa hii tunajua tunakula vitoa machozi na kupata wakati wa 
kusoma hii , ni ngumu sana.  Kwa hio ingerekebishwa tukienda  long tukue nayo , tukijificha 
mahali  angalau tuisome tukirudi tutakuwa t umeishika. Kwa hio u ko hapa na unajua unafanya 
nini, n ashukuru sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Kombe Nzai.  
Hon.  Nzai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker Sir to have given me this chance to air 
my views. I stand here to second the Motion, and it shows true that we are ready to realize 
and go h and in hand with the vision 203 5 for His Excellency the Governor. I can see we are 
really going in alignment with the vision of this House and we are ready to support your 
effort. So the Motion  has come at the right time and we are going to support it. Thank you 
very much.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Nzai. Yes Hon.  Kibwana.  
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon.  Speaker, mine is also to support the Motion  
that has been brought in this H ouse by our colleague. Hon.  Speaker I think this is the right 
time to do the realignment and other changes that we also go well with our culture. Mr. 
Speaker Mombasa should come up with Standing Orders that will guide them because we are 
coming from a diff erent Counties. Hon.  Speaker it is upon us as an Honorable  House as well 
as Hon.  Members  just to go and read th ese S tanding orders so that it comes to contribution 
changes we will be able to have a very healthy debate which will ma ke us to have very useful  
Standing orders in future. Mr. Speaker it’s upon us as Members  also to have bench marking 
so as to have consultation s with other Assemblies where we can borrow other useful 
amendments that also going to help us as Mombasa County. Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Kibwana. Yes Hon.  Nyiro.   
Hon.  Nyiro: Okay thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity ag ain. I think going 
through the Order paper  I see attached here a paper indicating the calendar events. I think the 
Committee ’s concern can use this short recess to have training somewhere, so that they can 
go through it. As we resume they will have a well -documented document; a s well the 
Members  as they go through it  they can also put down their recommendations where they can 
forward to the Committee  so that as they have a short training they can consider our 
recommendation s because it is a booklet that needs to be well detailed so that it can give us 
direction as we debate matters of importance of this County. So I really support  and really 
request that may be the concern s the  Committee  can use the time that we have a short recess 
that they can be organize d a short training for them with our input in terms of writing so as 
they sit there they can deliberate over them so that as the y come back we have a detailed  
paper which this House can go  through and accept. Thank you Mr. Speaker  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Nyiro. Yes Hon.  Ahmed Khamis.  
Hon.  Ahmed Khamis:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi nataka kumuunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa  Zahor o na vile vile kumuunga mkono Bwana Naibu wa Spika  kuhusiana na 
masuala ya mavazi maanake utaangalia sisi wengine hata siku ya harusi labda hatuja vaa suti 
hizi. Kwa hio namuunga mkono Bwana Naibu  Spika . Ahsante sana.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you. Yes Hon.  Mwaka.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi Mheshimiwa 
Mwaka ninamuunga mkono hoja ambao imetolewa na Mheshimiwa Mwaka Zahoro . 
Hii hoja naiomba iende kwa haraka tuichapishe kwa haraka ili  tuweze kuichambua 
ama kuikari ri wakati tuko , wakati tuko hali ya likizo. Ahsante.  
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon.  Samba . 
Hon.  Samba:  Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I am standing on the ground that I 
would like to support the amendments. Let the amendments so longer as they can make the 
business of the House run smoothly. I beg to support and bearing in mind I would also to put 
across or to request this Hon.  House that Mr. Speaker whenever we are going to come up 
with the last document,  let us have a pocket friendly S tanding order  like our constitution , this 
other one is too big for us to carry so when we are going to have amendments let ’s also have 
that into consideration. I beg to support.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon.  Samba. Yes Hon.  Amriya.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Amr iya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker having peruse d on 
the Standing orders, you see that it is really a customization from the National Assembly  
Standing orders during the last Assembly , so there is really need to customize this Standing 
orders in our favour  as Mombasa County Assembly  so that we can be able to effectively 
perform our mandate; for  instance when you can look at S tanding order like 52(2), yes when 
you look at some of these  Standing orders they are a bit not in our context . So I really prefer 
that I support fully and I am also saying that due to touch trends if we could have the 
amendments this week and may be before we break we can have the amendments so that we 
can go home and review the reviewed one. I think that will be in order. Tha nk you.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. .. 
Hon.  Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono 
hususan  Kanuni  ya 230 inayozungumzia maswala ya kukosekana katika vikao ; imetaja vikao 
vinane katika vikao vya Bunge  pasi ufafanu zi tukijua ya kwamba huwa kuna kipindi cha 
likizo katika Bunge . Kwa hio hili pia lingepaswa kuangaziwa na ibainike ya kwamba kama ni 
kipindi kabla ya kwenda likizo katika vikao vile ama ni ndani ya muda wa miaka mitano 
tukizingatia Bunge  kuu kwao wao ni ki pindi kabla kwenda likizo ndio wamekusudia vikao 
vinane , lakini kwetu kama Bunge  la Kaunti ni mzigo kuekewa vikao vinane ndani ya miaka 
mitano hilo ni swala linaweza tendeka na ikawa ni changamoto kwetu kupoteza viti vyetu 
kabla ya wakati mahsusi . Kwa hio naunga mkono marekebisho ya kanuni za Bunge  hili. 
Shukran Bwana Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Bwire.  Yes Hon.  Junior.  
Hon.  Kyaka : Ningelitaka kuunga mkono kwa sababu ningetaka kuunga mkono 
marekebisho  ambayo tunataka tufanye ili she ria h izi zifanane na Kaunti yet u. Najua katika 
Kaunti yetu ina  joto sana na ukitoka nyumbani ukiwa umevaa makoti  kama huna gari ukifika 
hapa umetota! Kwa hi o mambo mengine kulingana na K aunti vile zilivyo ni  vizuri kufanan a 
na sehemu unatoka. Ahsante sa na Mhesh imiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon.  Bwire . 
Hon.  Bwire:  I also ride in the same line with Hon.  Members  but Mr. Speaker I want 
also caution  the House that as far as we need to do some amendment we should also not 
dilute the amendments , we should not als o look so different from other C ounties or rather 
Hon.  Houses on the land ... 
(Applause ) 
With those few remarks I beg to support the amendments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. .. 
Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nimesimama hapa pia 
kuunga mkono ili tuweze kuwa na mabadiliko ambayo yatakuwa ni mabadiliko muafaka ya 
kuweza kutusaidia hapa Bunge ni tuweze kuendesha kazi zetu na utaratibu unaofaa na 
kulingana na upande wa mavazi .  
Kwa mava zi hiyo mimi siko napinga kwa sababu hili ni Bunge  na ukiwa ndani ya 
Bunge  nafikiri  hata wenyewe ambao tuko hapa ndani, kuna wengine wanatamani hata wawe 
na makoti matatu, nafikiri unaonekana ukiwa  nadhifu sana Mheshimiwa ukiwa na suti na 
tai... 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 (Applause ) 
Ufahamu kofia yako sasa ni tofauti, wakati ulipojikubali na ukasema unataka uwe 
Mheshimiwa, ishi kama Mheshimiwa ndio upate hadhi hio, u sianze kuleta masha rti ya Bob 
Marley hapa ndani ya Nyumba kwa kuwa unataka uachiliwe ... 
(Applause)  
I will be there to f ight for that because am one of the Members  who am proud to be an 
Honorable  woman, and I can dress myself as an Honorable  woman , kwa hio  hata nyinyi  
Waheshimiwa ingelikuwa ni wajibu  wangu nifunge tai  ningeifunga ile tai.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy?  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker the M ember is using two languages ; ask her to 
speak either English or Swahili. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Hon.  Hatimy, under which Standing Order,  you 
are standing on a point of Order u nder which Standing Order.  
Hon.   Mohamed Hatimy:  I think Mr. Speaker you can go through your Standing 
Order, it is one language and not two language s... 
(Laughter)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes continue Hon.  Mumba.  
Hon.  (Mrs.)  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunikinga vilivyo maana  
mimi naamin i niko na Spika  wa nguvu, maana yake a meelewa kuwa kweli nashambulia 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu wanaume ndio wanaona waanze kunipinga hapa, lakini 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy nafikiri utaendelea kuvaa suti na tai, maana yake si si tutaendelea 
kuunga mkono suti na tai ndani ya Nyumba hii, na ikiwezekana hata tai mbili pia 
zikiongezwa tutashukuru. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Fahad.  
Hon.  Fahad  Abdallah : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , ningependa kumu unga 
mkono Mheshimiwa Mwaka na pia kuunga mkono ndugu wawili walio tangulia ; ndugu 
Fadhili na Mheshimiwa Junior. Mheshimiwa Waswahili  walisema tukisem a imenona 
hatukusema ichinjwe. Kwa hio hatuombi  kuvaa nguo za Bob Marley wala kuvaa kama 
Mheshimiwa Sonko l akini ni kama ambae utoke hapa Mombasa useme unakwenda baharini 
ukapigwe na vitamin D  ati ukajianike kwenye j ua. Unajua kuna vitu v yengine Mheshimiwa 
utaonekana kama mwenda  wazimu, kwa hio kwa sababu ya joto hili liko hapa Mombasa 
tungeomba turu husiwe kuva a rasmi  lakini sio masuti, haya masuti ya kila siku Mheshimiwa 
na jua hili, kule mashinani  pia unajua ukivaa suti unajua unaonekana mwenda  wazimu, 
tukubalianeni kweli. K wa hio tungeomba tuvae shati  na suruali na kama italazimu  basi na tai, 
lakini hizi suti  za wiki nzima Mheshimiwa tunaomba muzizingatie na mutuonee huruma. 
Nyumba ni sheria si mavazi jamani. .. 
(Applause)  
Na suti kisheria inavyotakikana yataka uwe una mamilioni mfukoni mwanangu, sio 
umevaa suti na mfukoni hauna kitu. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Leila. Hon.  Bwire, were you st anding on a 
point of order or?  Sorry , were you on a point of order or, okay . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Nyache : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , pia mimi kwa upande wangu 
naunga mkono hoja iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Mwaka Zahor o, ningependa tushirikian e na 
wenzangu hapa tuweze kusoma hi zi Kanuni za Bunge na tuangalie  ni vipengele gani 
ambavyo vina weza kubadilishwa, vibadilishwe haraka maana yake ndio mwanzo tumeanza 
tuweze kuitekeleza na inaonekana hivyo vi pengele vinaweza kuleta natija  katika K aunti yetu . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Faith?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I beg to oppose the amendment of 
this Motion , because according to the Standing Order th ere are some which we don’t abide 
with them, like Standing Order ... 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 I beg to oppose the Motion  because we don’t adhere with most of the Standing Orders 
which we have, for example Standing Order 185 about Committee  on A ppointment. .. 
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speak er (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry are you opposing or proposing?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface : Am opposing.   
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : You are opposing the Motion  to amend.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface : ...Because  we can’t  have the amendment and yet some we 
don’t  abide with them;  for example is Standing Order 185 about Committee  on A ppointment.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Aran . 
Hon.  Oindo : Mr. Speaker sir, I think you raised the question, and you said as ma ny as 
of the same opinion supporting say ayes and we said a yes all of us, nobody said n ay, so I beg 
to understand what is happening, why is she opposing now and we have passed that stage, 
unless am not in order Mr. Speaker sir, we are still learning.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Nzai are you on  a point of order?  
Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I stand as I have said earlier to support the 
Motion , and beca use the whole House have agreed.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : What’s your point of order?  
Hon.  Nzai : Is a point of order according to Hon.  Faith which...  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Under which Standing order?  
Hon.  Nzai : Under S tanding order 185  of the  Committee  on A ppointment as she was 
putting it, because all Honorables  have decided to amend this booklet and we have agreed.  I 
think there is no point of again saying we are opposing the amendment because at first we 
have accepted to amend the whole book, it means even order 185 we are going to look on it, 
so there is no point of saying that we are opposing part of this book, we’ve decided and 
agreed to do an overall amendment of this book and we have agreed, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members , I just want to remind you, point of order 
Standing order number 79 sub -section (1) stating very clear, any M ember may raise a poi nt of 
order at any time during the speech of another Member stating that the Member rises on a 
point of order and that the Member shall be required to indicate the Standing Order upon 
which the point of order is based. So if you are making any point of ord er you have to 
indicate the Standing Order.  
Yes Hon.  Ali Sharif?  
Hon.  Ali Sharif:  Ahsante Bwana Spika  kwa kunipa fursa hii kuchangia, mimi 
nimes imama mbele yenu hapa, napinga M swada huu ulioletwa na  Mheshimiwa Mwaka 
Zahoro  na nina  sababu muafaka. Bwana Spika toka tupate Kanuni za Bunge  hizi sasa hivi ni 
miezi miwili n a hatuja pata mda wa kukichambua kitabu hichi, kukielewa , kukifahamu . Kwa 
hio naomba utupe  mda mda tukichambue mpaka Januar i ndio tuweze kurekebisha kitabu 
hichi. A hsante sana.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : Yes Hon. .. 
Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Spika , naunga mkono hoja ilioletwa na Mheshimiwa 
Mwaka Zahoro.  Kitu ambacho nina sema ile Kamati ambayo inajukumika na mabadiliko 
haya iweze  kuangalia zile lugha zetu mbili ambazo ni za hapa Bunge ni, nafikir i kitabu hiki 
kime weza kuandikwa katika lugha ya kiingereza, kimeandikwa katika lugha ya kiingereza 
itakuwa jambo muafaka wakati inatekeleza hiyo iangazie lugha ya Kiswa hili ili iwe katika 
lugha mbili; ya Kiswahili na kizungu  ili ambaye haelewi vizuri, maa na yake naona pia hii 
mambo ya kupinga ya weza kuwa ni lugha  na  ki zungu si chetu kilikuja na meli. T uangazie 
lugha yetu ya kitaifa, isije tukakorogana hapa maana yake naona kuna lugha za kiwakili mara 
ni cap wala ni nini.  Kwa hio m unatukanganya zaidi , nasema hivyo kwamba nawakil isha wale 
ambao hawa kuenda shule lakini nafikiri tuheshimu nchi hii inatukuza Kiswahili lakini ni  
nione  wale ambao wanapinga wanasema nini.  
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 Mimi sisemi niko upande huo lakini nafikiri zaidi sana hiki ni Kiingereza, 
kikiandikwa kwa K iswahili tukielewe vizuri zaidi ili  tuseme alhamdulil lahi hiki Kizungu 
kinatukera wengineo hapa. Hivyo basi  wakati mnakuja na marekebisho hayo muangalie, 
nimesikia kuna pocket friendly  mimi ninasema nataka muniletee ya Kiswahili, sawa sawa, 
ahsanteni. Hata  hivyo  nimeunga mkono.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes Hon.  Hatimy, are you on a 
point of order?  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Am standing on a point of order Mr. Speaker, but I just 
want to stand on a point of information . It is that I want the  Members  if they do have the ... 
what we call the Standing Order they can check Standing order 52 which state that, despite 
paragraph (1), the Speaker may, in exce ptional circumstances, allow a S enator to move an 
amendment to a Motion  before the Senate at a ny time during consideration of that Motion . 
Mr. Speaker we are not in S enate here, this is an Assembly  and we need to change, so what 
we do is just we go for few Standing Orders so that we can have a proper St anding Order, 
then I think the l aw allows as t o make change s every ... or if we want quarterly or every year 
we can change it any time . So we must, the Committee  must sit and see what they can do 
because this Standing Order is an interim Standing Order Mr. Speaker, so we can change it 
and come up with a fresh one on what is right . Thank you.   
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy . Yes, Hon.  Rosemary  you have 
anything to contribute?  Sorry, yes . 
 Hon.  (Ms.)  Mukavi:  I support the Motion  brought by Hon.  Mwaka Zahor o Juma Mr. 
Speaker .  
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon.  Mary . 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Wafula:  Mheshimiwa Spika  nakushukuru kwa kunipa fursa hii na 
ningependa pia kumshukuru  Mheshimiwa Mwaka Zahoro  Juma kwa kuleta mada hino ya 
marekebisho am bapo mimi nina ipongeza na nina iunga mkono  kikamilifu maana ninashukuru 
kwa muda wa ke wa mwanzo kusoma na kupata hizo nyufa  ambazo  amependekeza tuweze 
kuziziba kwa  mapema maana tunajua tutakapoziziba mapema hino itatusaida hata tukisonga , 
tutasonga kwa pamoja. Ahsante.   
 Mr. Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mary. Yes, Hon.  Maimuna .  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Maimuna Salim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  nimesimama kuiunga 
mkono lakini masikitiko yangu makubwa ni kwamba watu wanaangalia kuhusu mambo na 
mavazi , mimi nafikiri kuna mambo mengi pale ambayo yanahitaji marekebisho na Kamati  
ikienda ikirekebisha tukae pamoja kama Whole House  tukubaliane na ndio ikija hapa sote 
tuzungumze kwa lugha moja. Wasiende wao peke yao wakirudi wakaileta kwa Bunge  tukawa 
sasa tumeanza kuweka t ofauti fulani. K wa hio maombi yangu ni kwamba wao waende 
wakakae lakini wakija na hayo marekebisho tukae pamoja kama Nyumba moja tuangalie na 
kile ambacho tutaweza kuchangia, tuchangie kama Nyumba moja ikija hapa sote 
tunazungumza kama lugha moja Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa hiyo  mimi ninaiunga mkono.   
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. I think that is part of the process  yeah, if am 
not wrong.  Yes, Hon.  Ali Shomari . 
Hon.  Ali Mohamed Shomari:  Bismillahi Rahmani Rahim , ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika  kwa kunipa nafasi h ii mimi ningependa kuunga  mkono mada y a Mheshimiwa Mwaka 
Zahoro . Tumejaribu kuichambua vizuri hi zi Kanuni za Bunge yetu tunai ona kwamba iko na 
matatizo, nikimuunga mkono Mheshimiwa Thoya kwa sababu hapa hata ukiangalia kwenye 
maombi unapata upande h uu yameandikwa vizuri Kizungu  na upande huu yameandikwa 
Kiswahili . 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 Kwa hio namuunga mkono Mheshimiwa Thoya tunapofanya mabadiliko ya hi zi 
Kanuni za Bunge  tuweze  pia kuziweka  na Kiswahili ili pia tuweze kuielewa zaidi. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon.  Ibrahim . 
Hon.  Omondi: Thank you very much for according me this particular opportunity so 
that I may also give out my views concerning this particular Motion . Actually , I want to 
thank the Hon.  Zahoro for this particular o ne because when you look  at actually what she has 
stated here, she is talking about we have to give the House Committee  time so that they may 
undertake a comprehensive review , meaning that there are going to read  maybe  line by line 
on this Standing Order a nd if they find out that there is something that is actually not going to 
make us work smoothly in this particular House, then they will again come back to us 
because they do not have that mandate of passing it par say, but they will come back to us 
again and we shall actually give them that go ahead so that  it can be amended. So actually,  I 
do not see anything wrong with amending this Standing Order where it is possible. Thank 
you very much .  
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon.  Lucy .  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Chireri:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi naunga mkono hoja hii 
kwa sababu Bunge  letu haliwezi  kuendelea Mheshimiwa Spika  mpaka tuwe na muongozo 
ambao utatuongoza katika Bunge  letu. Pili Mheshimiwa Spika  ni mapendekezo yangu ya 
kwamba ule  muongozo ama zile Standing Orders  zetu tuko na mitabu mikubwa  ambayo  hata 
kuibeba pia twachoka. Mheshimiwa Spika  baada ya kuwa tutembee na matabu haya 
ningependelea tutengenezewe kitabu kidogo kama hiki upande wa Kizungu na mwengine 
uwe wa Kiswahili . Naona tukiwa na muelekeo huo Mheshimiwa Spika  Bunge  letu litakuwa 
na Katiba nzuri ambayo ni ya Kaunti ambayo haitaisha itaendelea. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika . 
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon.  Mary Evelyn  Osongo . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Osongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to stand  
in front of  my colleagues here. I propose the Motion , I think the Motion  has been a very good 
Motion , we should be having some changes to give us the smooth running of Assembly  
because you get s ome are not complying  with th e way we should be, we just do  them and we 
do not understand them, we should take our time to read them and  understand even if we are 
making changes, we make clear changes which will unite the Assembly . Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Si r. 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Osongo. Yes, Hon.  Hamida . 
Hon.  (Ms.) H amida Ali:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to suppor t the 
Motion  by Hon.  Mwaka and I a m glad to be part of this Assembly  for changing for the Vision 
2035 for Mombasa  and I am happy to be a part  of it for our Standing Orders so that it will be 
friendly for  us in this Parliament. Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon.  Feddis . 
 Hon.  (Ms.)  Mbura: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , pia mimi ningependa pi a 
kuunga mkono Mheshimiwa Zahoro  kwamba lazima hi zi Kanuni za Bunge  zibadilishwe tena 
haraka iwezekanavyo. Na pia ningeunga mkono wenzangu waliosema kwamba hivi vitabu ni 
vikubwa na kweli ni vikubwa na Bwana Spika  nataka k ukuambia hizi Kanuni za Bunge  
zengine  zinabaki hapa kwa Bunge  kumaanisha hazisomwi . Kwa hio vitabu viweze kuwa 
vidogo tuweze kuenda navyo nyumbani na kuvisoma. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon.  Milka . 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I st and in support of Hon.  Mwaka’s 
proposal to amend the Standing Orders. It is a good guide on how we shall be conducting 
business in this House but am wondering as some Hon.  Members  have said that we be given 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 time to go an d read on our own. I want to impress  upon you Mr. Speaker if you can hold a 
workshop or an induction for us, so that we go through the Standing Orders one by one so 
that we can understand better and get to amend wh at really does not work for us…  
(Applause)  
 …the Chairman has just pointed one  bit of words which have been used in the 
Standing Order as Senate yet we are not a Senate, they are many other things that we might 
find in this Standing Order s that we do not r eally need to use. So  I think a workshop or even 
going for benchmarking somewh ere might give us more insight on the Stand ing Orders, I 
hear an Hon.  Member laughing somewhere but really that is practical , it is very nice, and 
things that are done practically are learnt better than theory, that Mr. Speaker I am 
experienced in  that are a having taught for so many years, I know  that practical things work 
better than theory…  
(Applause ) 
 At this early opportunity, the fas ter we do it, the better for us  so that we have 
smooth running businesses in this Hon.  House.  Two, Mr. Speaker I would want to support the 
other Hon.  Members ; Hon.  Samba and I think Hon.  Lucy who have proposed that we have a 
pocket friendly Standing Order booklet so that we can move around with it and be perusing 
through it at all times. Finally, I want to also support the d ress code that  was I think was 
brought about by our Deputy Speaker , Hon.  Members  are supposed to dress Honourably and 
our male Hon.  Members  look very smart , presentable in their suits…  
(Applause ) 
 This House is very friendly atmosphere wise, it is air cond itioned and it calls for 
even heavy dr essing, so our male Hon.  Members  please you look wonderful in your suits 
carry it on it is beautiful and we admire you … 
(Applause ) 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker .   
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Milka, Hon.  Members  I now call upon 
the mover Hon.  Mwaka Zahora to reply.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Mwaka Zahor o: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I would like to thank all the 
Members  that contributed to this Motion  and hopefully the Committee  in charge will act upon 
it. Thank you M r. Speaker a nd the rest of the H ouse.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Hon.  Members  I now put the question that 
this H ouse adopts the Motion  on proposal to amend the S tanding order in the same terms as 
moved .  
(Question put and a greed  to) 
Hon.  Members  now that th e Motion  has been passed, the first prayer is that the 
Committee  on Appointment, R ules and Procedure to as a matter of urgency amend Part 21 of 
the Standing order and S econd Schedule . I therefore direc t that the  Committee  avail a report  
on Thursday 19th October , 2017 at 2:30 p.m. Yes Clerk?  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
Yes Leader of Majority, Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani.  
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Hon.  Speaker, may I move a  
Procedural Motion , pursuant  to Standing order 24 (1) and 25(1), this Assembly  resolv e that 
the C ounty Assembly  calendar 2017 be adopted, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili to second.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili  Mwalimu) : I second Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Hon.  Members  I now propose  a question that 
this H ouse consider for  approval calendar 2017 of the C ounty Assembly  in the same terms as 
moved.   
(Question put and a greed  to) 
Yes Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani.  
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Hon.  Speaker , that pursuant  to Standing order 
24(1)  and 25(1) this Assembly  resolve as the County Assembly  calendar 2017 be adopted as 
follows, Tuesday 26th September , 2017 to Thursday , 19th October to have 16 sittings that is 
Tuesday afternoon, Wednesday morning and afternoon and Thursday afternoon . On the short 
recess Hon.  Speaker it will be on Friday 20th October , 2017 to Monday 13th November , 2017 
for 21 days.  Mr. Speaker on the short recess even the Committee s are being allowed to meet . 
On Tuesday 14th November , 2017 to Thursday 7th December there will  be a sixt een sitting s 
which  will be held on  Tuesday afternoon, Wednesday morning and afternoon and Thursday 
afternoon. Mr. Speaker on the  long recess I have considered S tanding order number 24(2) 
that the Assembly  is required to adjourn on the first Thurs day of December and re -open on 
the 2nd Tuesday of February and that’s why we have now allocated our first recess on the 
long recess to be on 8th December up to Monday 12th February , 2018 which should cover 
nine weeks . Thank you , Mr. Speaker sir.  
Mr. Speake r (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Fadhili.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili  Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker as 
we know we are here to represent ou r people in this Hon.  House,  I support this Motion  or this 
calendar for it  gives us time for us to  go back to our people who elected us, to represent them 
here in this Hon.  House . It has given us a number of days for us to be back to our  people, 
knowing that during these  sessions as it has been stipulated in this calendar, there are days 
that we are su pposed to be here in this Assembly  and there are also days we are here during 
the Committee  sittings . So I have seen we’ve got a short recess and a long recess and Mr. 
Speaker am sure during this recess timing we wi ll be able to interact with our electorat e very 
well and we have also talked with the Committee  Chairpersons  and we are in a process of 
making our work plans . Mr. Speaker this is  a request that during the long recess we might be 
having some Committee s going for bench marking we will also like your  office to consider 
our plans because it’s during this tim e that the Hon.  Members  might get time to know more 
about our neighbouring  Counties or the C ounties in Kenya on what they are doing or even as 
I said earlier when I was presenting my maiden speech, we have seen places like Kigali, it’s a 
very good place I think it will be a good time that you take some of the Hon.  Members  to be 
in Kigali...   
(Applause ) 
I, Mr. Speaker have been in Kigali so I won’t be in that trip but when time comes I 
might also esco rt the Members  who are going to Kigali . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Fadhili, yes Hon.  Amriya . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to support the calendar of 
the Assembly  which is in pursuant  to Standing  order 24(1) and I say that we are privileged to 
be guided by this Standing order , thank you so much.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Kitula.  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ; kwanza ningependa 
kuweza kuunga mkono hoja  iliyoweza kuletwa na Kiongozi wa W engi katika Bunge  letu la 
Mombasa, na mimi vile vile kama K iranja wa Bunge  hili imekuja kwa wakati wa ufao kabisa . 
Mheshimiwa Spika  kama unavyofahamu hivi sasa kama K iranja wa Bunge  hili na Kiranja 
vile vile wa chama cha ODM katika Bunge  hili ningependa kuwafahamisha W abunge  
walioweza kuchaguliwa na kuteuliwa na chama cha ODM kwamba maandamano na sasa 
tumepatiwa wakati mwafaka zaidi maana kutakuwa na tutaweza kuungana na wana nchi wetu 
kuanzia Jumatatu  na vile vile Jumatano  na Ijumaa , kwa hio sa a hii sitaona sababu ya 
Mheshimiwa yoyote kutoweza kuja katika maandamano haya . Vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika  
ningependa kuwaambia Wanakiti wote katika K amati mbali mbali kwamba tafadhalini kwa 
heshi ma na taadhima tusiweze kuweka K amati siku ya Jumatatu , Jumatano  na Ijumaa  
asubuhi . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Mwamwiri . 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 Hon.  Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  nasimama kuunga mkono hoja ya 
Kiongoz i wa W engi katika Bunge  hili, hoja ya kwenda likizo kwa Bunge  na likizo fupi na 
likizo ndefu ni nafasi muafaka kadhalika kwetu sisi kurudi mashinani kuandaa ofisi zetu 
ambazo mpaka sasa hazijaanza kutekelezeka tuko tuko tu ukikosekana nyumbani hakuna 
mahali kwa kupewa taarifa pia tuweze kupanga maofi si zetu kutekeleza majukumu  kwa 
usambamba . Naunga mkono hoja hii ya lik izo tuweze kutekeleza  majukumu  kwa wananchi , 
ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwamwiri , yes Hon.  Salama . 
Hon.  Omar : Mimi ningependa kuichuku a furs a hii kisawasawa ingawa Wanachama  
wanasema Ahmed Salama haonekani kwenye  maandamano na hii inatokana na kuwa pengine 
hana mbio  ama woteva  lakini nataka kusema ino badala wiki tisa ingewekwa wiki 10 na hino 
21 ingewekwa 30, ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Bwire.  
Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I also beg to support the Motion  
moved by L eader of Majority ; even though to me 21 days is not a short recess we have just 
come from the campaigns, we have been with the electorate and we expect that we should be 
here advocating for the issues affecting them down there, again having 21 days with nothing 
happening in terms of development down there it might be also a burden to us , for most of 
the elected ones otherwise I beg to support the Motion  thank you.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Mwaka  Zahor o. 
Hon.  (Ms.) Mwaka Zahor o: Thank you Mr. Speaker I would like to support the 
Motion  for Members  to go on recess  as this will enable Members  to concentrate on their 
works and it will also enable Members  to do p arty issues like the demonstrations which Hon.  
Chief Whip has put forth. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon.  Fatuma . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipa fursa hii , 
mimi ningependa kuunga mkono hoja ilioletwa na Mheshimiwa Mwidani. Mheshimiwa 
Spika  mimi nin a hakika kwamba kuna baadhi ya W aheshimiwa waliweza kuchaguliwa na 
hawajakwenda k wa wananchi na kusema ahsanteni. H ii ni nafasi ambayo itawasaidia  
Waheshimiwa kwa kuweza kwenda kwa wapigaji kura na kuwapa shukrani na vile vile kuna 
baadhi wamesema hawana ofisi , nafikiri wakati walipochaguliwa walikuwa hawana ofisi hata 
chini ya miembe walikuwa wanakwenda wakienda kuomba kura na vile mambo ya ofisi b ado 
wasubiri hivyo hivyo waende hata kama ni chini ya muembe waende wakizungumza na 
wananchi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika .  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Renson . 
Hon.  Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to support the Motion  by the Majority 
Leader ; to me I feel that you have the love of the electorate very much but as much as we 
love them we are not going kule mashinani kwenda kuwaangalia , we want to make this 
recess either short or long more sweet to the electorate hatuendi kuwaangalia  and it will b e so 
challenging this time because you are going to a recess saa hii huna sababu ameenda Bunge  
lakini saa hii wako nyumbani ukiamka wako hapo jioni wako hapo na hauna cha 
kuwaangalia Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ): Point of order Mr. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Point of order yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker am up on Standing Order 73 , 
the Hon.  Member is using two different languages. Thank you.   
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  I think you should use either Swahili or 
English . 
 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  naunga mkono hoja ya Kiongozi wa 
Walio W engi Bunge ni na nashukuru kwamba muna upendo na mapenzi na watu waliotupigia 
kura, ni vyema sana changamoto ambayo tuko nayo asubuhi wako pale, jioni wako pale na si 
kwamba kuwapenda ni kuwaangalia na macho zile changamoto zao tunatakikana 
kuziwajibikia. Ningependa kuifanya iwe tamu zaidi kwamba katika hii ambayo mnasema ni 
likizo ndogo au likizo fupi kuwe kuna mpango kidogo hata kama nimesikia kuna hii 
inayoitwa Induction  yaani ni kama masomo ya kwenda kukufahamisha ukienda hata kama 
siku tatu ukirudi wale waliokupig ia kura utawaangalia vizuri , hiyo ndio hoja imenifanya 
nisimame hapa si kwamba tunaenda tu ... 
(Applause)  
Kwa hio kama kutakuwa na siku tatu kidogo unatoka ukirudi wawaangalia vizuri hata 
ile ahsante iliozungumziwa pengine itakuwa ni ya mbuzi , ni ya ng'ombe bila mpangilio 
kabambe Mheshimiwa Spika  inaweza kuwa tukadhalilika na tukaaibika kule na nawaona  
wako hapa wananiunga mkono mia kwa mia , kule si kuzuri ... 
(Applause)  
...kule mashinani si kuzuri hatuendi kwenda kuwaangalia, tunaenda kuwawajibikia 
matatizo yanayowakumba na kuwawajibikia lazima uwe uko vizuri kimfuko ni kweli ama si 
kweli? Unaona ? Ahsan te Mheshimiwa Spika  nitaachia hapo.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Shebe . 
Hon.  Shebe Salim : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity ; I seem to be on the 
same frequency or channel with this issue together with the Leader of Majority but of  course 
Mr. Speaker I need to add some input if you may allow me . The recess is good for us but it  is 
also tricky but I appreciate if the Committee s will go to work during the recess to go and to 
give us the opportunity to speed up the process in terms of the procedure s. A lot has to be 
done and also the timing, the electorate, the challenge s down there Mr. Speaker are 
enormous , despite considering the challenges, the offices of the MCAs you know we are 
elected MCAs so if you speak or you talk about we have  to meet these people under the 
mango tree it is disrespectful to the elected MCAs ...  
(Applause)  
...So Mr. Speaker I would like the Hon.  Member to at least withdraw the statement ... 
(Applause)  
...because we are no t there Mr. Speaker to meet our people und er the tree, we are 
elected, we have our privileges, she was supposed at least to address on how are we going to 
meet our people. I would like to support the Leader of Majority about this issue of recess and 
I also appreciate and I beg to support the Motio n. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Kombe Nzai . 
Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker to have accorded me this opportunity to express 
myself. First and foremost I stand to support the Motion  which was aired by the Leader of 
Majority but also Mr. Speaker I stand to express myself on matters of concern in this House . 
Indeed we've been into elections, we've been into the campaigns , we used to sit under the 
trees, under the tables, under the roofs of whatever but now because we h ave attained this 
name I believe we are being guided by the constitution , both national and the County 
Government Ac t which states clearly that an e lected Member will have his or her office in the 
Wards well managed and paid by the County . So it is true we  are going on recess and most of 
our electorates don't know what is exactly happening in our County , I would kindly request 
using the same recess period and your Clerks you work it and make it possible so that we 
could have all what is due for us to be cal led Hon.  Members  in our W ards. Thank you very 
much.  
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Nzai, yes Hon.  Ramla . 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 Hon.  (Ms.)  Ramla Said:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipa hii nafasi , 
mimi naunga mkono kwa hii mambo ya  mapumziko  aliotoa  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi 
Bunge ni na sababu ya kuunga mkono hatuna wakati wa kuona watu wetu mashinani . Mimi 
binafsi nina ofisi yangu ya chama changu ambacho sijakiona hii ni wiki ya pili natamani 
kuendelezea miradi yetu na ninaunga mkono hii mapumziko  ili niweze kwenda kuhamasisha 
walemavu wenzangu mashinani , pia itanipa nafasi kuwa na viongozi walemavu ili tupate 
kujua mwelekeo wa kutengeneza sheria za kisawa sawa. Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Ramla, yes Hon.  Mary  
Hon.  (Ms. ) Wafula : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipa nafasi hii ; tena 
ninaunga mkono hoja  hii ya Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Walio W engi ambapo umesema 
kwamba katika kalenda hii tuweze kwenda kwa likizo fupi na likizo ndefu . Mimi 
ningependekeza haswa Wabunge  wana wake wa hili Jumba tumekuwa na shida hatujajipanga 
kwa upande wa kutengeneza timu yetu ya mpira wa netiboli . Kwa hio mimi ningependekeza 
kuwa wakati huu utakuwa ni wakati mwafaka kwetu kwa kuweza kujiunga pamoja tukaweze 
na sisi kuwajibika katika kuwakilis ha Kaunti yetu wakati wa michuano ya kikaunti. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwaka Bakari . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi naunga mkono 
hoja hii ambayo twende likizo ni sawa , hii likizo fupi na hii likizo ndefu la kini kama 
walivyosema wenzangu waliotangulia kweli tunarudi mashinani kwenda kuhudumia jamii na 
kama alivyosema Mheshimiwa Fatuma (Kushe) tukawaambie ahsante, ni kweli lakini 
Mheshimiwa Fatuma (Kushe) ni vibaya nataka kukosoa kusema kwamba tukaonane chini ya 
miti... 
(Applause)  
...ni uchungu sana  wakati nikitafuta kura nilikuwa ni Mwaka wa kawaida lakini saa 
hii ni Mheshimiwa Mwaka siwezi kwenda kukaa kwenye mti nikasema naongea na wananchi 
wangu na nilipokaa hapa nafikiri nilienda nikapatiwa fanicha ambazo kwamba nikaziweke 
kwa ofisi, ofisi ile inataka huduma, inataka kuhudumia wananchi na inataka wananchi wawe 
katika ofisi, hadhi yangu ya uheshimiwa iheshimike , sio chini ya mkanju ... 
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwaka, Hon.  Fatuma (K ushe) I request 
you withdraw your statement . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh:  Mheshimiwa Spika  sina b udi kukupinga lakini vile vile 
sidhani nimeongea makosa, siwezi kukupinga lakini sijazungumza makosa hiyo inamaanisha 
kama ofisi bado hatuwezi kuhudumia wananchi na ni wananchi walitupigia kura na ni 
wananchi ndio w alitufanya mpaka sisi tukaitwa W aheshimiwa. Kwa hi o nawaomba 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu kwa h eshima na taadhima msingoje m pewe maofisi  ndio muweze 
kuhudumia wananchi, s iwezi kukupinga Mheshimiwa Spika  naregele lea tena. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Fatuma can you kindly please withdraw your 
statement please, just withdraw your statement.           
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  naomba samahani 
japo k wa kinyonge Mheshimiwa  Spika... 
(Laughter ) 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Fatma Mote, Yes Hon.  Ibrahim . 
Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir again for giving m e this time again to try 
and sh ed light on this particular Motion . I am in agreement with the Majority Leader , i think 
this is in order for this particular calendar and i want to state three or four thi ngs in support of 
this calendar ; one is that we just left election the other day, and it's very important for us also 
to have time on the ground with ou r people to refresh our minds . 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14 Again i want t o say that particularly in the Wards where i represent if you don’t  
appear physically to the electorate maybe two or three days time then you will be told that 
you are lost and i think this will be high time t hat Hon. Members  will be able to meet 
physically with their electorate so that the vocabulary you are los t will be null and void in our 
Wards. I think that one happens to other Hon.  Members  in other Wards, number two a 
mourner cannot pretend to go to a home stead and w ail louder than the bereaved , on that point 
i want to emphasise that as the Members  elected particularly the elected Members  am 
emphasising that we have a responsibility , we have an obligation , we are answerable to the 
people who e lected us and therefore having this time that ’s the way it has been proposed by 
Hon.  Majority Leader it will enable us even to have some meetings , to have some workshops 
with our people so that they can also give us their views on what to do in his Hon.  House . 
Maybe some of the Motion s, some of the things that they feel that really touches them in their 
lives and that now when we come back i think we will be very hot with ideas , we will be 
pregnant with ideas so that now we can be able to deliver them in this partic ular House. 
Last Mr. Speaker as my fellow Hon.  Members  have said it will be high time , it will be 
humble opportunity for us to go out there and have some induction so that we can learn from 
our friends ; as you know a quarter , rather 90  per cent  of the elected Mem bers or the Members  
of this House apart from the elected Members , including the ones who were nominated 
actually it ’s our first time and we are still in a learning process that is true because i have 
come to learn that even i n this House you don't talk the w ay you talk outside there, you don't 
laugh the way you laugh outside there , you don't walk the way you walk outside there, here 
there  are proce dures which need to be followed . Now as we have that opportunity we shall be 
even expose ourselves to those good  ideas that still are not here and we can be able now to 
come and actually practise them in this House and even the Committee s. Some of us don't 
know how to conduct our Committee s, that is true that's also an opportunity for us to learn 
more from our friend s, as we com e back Mr. Speaker i think this House wil l be one of the 
most admirable Houses in this country . 
(Applause ) 
And even  if we would have ranking s Mombasa County Assembly  Second Assembly  
will be ranke d as number one, thank you Mr. S peaker sir ... 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  yes Hon.  Mwalimu . 
Hon.  Mwalimu Mgwisho : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika  nataka kuchukua  hii nafasi 
kumuunga mkono Kiongozi wa Wengi katika Bunge  kwa hii kalenda  ambayo twaiona hapa,  
nafikiri kila kitu hu wa kina sababu ndio utaona watu wengi wanaongea na maana ya kusema 
hivyo  ni kwamba sisi viongozi  tume pata hii sababu tutaweza kus ukuma katika ofisi yako ili 
Waheshimiwa wa weze kupata ofisi . Mheshimiwa Spika  kama ungepata nafasi ukatute mbelea 
katika majumba yetu basi utashangaa ut aona kweli ni muhimu Waheshimiwa ...kuna 
umuhimu kuwa na ma ofisi . Nashukuru  kwamba kuna likizo  ndefu na likizo fupi na huu ni 
wakati sisi viongozi ambao mara nyingi hu wa twapata nafasi kutoka majumbani kwetu tukija 
Bunge ni, kwa sababu wananchi hawataki kujua wanajazana nyumbani na ndio  pale tukaona 
kwamba ni muhimu Waheshimiwa wawe na ofisi . Naunga mkono wale wenzangu ambao 
wames ukuma hili jambo la ofisi na Mheshimiwa Spika  tunakuomba kupitia ofisi yako 
kwamba ulich ukulie umuhimu hili jambo la ofisi kwa sababu wa kati tukitafuta kura hu wa ni 
kitu tofauti tu naingia mlango baada ya mlango tukiomb a kura lakini kwa sasa twaitwa 
Waheshimiwa wale wananchi  badala  ya sisi kuwafuata  majumbani kwao wao ndio waja 
majumbani kwetu ili tuweze kuwatimizia haja zao . Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa  Spika naomba 
kupitia ofisi yako kwamba hizi siku ambazo tutakua kwa likizo tutie  juhudi kama uwezekano 
upo ili Waheshimiwa wa weza kuwa na ofisi, a hsante sana . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Hatimy. 
October 17, 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                          14  
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika  yangu ni machache ; baada ya 
yote tumezungumza nataka kukumbusha ofisi ya Katibu  kuwa Kanuni ya Bunge  5(2) lazima 
ifuatwe ama itakuwa yote hii ni kazi ya bure . Nafikiri m na ufahamu 5(2) ni kuwa lazima iwe 
gazetted  iwe tumehalalisha kuwa sisi tunaenda mapumziko  hizo tarehe, a hsante Mheshimiwa  
Spika . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Kitula . 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  kuongezea sauti yangu kwa 
hoja ambayo imeweza kutolewa na Kiongozi wa Wengi Bunge ni; vilevile  kulingana na kiti 
changu kama Kiranja wa Bunge  ningependa kuweza kuwafa hamisha Wabunge  wote kwa mba 
siku ya kesho Jumatano  kuanzia saa mbili asubuhi  pale Mwembe  Tayari katika eneo la Total 
kulingana na habari ambayo tumeweza kupatiwa na Naibu  kinara wa chama cha ODM 
Gavana  wetu Hassan Ali Joho ni kwamba ni jukumu letu kila kiong ozi ambae ame weza 
kuchaguliwa na chama aweze kuja na watu ishirini  ili tuweze kujumuika katika maandamano 
ya siku ya kesho, ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Kitula i think you are out of order, yes Hon.  
Samba . 
Hon.  Samba:  Yes Mr. Speaker sir thank you for giving me this opportunity to also 
contribute , i think it's very prudent , very healthy for  us to have a recess and i think it is going 
to give us ample time to familiarise ourselves with the administ rative offices , the department s 
because maybe some of the Hon. Members  don't know even where  the Youth, Gender and 
Sports offices are located  or where Ministry of Environment  is. I think this gives u s ample 
time to familiarise ourselves with their offices , number two Mr. Speaker i would wish to 
request when we ar e breaking there are some  issues that are still pending , this is also the right 
time to do follow ups like our medical cover  and the rest, our grants etc because as at now i  
think we should be driving , even if we are driving lo an cars but atleast we are tired of 
walking , we are walking as i f we are not Hon. Members  and then there are also things that 
our identity cards also should be in place in that when we are breaking we should have this . I 
think Mr. Speaker sir you will do  us good favour if you join hands with us for the follow ups 
and last but not least i would request if you are breaking we have a small Kamukunji  with you 
Mr. Speaker sir and Hon.  Members . We would like to have some parting shots so that when 
we come back we come ba ck more energetic and more very ready for  another season, thank 
you Mr. Speaker sir ... 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Samba, Hon.  Kitula i think the right 
way you should call for a Kamukunji  and do the other things necessary rather than bringing 
the issues here in the House whereby we are not deba ting on those issues, thank you . Hon.  
Members  i now put the question that this House adopts the Motion  on approval of the County 
Assembly  calendar , 2017 in the same terms as moved .  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
Yes Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon.  Members  the Assembly  stands adjourned until Wednesday 18th October , 2017 at 
9:00a.m. 
The House rose at 4:10p.m. 
 
 