December 1 3, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          153 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 13th December , 2016  
The House met at 2.35pm. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Members you may sit down. Yes C lerk. 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Good afternoon Members of the County Assembly , glad to meet you again. Members , 
i have received a resubmission of Mombasa  County Fiscal Strategic Paper . It rea ds ; 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) read.)  
MOMBA SA COUNTY FISCAL PLANNING PAPER  
 Reference is made to the County’s previous submission in a letter dated 1st December 
2016 . Please find attached a resubmission  of the Fiscal Strategy Paper 2016/17 which is 
according to the National Treasury which hind ered the County from incorporating the 
statement’s inputs.  
 Thank you for your continued support.  
 Hazel Koitaba  
 County Executive Committee Member  
(End of communication)  
 So the thing is this paper is committed to the Committee of Budget and Finance, yes 
 Clerk. 
MOTION  
Hon Kibwana Swaleh Baya . 
 Hon Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank You Hon Speaker , mine is to bring a Motion today ; 
report on contamina ted Dasani  minera l water that was handled by my Committee, Committee 
of health services.  
 Hon Speaker  my Committee embarked on an investigation on the issue of Dasani 
water , the report that i am going to read it contains  the membersh ip of the Committee Hon 
Speaker and also the issue of secretariat  Hon Speaker and also the content .  
 Hon Speaker the executive summary,  
1. Executive Summary  
 The Committee on Health Services is established under Mombasa County Assembly 
Standin g Order s.  The Mandate of the Committee as defined in the second schedule of the 
Interim Standing Orders , and it  is to deal on all matters rela ted to County Health Services, 
including, licensing and control of undertakings that sell of food to the Public.  
 Mr Speak er Sir, this is the Committee’s report on a fact finding mission occasioned 
by the ruling on 4th October, 2016  on the statement by Hon  Maimuna Salim Mwawasi, 
Leader of Minority, regarding contaminated Dasani mineral water. 
2.  Introduction  
 Mr Speaker Sir, Ho n. Members of the County Assembly, it is my humble pleasure to 
present to you the report of the Committee on Health Services on contaminated Dasani 
Mineral Water.   
 The matter arose when the Honourable House was served with Dasani bottle water 
which h ad visible foreign matters on 4th October, 201 6 during an afternoon plenary session.  
 Mr. Speaker t he Committee there after held eight meetings and also made one site visit 
to Coastal Bott lers Limited who produce and distribute  Dasani  water .   
December 1 3, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          153 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  Further, t he Committee also invited KEB s officials and CEO of Coastal Bottl ers as 
pursuant to Article 195 Sub Section 1 and 2 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.  
3. Observations / Findings  
 Mr Speaker Sir, the Committee on Health Services embarked on an investigation with 
a mis sion to establish whether the Dasani bottle d water  and entire water batch  which had 
foreign matters was fit for human consumption.   
 The following are Committees findings and observations: - 
3.1 The Committee on Health Services on 5th October, 2016 invited offic ers from    
Coastal Bottlers Limited to come and witness their contaminated product, i.e        
four bottles of Dasani Mineral Water.  That is (Annexture I)  Mr. Speaker Sir .  
 
3.2  On 13th October 2016 the committee invited CEO of Coastal Bottlers Ltd and     
  KEBS of ficers at the County Assembly, Committee R oom.  That is (Anne xture II)  
Mr. Speaker Sir  in the report.   
 
3.3  During the meeting, officials from Coastal Bottlers Limited agreed that four bottles  
of Dasani water were visible with foreign matters  in it. 
 
3.4  KEBS Officers also confirmed to the above and ruled that they were unfit for  human  
consumption.  
 
3.5 KEBS saw a complaint on twitter and immediately shut down the production of  
Dasani  and there  were no production s since then.  
 
3.6 Mr. Spea ker o n 17th October, 2016 the committee visited Coastal Bottlers Limited at 
behest  of CEO and were taken through step by step on the processing of Dasani  
mineral  water from initial stage till the final stage . That is (Annexure  III) Hon 
Speaker.  
 
3.7  Hon Speaker Members observed that the process steps for Dasani beverage is fully 
automated  with high state of technology  levels and storage facility are of high 
standards . 
 
3.8 Upon receiving a complaint of Dasani having irregular content, CBL to ok the 
following action immediately: - 
 
i)  Production of Dasani was suspended . 
 
ii)  They recalled the affected batch as indicated below: - 
 
Production  
Date  Released  
Quantities  Quantities 
recalled from  
the Market  Quantities already 
on the Market  
18/8/2016  270 184.54  86 
 
iii)  They sent samples to SGS, South Africa and KEBS for analysis.  
 
December 1 3, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          153 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 3.9  Hon Speaker a ccording to CBL, all the process steps relat ed to the batch were 
adhered to during the production and the possible cause of irregular content in th e few 
bottles  could be due to external factors during the process of handling transport ation 
and storage suspected extreme temperature conditions.   That is  (Annexture IV)  Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
3.10  Hon Speaker t he committee received a laboratory results for  Dasani water from 
SGS for the production dates 12th, 18th and 23rd September 2016 which states that the  
product s have passed the microbiological test and found to be fit  for human  
consumption.  That is  (Annexture V)  Mr. Speaker.  
 
3.11  The Committe e on its meeting held on 2nd November 2016 resolved that the Dasani 
water th at had foreign matter be taken to government chemist for analysis  and second 
opinion besides the laboratory results by SGS .  That is  (Annexture VI)  Mr. Speaker.  
 
3.12  On 15th November 2016 the Committee received analytical report from Ministry  of 
Health (Government Chemist Department, Ref.  No BW/VOL.X XI/740/ 2016/ 374 
dated 4/11/2016.  That is  (Annexture VII)  Mr. Speaker.  
 
3.13  The report stated that from physical examination  there is presence of foreign  
 matter, hence the sample does not conform with KEBS Standard KS 459 -1:2007 , (It 
is therefore unfit for human consumption) . 
 
3.14  From the above, Members observed that CBL did not t ake the bottles that had  
    forei gn particles for  analysis to SGS for laboratory examination  but rather                
sent sample from the  recalled  batch.   Otherwise the result would have been same .       
4.  Recommendations  
4.1   The “Clean -in-Place” (CIP) should be done more often and not after every 3 - 6 
months as is the practice currently.  Since the same machines are used for 
processing other products such as sodas, it is quite imperative that the production 
line is cleaned immediately after each session of production.  The kind of foreign 
body found in Dasani Water could be “Biofilms” which could have grown in the 
production line as a result of this failure to have regular cleaning of the production 
line. 
 
4.2   Mr. Speaker another recommendation is that Coastal Bottlers Limited sho uld ma ke 
sure that they are always in compliance with local standards for packaged water 
like Kenya Bureau of Standards.  
 
4.3  Mr. Speaker another recommendation is that Coastal Bottlers Limited to make sure 
that the y vetted their distributors and ensure t hat they comply with storage standards.  
 
4.4   Mr. Speaker another recommendation is that Kenya Bureau of Standards and County 
Public Health Officers to make an impromptu visit not only to Coastal Bottlers Limited but 
also all other food package products t o make sure that they are in conformity with their 
standards.   
   
December 1 3, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          153 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  
Page 4      4.5    Mr. Speaker another recommendation is that Coastal Bottlers Limited to 
organize/arrange for periodic refresher courses for their workers and have them medically 
checked for thei r medical fitness so that they can  work more efficiently.     
                                                                           
4.6   Mr. Speaker another recommendation is that Coastal Bottlers Limited to organize a 
trial run of the  plant and KEBS  to pick samples  for analysis . 
 
4.7  That the County Assembly Health Committee and the Assembly at large shall 
continue to endeavour to work at any other similar health issues that pertain human 
consumpt ion as part of our mandate for representation of the public for the 
betterment and welfare of the residents of Mombasa County.  
 
5.0  Conclusion  
5.1 The company has shown efforts in maintaining ideal standards of operations            
nevertheless, the management is advised to take into consideration of the a bove 
recommendations.  
5.2  Mr. Speaker last but not least that this report containing findings, recommendations 
and conclusion be approved and tabled before the Hon Assembly for adoption.  
(End of Dasani health report)  
 Thank you Hon Speaker . I ask Hon Kondo to second the motion  
(Applause ) 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon. Ibrahim K ondo  
(Hon. Ibrahim Kondo bowed)  
 Yes he has seconded it . Yes Hon. Kibwana can you continue  to build up your Motion 
first in this H ouse 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon Speaker . First and foremos t i would like to 
thank Hon Members, the Comm ittee Members and all the staff  because it was a big challenge 
on the report because we had to inclu de the legal department of the Assembly and also people 
from Public Health department for a good report b ecause the issue was very sensitive.  
 It was also captured in many news papers also the TV. Hon Speaker when you  saw it 
was stated  that the report contains the reports from various institutions ; one being the SGS. 
 Hon Speaker it is a report tha t is found here from the SGS which is one of the  
mandate for the SGS, it is about the standard of the goods that are being produce d in our 
country.  
 Hon Speaker also the Committee also involved because of the sensitivity ... 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Hon Amur maintain silence . 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : ...Hon. Speaker because of the sensitivity of the matter also 
we also involved the government chemist which also we have attached the report here fr om 
the government chemist for clearing this issue beca use it is very sensitive.  
 Hon Speaker when we invite the KEBS people who combined with us the Kenya 
Bureau of Standards , it is their mandate to make sure that whatever is produced in this 
country is up to the standard and we invite d them so that at  least they could sh ed light on how 
they work  and they give us their standards how they work and Hon Speaker we also invited 
the two teams so that we have a fair judgment , also the management co operated with us they 
also asked a lot of questions one be ing the health of their product .  
 It was sad for us that we  found the  water came into the House and we were scar ed 
Hon Speaker because if we could have drunk the water maybe it was contaminated or if there 
December 1 3, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          153 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 was something wrong Hon Speaker we cou ld have now mourning for other Members who 
could have taken the water .  
 So we conduct  a site visit and we went to the company and  we attached the report of 
the site visit and we fo und what is there . Hon Speaker i can assure y ou that the environment 
of the Coastal bottlers company is very nice and the machines are automated.  
 There is no stage where you can found someone putting a hand in the bottles, 
everything  is automatic Hon Speaker and when we are taken through the company maybe the  
issue of changes because they take time to change and that is why we recommended there 
should be changes between three  to four weeks .  
 Hon Speaker also from the government Chemist  once you find that a bottle has a 
foreign  matter, according to their standards that is already something that is not for human 
consumption .  
 Their physical analysis also pointed that the four bottles Hon Speaker were not good 
for hum an consumption , according to the government  Chemist  who gave us the report. 
 Hon Speaker the other issue i would like also to point from  this report is that when we 
tried to see the package issue we also discovered that  the peopl e who are given the 
responsibility to store the water should also included  in this report.  
 There  must be hygiene for those who are suppliers or dealers of water ; be it Dasani or 
any other mineral water Hon Speaker because  this issue is also  very crit ical. 
 And finally Hon Speaker this is not only Coastal Bottlers Limited , the Committee said 
that there should be recommendation for the people who are dealing with foods in Mombasa 
County .  
 If you recall Hon Speaker,  I think about five months back there were some bottles that 
were condemned by Public Health  Committee  because there was Hepatitis A  and B that was 
in our County , that's  why i say some recommendation should be in general not only the 
Coastal Bottlers but also the other pe ople who are dealing with foods .  
 Hon Speaker i think it's our duty as Members to see that our staffs are paying 
impromptu  visits to the companies around Mombasa County  to see whether t he companies 
are within the  KEBs standards .  
 I think this is very important because health is very important , health is wealth  Hon 
Speaker and i also urge that the department should be  very keen in making  sure our foods are 
in good condition .  
 So i think Hon Speaker the report is well explained,  every report  concern ed is 
contained in this report for any person to see. Thank you Hon Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): The Motion is on the floor of the House.  
 It means there's no contribution , yes Hon Onje . 
 Hon Onje : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa  nafasi. Mheshimiwa Spika  
mimi naunga mkono ripoti  ambayo  imeletwa na Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Afya .  
 Ni kweli Mheshimiwa Spika  maji ambay o tulipata hapa  ndani ya hii Assembly 
hayakufaa kwa matumizi yetu n a ni maji ambayo yalik uwa yanatoka kampuni ya Dasani. 
 Mimi nakumbuka Mheshimiwa Spika nikiwa pale niliwahi kupata maji ambayo 
hayajafunguliwa na ndani yake kuna kitu ina kaa kama sijui n i pamba ; kwanza niliweza 
kupeana hii ripoti japokuwa hayo maji nilipoyapeleka  hayakushughulikiwa l akini nashukuru 
Mwenyekiti  aliweza kupata maji mengine zaidi na yakaonekana si mazuri kwa matumizi ya 
binadamu na waliweza kufuatiliza tena mpaka mahali leo wam efika wameweza kutuletea 
ripoti na ningependa watu wa maji yale waseme ni kwa nini wanaweza kuleta au kuuzia 
December 1 3, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          153 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  
Page 6 wakenya maji ambayo yanaweza kuhatarisha maisha yao hilo ndio jambo ambalo twataka 
kujua sisi.  
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ):  Yes Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Kondo .  
 Hon Ibrahim Kondo: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kama mmoja wa Mwanachama  
wa Kamati ya Afya  nakubaliana na ripo ti iliyotoka kwa Mwenyekiti kuh usiana uliokua 
kutokana na chembechembe ama uchafu uliopatikana kwenye maji ya  Dasani.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika kazi tulioifanya si kazi rahisi kwa sababu hapo mbeleni kulikuwa 
na tetesi nyingi ya  kwamba Wanakamati hawakwenda kufanya kazi bali walikuwa  wameenda 
kwa maslahi yao lakini kama Kamati tul isimama kidete na kuhakikisha kazi ile imefanywa ili 
kusaidia wana nchi wa  Kaunti ya  Mombasa na si kwa manufaa binafsi  ya Wanachama .  
 Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika swala hili tulichukua hoja baada ya nyingine kwenda 
kulifanyia uchunguzi kama Mwenyekiti alivyoel eza katika nakal a yake na kufikia mwisho 
kila kitu kilikuwa kiko sawa na tungependa Nyumba hii ikubaliane na ripo ti ambayo 
tumeileta ili kuweka hali yetu ya afya pamoja na kutetea y a wana nchi wengine ambao 
hawawezi kuingia katika Jumba hili bali sisi kuwa wawaki lishi wao.  
 Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ninaung a mkono na nafikiri  wanakamati wengine na 
waheshimiwa wenzangu wengine wote  twakubaliana kwa kau li moja na kupitisha  ripoti  hii. 
 Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Mheshimiwa  Amur . 
 Hon Amur : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika hata mimi ningependa  kuunga mkono hii 
ripoti  kwa kuwa jina la Assembly  hii liliharibiwa sana kwa  magazeti . 
 Ningeomba Bunge  hili ili liweze kuwasilisha copy  ya nakala hii kwa wa le watu wa 
kitengo cha kupigana na ufisadi  waone  kuwa Kamati  ilikuwa inafanya kazi yake na iweze 
kusafisha kutoka ile dhana kwamba waheshimiwa wal ikuwa hawawajibiki ripot i hii 
itadhihirisha Mombasa kwamba kweli Kamati ilikuwa inafanya kazi yake na ukweli leo 
umepatikana  na watu wauju e ukweli kama ulivyo. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika. 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Mheshimiwa Zainab . 
 Hon (Mrs) Zainab Said : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa hii nafasi . Mimi 
pia naunga mkono Mwenyekiti wetu kwa kazi aliyoifanya na tulichukua muda mwingi ili 
tulete ripoti ya kisawasawa japo wana sema tulichelewa lakini wao ndio waliochelewa kuleta 
ripoti kutoka Sout h Africa lakini  kuchunguza tulichunguza mpaka tukapata ule ukweli uko 
wapi ? Kwa hivyo  tuk ifanya kazi  nzuri  twataka kupongezwa ...   
(Applause ) 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ):  Yes Mheshimiwa Kibwana can you reply 
to the Motion . 
 Hon Kibwana  Swaleh:  Thank you Hon Speaker ; once again m ine is just to sincerely 
thank my Committee and I also thank the staff of the County Assembly for the support they 
gave us .  
 Hon Speaker  mine is just to  say that the jo urney had hiccups but we thank God we 
made it .  A s you he ard several Members  raise d the issue of  anti corruption that was 
publicised by  the media but we  focus  ourselves  for the job that is ahead of us .  
 Hon Speaker  I  think  it’s very important whenever we are given a duty we shoul d do 
it with all o ur commitment  it deserves .  
 I think we are answerable to the people who elected us so we should do o ur duty 
without fear or favour and it has show n that as Members we work tirelessly  to see that we 
have  a report that catches every part . 
December 1 3, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          153 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor  
Page 7  So Hon Speaker mine is just to s ay I am really happy to see that after a long run we 
have presented the report that was being awaited for  long. Thank you Hon Speaker and we  
continue ... 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Thank  you Members i think it is now time 
to put a question . Members i put the question that this House adopt the report on 
contaminated Dasani water laid on the table on Wednesday  7th December  2016 . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
 Yes Clerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Members  having no other business this H ouse stands adjourned until tomorrow 
morning . 
The House rose at 3 :10pm. 
 
 
 