December 20, 2016            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          157 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certifie d version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tues day, 20th December , 2016  
The House  met at 2.34pm. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Hon Deputy Speaker : Members you may sit down. Yes C lerk. 
PAPER  
Yes Hon Patrick Siminyu, yes Hon Mary A kinyi .  
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  I just want to inform the House that Hon Patrick Siminyu has 
arrived . 
Hon. Deputy Speaker:  Okay I have seen him, yes he has come. Yes Hon Patrick 
Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker I raise to lay a report from the Committee on Dis aster 
Management on conditions of all fire station of Mombasa County.  
(Paper laid)  
Hon. Deputy Speaker:  Okay Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Yes Hon Patrick Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker I would like to give a Notice of M otion on the adoption 
of the report on  conditions of all fire stations of Mombasa County.  
Hon. Deputy Speaker:  Can you read the Notice of Motion please?  
Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to give a Notice of Motion that this House 
adopts the report of all fire stations in Mombasa laid on the table on Tuesday , December 20, 
2016.  
Thank you.  
Hon. Deputy Speaker:  Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
Yes Hon Mary Akinyi . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir , first I would like to tell you that this 
is a resumption of unfinished business ; it was table d on Wedn esday, December 7, 2016.  
Mr. Sp eaker may I table the M otion on replacement of asbestos roofing in public 
primary schools ...  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Deputy Speaker:  Am going to put a question because it was debated and 
deliberated so am going to put a questio n, you ca n have your seat Hon Mary, t hank you.   
Members this M otion was discussed and deliberated to the full and now am putting it 
to question that the County Government to compel the national government to replace 
asbestos roofing in public primary schoo ls and other public buildings to forestall its 
potentially harmful effects to students, teachers and the general public . 
 (Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members there being no other business the House stands adjourned until tomorrow mo rning.  
The House Rose at 2:40 pm.  
 