Dece mber 21, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 21st December , 2016  
The House  met at 9.20a m. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down. Yes Clerk.  
MOTION  
Yes Hon Patrick Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu:  Hon Speaker I want to move a M otion on adoption of report on 
condition of all fire stations in Mombasa.  
Mr. Speaker I beg that this House adopts the Report on condition of all fire stations in 
Mombasa laid on table on Tuesday, Decembe r 20, 2016. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay Members I now propose a Motion 
that the House adopts the report on condition of all fire stati ons in Mombasa. Yes Hon 
Siminyu . 
(Hon Siminyu read report)  
 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP  
Hon. Patrick Siminyu    Chairman  
Hon. Mswabah Rashid             Vice Chair   
Hon Saad Faraj Ahmed   Member  
Hon Maimuna C Mwamassa   Member  
Hon Nasser Rashid    Member  
Hon Zainab M umba    Member  
Hon Murfad Amur    Member  
Hon. Tom Ogalo    Member  
Hon. Ahmed Omar    Member  
Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani   Member  
 
This matter was raised because of a Member who brought a statement wanting to 
know the status of all fire stations in Mombasa and it was direct ed to fact find and we went to 
several fire stations and maybe we go to the recommendations of the Committee  because the 
report was placed in this House way back .  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir the recommendations of the Committee ; the Committee recommended 
that; 
 The County government should consider employing additional firemen to enhance the 
staffing levels of fire stations in the County.  
 
 There is need to establish a County diving and rescue unit and manned with qualified 
personnel so as to handle any emerg ing rescue missions in the County and beyond.  
 
 The firemen should be facilitated to undertake regular training and refresher courses 
in their specialist areas so as to be responsive to the County  disaster needs.  
 
Dece mber 21, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  2  The Committee recommends the County to ent er into Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOUs) with  several stakeholders such as Mombasa Water Company, Kenya 
Pipeline, Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) and Kenya Refinery with a view to access 
water hydrants within the industrial areas;  
 
 That during procurement o f fire fighting and rescue equipment, officers from this  unit 
be incorporated in the process/inspection so that the County can get value for money 
for the equipment being procured.  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir the Committee also recommended that t he Department in cha rge of 
County Fire fighting services to urgently supply the units with the three types of 
uniforms i.e ceremonial, protective gowns and working uniforms, safety boots, VHF 
communication gadgets, working gear such as breathing kits, gloves, soap, gas etc.  
 That no officer should be victimized or reprimanded for the engagement with 
Members of the Disaster Committee of the County Assembly of Mombasa, and that 
all warning letters to that effect arising from an earlier visit of a committee of the 
House be withdra wn. 
 The Committee recommends that the Department in charge of County fire fighting 
services should urgently find modalities to compensate the fire fighters for working 
beyond the official normal working hours. This should be done either through cash or 
off days to the officers.  
 The Committee also recommends that Kshs . 1,000/= risk allowance to the officers 
should be reviewed upwards in order to motivate the officers who are undertaking an 
important service to the County residents.  
 The Committee recommends that  the County government should explore modalities 
to improve on the officer’s access to medical care considering that they worked in 
very risky and hazardous environments.  
 The Committee also recommends t hat thorough investigations be undertaken by the 
Lands  department with regard to the encroachment of lands belonging to three fire 
stations in the County. The renting by IEBC of offices previously belonging to the fire 
station at Changamwe be investigated and a way forward be given.  
 Mr. Speaker , that an engag ement forum between the Committee members and the 
leadership of fire stations be undertaken with a view to further engage and come up 
with tangible strategies and proposals on the way forward with regard to disaster 
management and fight fighting issues in the County.  
 Mr. Speaker on 21st November, 2016 the Committee invited the Director of 
Inspectorate and we had a meeting on conditions of all fire stations and he had 
inform ed the committe e members that he wrote to the Public Service Board on the 
employment of  50 staff and drivers due to the shortage of staff to the fire department.  
 
Mr. Speaker , I beg this House to adopt  the report in this House. Thank you.  
 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Mary Akinyi . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spi ka. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga 
mkono ripoti hii kwa juhudi ambayo Kamati hii imetuletea ripoti hii imefanya na ikatuletea 
ripoti hii.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tunapoongelea mambo ya fire ni mambo na majanga ambayo 
yanatakikana tuyatilie maanani tena tuweze kukub aliana na hii ripoti iweze kuanza kazi 
haraka iwezekanavyo.  
Dece mber 21, 2016             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          1 58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  3 Mheshimiwa Spika hii ripoti imeletwa wakati mzuri ambapo tunaenda katika ile hali ya 
kuweza kutengeneza bajeti .   
Hivyo basi kwa vile hii ripoti imeletwa wakati tunaenda kufanya baje ti ni ombi langu hata 
tukishapitisha ripoti ndani ya Nyumba hii ni tuhakikishe kuwa hii ripoti inatekelezwa kwa 
haraka haraka ili wakati tunapofanya bajeti tuweze kuweka haya mambo yote hapa ambayo 
yako kwenye  mapendekezo  amba yo yako katika hii ripoti ili haya mambo yaweze 
kutekelezwa vile inavyohitajika ili kusiwe tena na mambo ya majanga . 
Hata kama janga lim etokea ; ama moto umetokea mahali , kuna mtoto ameingia kwenye 
kisima mahali, kuna mtu yeyote amefanyiwa kama ni ajali kama ni nini kinachohitajika  
Mambo  yaweze kutekelezwa haraka iwezekanavyo.  
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Tom . 
Hon. Ogalo:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono ripoti hii .  
Mimi ni Mwanakamati  na tulienda mpaka Nairobi na tuka panga way forward  ya 
kutengeneza fire za Mombasa Kaunti  na ningeomba Nyumba hii tuunge mkono na tutekeleze 
mapendekezo  amba yo tume yaleta kwa hii Nyumba ili tupate faida ama tuache ile hasara 
ambayo tulipata wakati ule.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ninaunga mkono s ana. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Fatuma Swaleh Kushe . 
Hon. (Ms) Fatma Swaleh:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi pia nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hoja ilioletwa na Mheshimiwa Patrick Siminyu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika kama unavyojua Bunge letu la M ombasa barabara 
zimetengenezwa katika njia za kidigitali Bwana Spika.  
Mimi ningeomba Service Board  ifanye haraka iwezekanavyo ili iweze kuajiri watu 
ambao watatusaidia katika upande wa hizi fire.  
Mheshimiwa Spika janga la moto ni jambo kubwa sana na ukiang alia hapa kwetu 
barabara zimejengwa katika hali ya utata sana na majumba pia yamejengwa katika hal i ya 
kusikitisha .  
Kwa hivyo mimi cha  kuongezea Mheshimiwa Spika katika hoja hii ni kwamba ikiwa 
inawezekana kila Sub county  kuweze kupelekwa g ari la kuzima moto. Ahsante sana.  
(Question proposed)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much Members , I think 
this Motion has been deliberated and  I now put the question Members . 
I propose that this House  adopts the report on conditions of all fire stations i n 
Mombasa laid on the table Tuesday, December 20, 2016 . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members this House is adjourned until afternoon.  
The House rose at 9:34 am. 
 