December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 21st December , 2016  
The House  met at 2: 30pm. 
(The Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes C lerk there is no quorum, Sergeant - At- Arms can 
you ring the quorum bell?       
(Sergeant At Arms rung q uorum bell ) 
(Silence ) 
(Some Members entered  the chamber ) 
 Clerk , can you ascertain if there’s quorum?  
(Clerk confirmed there is quorum)  
 Yes C lerk can you start the business of the House . 
PETITIONS  
 Thank you, M embers goo d afternoon. There is a petition today memorandum of MOSAT 
on the challenges and recommendations facing Mwakirunge communit y in Mombasa County.  
(The Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) read)  
 Memorandum of Mwakirunge residents on challenges and recommendations facing 
Communities o f dump site. 
 Background  
 Mwakirunge is one of the official dump sites for Mombasa waste. There are around 500 
people living on the dump site, many of whom are women and children. They live off the food 
they scavenge from the dump site, food wh ich is moldy, rotten and stinking. They also eat the 
paper food that has been wrapped in or used during the cooking process!  
 As the dump site is in a very rural area, drugs tend not to be as big problem as the people 
here do not have access to them. The dump is also a very hazardous place for the children. Acid 
is commonly dumped along with other indu strial waste. Children often tr ead in the acid and 
receive severe burns to their feet, legs and hands. Medical treatment is not available to those 
without mo ney so these injuries are often left untreated.  
 During the rainy season the residents, w ho live on the edge of the dump  try to earn a 
living from scouring through rotting rubbish, plastic bags and raw sewage for discarded things 
they can sell. As well as the daily grind for survival, people living on dumps often face 
discrimination. When you live and work on a rubbish dump everything about you is permeated 
by the overpowering smell. It identifies you before you even open your mouth as someone who 
lives out side of normal society. Dumpsite life also means women and girls are vulnerable to 
viole nce and sexual abuse, even rape  but because people are so poor and on the fingers of society 
there is nowhere for them to go for healthcare or support.  
 Recommendations  
 The recommendations and demands that we the people of Mwakirunge are proposing for 
your immediate action include the following:  
 Health Services Demands  
 Equipped health centers near the dump site . 
 Cost of treatment from diseases relating to the dumpsite should be scrapped off . 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2  Community health workers should be increased and investigations be done on health 
issues . 
 Emergency and referral services to be availed for emergencies living near the dumpsite 
due to the distance and road to the hospitals . 
 Rabies v accine to be availed.  
 Specialized respiratory drugs and rabies vaccine to be availed . 
 Regulations of the companies that dump at the method used to dump . 
 Rescue for girls raped at the dumpsite and counseling services to be availed . 
 Education Services Deman ds 
 More qualified teachers are needed to the schools in Mwakirunge location . 
 The schools should equip with basic and necessary education resources . 
 Environmental   program should be included to the school learning curriculum . 
 Intensive civic education to th e targeted community on the importance of education . 
 Tough penalty and punishment should be applied to those parents who discourage 
learning to their children.  
 Solid Waste Management Services Demands  
 Improved methods of collection of the waste products .  
 Sorting to be done at the point of collection and different days be used for different 
refuse . 
 Increased awareness creation on the health conditions that result from the presence of the 
dump site.  
 Establish a recycling plant at the dump site .  
 NEMA regulat ions must be adhered to and they should take active role in advising the 
various stakeholders and the government on the reality of the hazards around the 
dumpsite .  
 Environmental ministry and institutions should take keen management of the dumpsite so 
that does not affect the lives of those living near the dumpsite  
 Disaster management and response team unit should be put at the dumpsite.  
 Proper waste management services has recommended in the environmental impact 
assessment report  
 Ban on scavengers at the d ump site  
 Encourage community responsiveness and awareness  
 Anti-rabies vaccine to be readily available in case of dog bites  
 This report was signed by Mwakirunge residents:    
1. Elizabeth Mkongo  
2. Charo M Tangai  
3. Aisha Ibrahim  
4. Edith Katana  
5. Angela Akayo  
6. James B oma  
7. Kingi Mohamed  
8. Harry Malau  
9. Raymond Saha  
10. Juma Gwede  
11. Vincent Chula  
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3 12. Claris Masha  
13. Zawadi Japhet  
14. Salome K Jefwa  
15. Priscilla Chizi  
16. Chale Kuza  
17. Bonface Menza  
18. Neema Kahindi  
19. Amina Kache Karisa  
20. Leonard M Faris  
21. Maurine K Kahindi  
22. Veronica Mbingu  
23. Modieta Dume  
24. Duncan Wesa  
25. Hamisi Kingi  
26. Allen Chenjema  
27. Chikwangu Katana  
28. Salim Ibrahim  
29. Miriam Kisavo  
30. Halima Mohamed  
 Members  in view of the above petition, I commit it to an A d hoc C ommittee  which 
should be formed by the Environment C ommittee sh ould give three people and  the Health 
Committee three people to form an A d hoc committee which shall look immediately into this 
matter  and the report  should be brought back to the House  within three weeks . Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
 Yes C lerk. 
PAPER  
 Hon Saad . 
 Hon Faraj: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I wish to report to this House  
concerning the public participation exercise that was conducted by the department of physical  
planning, lands and housing and the C ommittee of physical planning la nds and housing.  
 Mr. Speaker the const itution  of Kenya , 2010 chapter on devolved government part two 
states that. .., 'The authority is vested in and exercised by the County A ssembly '. 
 Mr. Speaker I wish to table this report so that it can reach your office, thank you . 
(Paper laid ) 
 The Speake r (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 Yes Hon. Saad Faraj . 
 Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker I beg to give the N otice of Motion; t hat this House  adopts the 
report on the public participation for the Mombasa County Land Policy 2016 laid on the tab le on 
Wednesd ay December 21st , 2016 . 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
 Mary Akinyi ? 
 Hon. Onyango : Mr. Speaker I  beg your permission to request for a statement on behalf 
of may Mary Akinyi who unwell.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes go on . 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4  Hon. Onyango : Thank you, request for statement. Mr. S peaker I seek to know from the 
Chairman of the Committee on A dministration and County security on what measures are in 
place to ensure that children using fire sticks for fireworks do not endanger themselves a nd the 
security of other persons and that said fire sticks are sold to responsible adults with permits to 
ensure safety measures are followed by those handing the same . 
 Thank  you. 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Chairman of the C ommittee on Administrati on. 
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I am a Member of the same C ommittee and 
Mr. Speaker at the moment we don’t have answers to this issue because we have to consult the 
legal department for  us to have a ve ry good response to this matter.  
 So Mr. Spea ker we are asking for a day ; one day being tomorrow so that we can be able 
to get the response to this issue thank you . 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  It’s okay then tomorrow in the afternoon the House  will 
get an answer f rom you tomorrow afternoon . Clerk.  
MOTION  
 Hon Saad Faraj . 
 Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker sir I take this opportunity to lay adoption of the report on the 
public participation for the Mombasa County land policy , 2016 . 
 Mr. Speaker , the Constitution of Kenya 2010, Chapter Eleven – Devolved Govern ment 
in Part 2: County Government states that the  legislative authority of a C ounty is ve sted in, and 
exercised by, its County A ssembly:  
 (2) A County A ssembly may make any laws that are necessary for, or incidental to, the 
effective performance of the fun ctions and  exercise of the powers of the C ounty government 
under the Fourth Schedule;  
 (3) A County A ssembly, while respecting the principle of the separation of powers, m ay 
exercise oversight over the County Executive Committee and any other County E xecu tive 
organs;  
 (4) A County A ssembly may receive and  approve plans and policies for;  
(a) T he mana gement and exploitation of the C ounty’s resources; and  
(b) T he development and management of its infrastructure and institutions.  
 The County Assembly of Momba sa with support from Coast Education Centre (COEC) 
and funding from Civil Society Urban Development Platform (CSUDP)/ SIDA organized Public 
Participation on Draft Mo mbasa County Land Policy in 30 W ards from 13th – 19th December 
2016.  
 The Mombasa Land Pol icy aims  to address Mombasa’s unique and complicated land 
problems that spring from the colonial period to present and which affect a big number of the 
residents.  
 The prevailing land situation in the County has to do with the following ;- Injustices 
related to historical land ownership and tenure systems; poor land administration and 
management; unsustainable land use; l ack of effective development control and facilitation; and 
Inadequate infrastructure.  
 The document had gone for First reading after bein g handed over to the MCA Committee 
of  Land, Planning and Housing (LP&H) by Coast Education Centre (COEC) in partnership with 
Mombasa Local Urban Forum (MLUF) supported by Civil Society Urban Development Platform 
(CSUDP) and Action Aid International Kenya (AAIK) in 2015.  
 This report has consolidated all findings from the 15 wards (Wards were merged into two 
giving a total of 15 activities conducted in different wards) and recommendations during the 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 public participation forums which targeted different secto rs as follows: women, youths, PWD’s, 
residence association, landlords, tenants, Jua kali groups, boda boda operators, Sacco’s, CBO’s 
and NGO’s respectively.  
 Findings  
 It was evident that the l and policy was a noble idea and a great need for the people of 
Mombasa , many of them said that the land problem in Mombasa County has become chronic and 
the need of resolving the land matters will be addressed by the policy.  
 The people who have acquired land without proper papers and documents fear that they 
might l ose their land  if the C ounty will get back the land and without considering them as first 
priority.  
 For many years  Mr. Speaker  the residen ts of Mombasa County have lived like squatters, 
without their la nd being mapped or identified (I n some of the ward s e.g. Ju nda Ward) in the land 
registry.  
 This has caused  the community a lot of confusion since strangers claim to own the same 
said land  than the indigenous own ers, It has resulted to chaos and killings in other parts of the 
County.  
 The issue of PWD ’s o n the current buildings being constructed have not been 
championed to equip their buildings with elevators or backup generator since it has denied many 
the opportunity to assess these office/ facilities for assistance.  
 This was addressed ; the county gove rnment passed a law where all houses being 
constructed in Mombasa County should cater for the people living with disability so that they 
can easily access the House s or buildings in the C ounty.  
 On constructing  of roads, the County government should cater  for people living with 
disabilities especially the ones on the cycling wheelchairs e.g.  Biashara Street, Mombasa it is 
almost impossible for them to cross with the cycling wheel chairs.  
 The issue of absentee landlords was raised during the forums where  several people claim 
either forced evictions from a third party (Not initially owner), the landlord is said not to have 
paid land rates in years which have accumulated to millions of shillings.  
 This issue has been well addressed in the policy and will g ive opportunity for current 
occupants to purchase the said land.   
 Mr. Speaker whenever residents get an opportunity to discuss policies or bills, mostly 
they don’t raise concerns about the document being debated rather they are concerned about their 
curre nt state problems in relation to land matters and prefer direct solutions/answers to their 
problems be provided during the forums.  
Mr. Speaker the r ecommendations  are as below;  
1. The residents of Mombasa County requested the County Assembly Members to adopt  the 
policy and pass it to law during the forums because they have faith in the document 
(policy) which is for pro -poor and will address historical injustices especially on 
absentee’s landlords giving an opportunity to the community members to own land in 
Mombasa County.  
2. Mr. Speaker t he County Assembly should give this policy a priority especially after the 
adoption and formation of the law to address historical injustices;  
3. The County Government should ensure all grabbed lands within Mombasa County are 
reclaimed;  
4. The County Government of Mombasa should issue a three (3) months notice of evictions 
to and avoid forced evictions;  
5. All informal settlemen ts should be identified by the C ounty government;  
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6 6. The document (policy) is good, the zoning part and issues sh ould be implemented as soon 
as possible for sustainability of our county;  
7. The County Assembly should make sure the process isn’t driven politically to safe guard 
the interest of poor.  
8. The County Assembly should ensure a full policy awareness program and av ail the 
documents in both English and Kiswahili. Also the County Government should consider 
the policy booklet be produced in brail for visual impaired citizens.  
9. More focus should be on lands on the beach and harbors in the policy. The policy has 
focused more on railways, roads and other kinds of land and neglected the beach lands 
and harbors.  
10. The land policy should put up penalties for those who dump solid wasted in lands 
reserved for other uses other than the dumping point of the wastes.  
11. The lands in frè re town area could be made freehold because some of the leases are about 
to expire.  
12. The community recommended that for those who want to build or renovate shou ldn’t 
seek permission from the C ounty government since the property belongs to them and not 
the c ounty government.  
13. A person can be allowed for up to  5 years without building any structure of his/her land  
and not two years as stated in the policy.  
Mr. S peaker our conclusion was that  all forums were successfully conducted and popular 
version of the poli cy shared to the residents of Mombasa County. The Policy will solve land 
related matters in Mombasa County once and for all and this will be a Christmas gift for the 
residen ts in 2016.  
Mr. Speaker I wish to move this M otion I call upon Hon. Hatimy to secon d this motion thank 
you. 
(Hon. Hatimy bow ed) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Thank you Hon. Saad and Hon. Hatimy for seconding, 
Members I now propose a question that this House  adopts the report on public participation for 
Mombasa County Land Policy 2016 laid  on the table on Wednesday December 21st 2016, yes 
Saad Faraj, you can now support the M otion you should give us a reason why the Motion should 
be passed , support  your M otion, I have proposed a question . 
Hon. Faraj : Thank you again Mr. Speaker, I think th is is a milestone for this C ounty, it 
is a v ery historic document for this C ounty and it has been able to cover almost all areas that 
have been causing a lot of problems for the peopl e and residents of Mombasa and C oast at large.  
Mr. Speaker if you look a t the document you’ll see that it has been able to prioritize 
historical injustices , the committee also came up with few recommendations that to call us 
people of all houses that have been conserved by UNICEF .  
This is one important element with regards to  the peo ple nearby here and the O ld town 
and also the houses have actually been conserved but they are not earning anything from those 
houses and this is part of many issues that have  been  addressed by this document, and therefo re 
Mr. Speaker I call upon all M embers as you may have heard from what I read from the report 
and w e were able to give each every M ember the version of the Mombasa County L and Policy 
and am sure all the M embers have been able to go through it and will be able to support this 
documen t for the benefit of the poor and the benefit of the people on the ground . Thank you so 
much Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Mheshimiwa Fadhili Makarani . 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7 Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, Land policy  ambayo iko mbele yetu 
imezungumzia mambo mengi nyeti am bayo yata tunufaisha sisi wakaazi wa Mombasa mambo 
ambayo hayakuwa yanazungumziwa ama yanagusiwa gusiwa kidogo, mambo kadha wa kadha.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tumeona vizazi vilivyopita wengine tukiwa mfano tunaona mila 
zilikuwa zimechukua hata mu ya  uongozi kwa kipande fulani;  baba anaweza fariki umiliki ama 
urithi wa mali ile kwa mama mjane aliyewachwa . 
Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa kitambo inakuwa shida lakini nina imani ndani ya Policy yetu 
imeweza kuzungumzia jinsi gani kutaweza kuwa na utaratibu  wa kiuhakika ili familia zisiwe 
zinaweza kupata hasara.  
Mheshimiwa Spika familia nyingi zimepata hasara kama kwa mfano vile nimetoa mzazi 
akifariki, mama anashindwa kumiliki, ndugu yake baba anaingia, akiingia yule mzazi aliyefariki 
na watoto wake wanaku wa ni wenye kupata dhiki yule baba ndugu aliyeingia anakuwa ni 
mwenye nguvu kuchukua kulingana na mila ambayo kimaana vitu vile vitaweza kupotea kwa 
wale wahusika vinaenda kwa wale ambao si wahusika lakini tunashukuru kwa kuja kwa Policy  
hii tutaweza kuzun gumzia.  
Mheshimiwa Spika sisi hasa wakaazi wa Mombasa tumeona  jinsi gani tunaishi na wale 
wamiliki wa ardhi ambao mfumo wake kwa jina maarufu ni absentee land lords . Land policy  hii 
Mheshimiwa Spika imeweza kuangazia vizuri ni vipi masuala kama haya yataw eza kuangaliwa 
ili suala la uskwota liweze kupungua ndani ya Mombasa.  
Mimi nawaomba wenzangu Mheshimiwa Spika tuweze ku kubaliana sote kupitisha Policy  
hii ambayo itaweza kutunufaisha sisi na vizazi vyetu vijavyo. Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni historia 
ambayo ik o hapa kwetu yatokea hapa kwetu hakuna serikali ambayo ishazungumzia masuala 
kama haya.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tunaona pia ni jinsi gani serikali inaweza kuzuia masuala haya ndani 
ya hii policy  yetu; tunaona kwa ufupi policy yetu inazungumzia masuala me ngi amba yo mengi 
yana manufaa kwa wananchi wetu wa  chini, mambo ambayo sitasita kusema  imepita miaka 
mingi yalikuwa hayakuweza kuzungumziwa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika  tunaona ndani ya policy  yetu jinsi gani tutaweza kukusanya fedha 
kama serikali ya Kaunti njia ya rahisi ambayo itazifuata na Kaunti iweze kufanya maendeleo 
kupitia ukusanyaji wa fedha ilivyopitisha ndani ya policy  yetu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi natoa pongezi kwa wananchi wetu wote wa Mombasa pamoja 
na mashirika ambayo yalijitolea, yalijitolea mhanga kuhakikish a tumeweza kutengeza taratibu 
hizi ambazo zitasaidia Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa, na mimi naomba waheshimiwa wenzangu tuwe 
tutasimama pamoja tuweze kupitisha policy  hii ambayo italeta manufaa mengi ndani ya 
Mombasa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. R ajwayi) :  Yes Hon Patrick Siminyu.  
Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to thank the fo rmer 
Chairman of land Hon Nasser for the start of this journey and Hon  Saad Faraj…  
(Applause ) 
And Committee of land for a job well done, we app reciate….  
(Applause ) 
..Mr. Speaker am very excited because this document is going to solve so many problems 
that we have been suffering here in Mombas a and looking at 3.6 section 16,  the policy statement 
that is talking of informal settlement s, that the co unty government will recognize informal 
settlement s of which I have several in Tudor including Tudor Moroto, Burukenge and the rest.  
Mr. Speaker I am happy for it  is going to take care  of the poor and the most needy,  this 
policy will give direction on dev elopment of regulation of eviction a s we understand, where we 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8 have been having forceful eviction and if this policy is going to give direction and guide lines for 
the county government  to come up with good laws and regulations to see that our people are not  
forcefully evicted.  
Mr. Speaker this is a step forward as a county to have a policy like this ; if you look at Old 
town for years, as Mombasa we have not benefit ted, our people have not benefit ted from the 
heritage that we have inherited from our own  grand parents.  
Mr. Speake r this policy is talking on joining stakeholders, a way of determining of 
sharing the benefits that is going to be, the benefits that are derived from these inherited sites at 
Kibokoni.  
Mr. Speaker  as we understand for years people fro m Kibokoni have not been benefiting 
from the gains that are gotten by the national government from th ese sites and this policy is 
giving us guidelines and making sure that our people benefit from any benefit that is gotten  from 
these sites.   
Mr. Spe aker another thing it  is talking of absentees land lords, people who are in 
Momb asa we know that we have so many  and also historical injustices ; being that it has been 
affecting our people , as we understand most of our residents are squatters and these squatters  are 
not supposed to be squatters because we as Mombasa people have a cul ture of not getting title 
deeds.  
For years , Mr. Speaker sir  some people are coming from other areas producing title deeds 
and evicting our people, It’s high time as a House  we support  this policy so that if the affected 
we come up with laws that are deriving and giving more meat in this policy so that Mombasa 
people can have a safe place on where they live.  
In most cases there  are people who hav e houses without land and this is a way of curing 
this Mr. Speaker , I fully support and this policy is going to solve the problems of our people in 
Mombasa. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Mheshimiwa Amir Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuwez a 
kuunga mkono policy  hii ambayo imetayarishwa na kuletwa kwenye Bunge hili kupitia kwa 
Mwenyekiti wa Kamati yetu tukufu ya Ardhi katika Bunge letu . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika tunapojaribu kufuatilia policy  hii inamaanisha kana kwamba policy 
hii tunafungua ukurasa mpya katika masuala ya kufaulu kwa hali ya juu katika masuala ambayo 
kulikuwa na matatizo ambayo yalikuwa yamesababishwa na ukosefu wa ardhi.  
Mheshimiwa Spika katika policy  hii ukurasa wa 13 imeeleza vizuri matumizi ya ardhi 
ambayo yamenukuliwa vizuri kat ika policy  hii, kwa hivyo kwa kupitishwa policy  hii katika 
Bunge letu itafahamisha kwamba matumizi yote ya ardhi yale ambayo yanakuwa tuko nayo 
katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa yatakuwa yanafuatilia mpangilio huu wetu rasmi ambao utaanza 
punde tu i kipita policy hii.  
Mheshimiwa Spika kuna ardhi ambazo ni za makao, zengine ni za kilimo, zengine za 
misitu, zengine za viwanda na sehemu za kupumzikia ambazo zote zinaangaziwa katika policy  
hii, pia policy  hii ime weza kwa sababu kuna ardhi kwa mfano kama ardhi za ma kaburi amba zo 
na sisi kama waafrika ama wakaazi tuko na uhusiano wa karibu sana ama sehemu ambazo 
tunazika wale wapendwa wetu . 
Mara nyingi Mheshimiwa Spika sehemu kama hizi pale nyuma zimeweza kuvamiwa, 
sehemu kama hizi zimeweza kuuzwa, sehemu kama hizi zi meweza kugeuzwa na zikaweza 
kutumika kwa ujenzi wa aina tofauti tofauti lakini katika policy  hii zimeweza kuangaziwa kuwa 
mpaka hivi sasa ni rasmi sasa kwanza zinaweza kusajiliwa kwa masuala ya makaburi kwamba 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  9 zinaweza kutumika kwa masuala mengine itakuwa ni mambo ambayo yamezikwa kwa kaburi la 
sahau.  
Mheshimiwa Spika cha msingi ni kuweza kushukuru kazi nzuri ambayo imeweza 
kufanywa na Kamati ya ardhi na kuweza kufungua ukurasa mpya wa matumizi bora ya ardhi 
katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa , tunaingia kwenye historia ya kwamba hata serikali kuu hivi 
sasa itakuwa haina mamlaka ya kusumbua wakaazi wetu ama wa Kaunti nzima ya Mombasa kwa 
sababu tayari imeshatoka kwenye kero . 
La mwisho Mheshimiwa S pika shukrani kubwa kwa sababu hivi sasa punde tu policy  hii 
itakap oweza kupita nama anisha kwamba kama Kaunti  tutaweza kuwa na mfuko maalum  ule 
ambao umeweza kutumika ku  settle  wale wakaazi wetu ambao wengi walikuwa hawana ardhi.  
Kwa hivyo ni kuwashukuru na kuomba wenzangu tuweze kupitisha policy  hii kwa kauli 
moja ili  tuweze kuwa na mwelekeo mzuri katika matumizi ya ardhi katika Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa , kwa hivyo nashukuru na naomba tuiunge mkono  policy  hii. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon Okoth Opeya.  
Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker I also rise to support this doc ument because it is 
touching on some of the things especially the area which I represent Nyali ; if you look at 3.6 
section 1(6) it talks about informal settlements this will help especially people who live in 
Mkomani in Maweni, Shauri yako slums it talks a bout how it is going to do the development and 
also the planning . 
When you go to 3.17 to obtain register of all public utility in Mombasa County I think it 
is in record that a lot of public land has been grabbed schools,  hospitals even cemeteries have 
been  grabbed , a register and for future generations to be able to get land then when you go to 
3.24 it has summarized the whole issue about absentee landlords, historical injustices pertinent 
groups the old and so forth . 
This is a document which will bring san ity to our land sector to ensure that the rights of 
people are protected and also help Mombasa move forward, I would urge M embers to support 
this and make sure it is implemented because it is something which is good. Thank you , Hon 
Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon Mwinga Mwadziwe.  
Hon. Mwinga:  Ahsa nte sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii, kwanza 
nachukua nafasi hii kuwashukuru sana haswa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati  ya ardhi  pamoja na kamati 
yake yote kwa kuweza kutuletea ripoti nzuri ambayo  itasaidia watu wetu.  
Mheshimiwa S pika mimi nikiwa mwakilishi wa Mwakirunge nataka kusema ya kwamba 
labda watu wangu wa Mwakirunge asilimia 70 ni maskwota;  ninasema hivyo kwa sababu toka 
sisi tupate uhuru mashamba yale ambayo tunaambiw a ni ya watu ambao h awajulikani.  
Watu wa Mwakirunge wamekuwa wakiishi na wasiwasi sana , hii ni kwa sababu 
Mheshimiwa S pika tumekuwa na vitisho vingi kule Mwakirunge tukiambiwa kwamba tutakuja 
tufukuzwe mahali ambapo tunaambiwa si kwetu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nashukuru kwa hi i policy  ambayo tunaenda kuip itisha siku ya 
leo kwa sababu itafanya watu wangu wa Mwakirunge waishi na kufanya ukulima bila tatizo 
lolote nikitumainia ya kwamba watashughulikiwa vilivyo.  
Mheshimiwa S pika vile  vile policy  hii imezungumzia pia kuhusu mazing ira na kama 
tunavyojua nimekuwa nikipiga kelele juu ya kule Kibarani ambayo iko kule nikiamini ya 
kwamba kwa sababu policy  hii imezung umzia kuhusu mambo ya mazingira  nina amini ya 
kwamba Kibarani ile itashughulikiwa aidha itatafutiwa mahali pengine ikaweze  kuwekwa ama 
itatengenezwa iwe katika …  
(Applause ) 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page  10 …katika viwango vile zile Kibarani zengine ambazo zinatakikana ziwe, kwa hivyo mimi 
nashukuru kwa ajili ya policy  hii nikitumainia wa tu wangu watafaidika mara mbili;  kwanza 
watalima na wataishi bila wasiwa si na kufanya ukulima kwa nguvu kwa sababu watakuwa na 
hakikisho ya kwamba mahali pale wanaishi ni mahali kwao na watapewa vibali vile 
vinatakikana, pili pale Kibarani patatengenezwa kwa sababu watu wangu wamekuwa wakiteseka 
kwa muda mrefu kwa  ajili ya zil e takataka ambazo zinamwagwa pale kiholela nikijua ya 
kwamba zitashughulikiwa vilivyo ili watu wangu wakaweze kuishi kwa afya na wakaweze 
kuishi kwa amani.  
Kwa hayo machache Mheshimiwa S pika nasema ahsante na mimi ninaunga mkono 
asilimia mia policy  hii tu kaweze kuipitisha. Ahsante , Mheshimiwa S pika.  
(Applause ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Mheshimiwa Mwabashiri?  
Hon.  Mwabashiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipea fursa hii kwanza niwape  
pongezi  kamati ya ardhi  kwa kuileta policy  hii lakini tusimsahau aliy ekuwa M wenyekiti 
Mheshimiwa Nasser ndiye alianzisha haya . 
Mheshimiwa Spika sitazungumza m engi kwa sababu wenzangu wamezungumza mengi 
na yote ni mazuri pia na hiyo policy  ukiangalia kwa undani lakini jambo langu ni moja tu ;  kuwa 
katika kila mtaa kutatengen ezwa settlements . 
Ukiangalia section  2.6 the establishment of a county settlement fund  to manage the 
settlement programs  Mheshimiwa S pika jambo hilo hatukulipangia katika b ajeti ya mwaka wa 
14/15 , nilipendekeza katika kamati ya bajeti iliyokuwa chini ya Mh eshimiwa S aad mas uala ya 
ardhi kusaidia wale wenzet u ambao wanaoishi katika settlement  hawana uwezo wa kulipa yale 
malimbukizi ya zile pesa kwa sababu mimi natoka katika wodi ya Mjambere  na Kisauni  na 
Kaunti ya Mombasa kwa ujumla kuna masuala ya ardhi . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika jamb o hili mimi limenifurahisha sana kwa sababu naona 
watu wangu wa Kisauni  sasa kufikia yale malengo tuliyokuwa nayo yamestawi ; jambo hili 
hatutaliwacha hivi  hivi na naomba waheshimiwa wenza ngu tutunge sheria kwa sababu hii ni 
policy tu sheria lazima itungwe . 
Kwa sababu tukiizungumza hii County settlement fund  lakini lazima sheria ifanywe 
itakuwa ni asilimia ngapi pesa za kaunti ndani ya hiyo county settlement fund  kwa mfano 
ukienda Nairobi k wenye Bunge kuu  CDF ni asilimia 50 ya bajeti nzim.  
Kwa hivyo hata sisi katika b ajeti ya K aunti ambao tutaweka katika mfuko huu ya b ajeti 
nzima k wa mfano kama b ajeti yetu ni Bilioni 12  kwa hivyo tukiweka  asilimia  10 tupate milioni 
tano kwa bilioni moja ili tuweze kuwas aidia wenzetu kule ambao wam ekaa kwa ma  settlement  
kule nje ba do wamekaa katika sehemu ambazo si  zao. 
Kuna wengine wanashi ndwa kuuza zile nyumba kwa sababu eti wameshindwa kulipa 
kodi kwa sababu watu hawa wameishi zaidi ya miaka 40 na wakati huo sehemu ile iliku wa msitu 
kabisa sisi w enyewe tukaw awekea mataa  tumewatengenezea barabara tumewa wekea cabro  sasa 
yule mwenye hapo anaona kumekuwa mji anaweka mambo yake vile anavyotaka . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika naona policy  hii itawazuia watu wenye maono kama hayo 
na ikiwezekana wana weza kuka a na kuangalia pia tunaweza kuwasaidia vipi. Ahsante.  
(Applause ) 
           The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Chairman  Nasser Rashid.  
           Hon.  Nasser  Rashid : Mheshimiwa S pika ahsante sana kabla sija endelea leo ni siku 
yangu moja muhimu sana na ningependa  mpigaji picha apige p icha vizuri.. . 
(Applause ) 
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page  11            …Mheshimiwa S pika leo tunaji anda a kuwapa watu wa Mombasa  zawadi ya krismasi ; hii 
land policy  haikutoka hapa kwenye Bunge  pekee ni land policy  kuna watu amb ao ni raia wako 
nje walikaa wakafikiria wa kaleta kwetu wakasema kuna haja ya kuunda land policy , tuna shida 
zetu za kipekee kwa hivyo lazima tuwe na policy , walileta tukakaa chini tukatengeneza…  
(Applause ) 
           ...hiyo itatatua zile shida ambazo ziko hapa  na vile  vile pia tutaweza kupunguza shida zetu 
Mheshimiwa S pika; katika dunia nzima swala la shida la ardhi liko hapa Mombasa tumekaa 
chini na Mwenyekiti  ambaye ni mkakamavu Mwenyekiti…  
(Applause ) 
           Ameweza kuwalet ea wanachama  na namshukuru sana Mwenyekiti mwenzangu pia 
ningependa k umpongeza Mheshimiwa Enock kila akija hapa hana stori nyingine ni Kibarani  na 
watu wangu.  Ahsante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon Karume?  
(Technical hitch ) 
Hon. Karume: Mr. Speaker thank you so much for giving me this opportunity to also 
contr ibute  to this very progressive M otion . Mr. Speaker Sir I will start first of all by reminding 
Honorable M embers something that all of us are obliged to the national government , it is formed 
by the J ubilee party and the county government of Mombasa is formed by the ODM party and … 
(Applause ) 
...Mr. Speaker Sir whatever that we are doing today is part and parcel of the ODM party 
and now that we are in an election year I am a very happy and humble resident of Mombasa 
because I know the county governm ent of Mombasa c ourtesy of the D eputy party leader we have 
earned ourselves credit as the county government of Mombasa . 
Having said that Mr. Speaker at this point in time it is very important for us to recognize 
that the economic development of Mombasa squarely lies with the policy that we are passing 
today ; investors will alway s shy away from a C ounty that has serious land challenges and at this 
point in time whatever that we are doing today we are going to really encou rage investors to our 
esteemed C ounty…  
(Applause ) 
…Mr. Speaker Sir we are talking about again economic empowerment for our residents , 
our banks refuse to take our titles because of our long term historical challenges whatever that 
we are doing today we are going to correct this the long term challenges that we have been 
facing and our poor residents of Mombasa will be able to obtain loans from financial  institutions 
courtesy of the land documents that will be available . 
Talking about the historical injustices I think this is a thing of the past I am p osing a 
question  I think they have been a stumbling b lock, corruption issues and e ven land challenges as 
Mombasa C ounty government we have already spoken and this is the document and we want to 
be supported and not support the ... that have been churned to fru strate the efforts of our able 
|Governor . 
Mr. Speaker S ir having said this that whatever that we are doing ; the policies are very 
nice but the most important thing is the implementation whatever my coll eague has said Hon 
Opeya we need to put in place mechanisms  that will ensure that we implement this policy 
because the sooner we implement this policy the better for us and we are 100 per cent sure not 99 
per cent sure that the next government will be formed by his Excellency  Ali Hassan Joho . Thank 
you. 
The Speake r (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon Hatimy?  
December  21, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         159 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page  12 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipatia fursa h ii 
niweze kuchangia mjadala huu … ni kuwa mwanzo nataka kutuma kwa niaba ya…wetu wale 
wote …lakini kusema kuwa mama Halima na wengine wote ile bidii wa litia kuhakikisha kuwa hii 
sera imetimia na hivi leo imetumia. Mheshimiwa Spika kama unavyojua. .. 
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Why are you standing?  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you so much . Mr. Speake r for the benefit of this House  we 
would like to know who is Mama Halima , there are many Mama Halima’s in this C ounty of 
Mombasa so we need the Honorable  to be precise  who is this mama  Halima.  Thank y ou, Mr. 
Speaker.  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Nafikiri Mheshimiwa S pika tukianza kuuliza jina hapa 
hatutamaliza l akini nitam uonyesha mama Halima tukimaliza . Mheshimiwa S pika kama 
unavyojua sera na sheria kutoka 1895 mpaka leo imekua ni sheria tatu ,  ya pili ni kutoka 1963 
mpaka hivi sasa serikali ya Mombasa imeonelea kuja na sera hii ili kujadili swala la kutatua 
ardhi na leo hii tunasema kuwa tutaepuka shida nyingi za ardhi tulizokuwa nazo . 
Sera hii imew eza ama sera hii imegusia shida tumekuwa nazo kwa muda mrefu na tangu 
zamani Mheshimiwa Spika ni kusema shida tulizokuwa nazo ni seri kali kuweza kutia jambo hili 
nguv u kutatua shida hizi tulizo nazo . 
Mheshimiwa Spika twasema leo hii ni aidha usimamizi uzungumzie juu ya … la pili ni 
kusema kuwa kutakuwa na msingi wa kutosha na mambo mengine mengi yamezungumziwa 
katika hii sera hamna jambo ambalo halikushikwa . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika nataka tutie swali sasa tuulize watu wote wa unge mkono  
hii sera ili tuwe Mombasa tumepeana siku kuu ya krismasi watu wetu walio na shida wasaidike 
wanachama  nashukuru kwa kuweza kuni unga mkono na mu endelee hivyo ili tupate kuipitisha.  
Ahsan teni sana . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Members there being no other contribution I put the 
question to the Motion . Member s, of the opinion that this House  adopts …  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members there being no other business this House  stands adjourned until tomorrow 
afternoon.  
The House  rose at 3 :39 pm.  
 