March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 1 
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 1st March , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Fifteenth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 10:35a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Abdirahman Abdulka dir) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): You may be seated ? Yes 
Clerk ? 
 
MOTION  
MEASURES TO DECONGEST COAST TEACHING AND REFERRAL HOSPITAL  
 
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana MCA Shanzu Ward please move the Motion.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker, I be g to move the following Motion:  
 
THAT AWARE THAT , article  43 (1) (a) of the Constitution of Kenya , 2010 provides that 
every person has the right to the highest attainable standard of health which includes the 
right to health care services;  
 
FURTHER AWARE T HAT , health sector is the biggest function to be dev olved under the 
Constitution of Kenya , 2010 to allow the County government to design innovation models 
and interventions that suit the unique health needs, encourage effective cit izen 
participation and ma ke autonomous and quick decision on resource mobilization a nd 
management;  
 
COGNIZANT THAT , the Coast General Teaching and Referral Hospital is the largest 
public health facility serving the Counties  of Mombasa , Kilifi, Lamu, Tana R iver, Kwale 
and Taita Tav eta; 
 
CONCERNED THAT , due to the high number of patients at  Coast General Teaching & 
Referral Hospital the situation has caused congestion, undue delay in service delivery, 
straining of the available facilities and overworked staff;  
 
I, therefore urge this  Assembly to RESOLVE ; 
 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 2 1. THAT, the County government through the Department of Health to conduct a 
strategic needs assessment survey of the infrastructure, equipment and human resource … 
 
[Loud consult ations ] 
 
Mr. Speaker , kindly protect me because an Honourable Member is shouting here.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdu lkadir ): Okay Hon ourable  Juma please 
remain silent when the Member is on the floor.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
  
1. THAT, the County government through the Department of Health  to conduct a 
strategic needs assessment survey of the infrast ructure, equipment and human resource  
capacities of all health facilities in the County to be able to know requirement, capacities, 
for planning  and implement solutions accordingly ; 
 
2. THAT, the C ounty government to upgrade Port  Reitz Level 4 Hospital to leve l 5 
and fully equip it to attend to referrals to reduce the overcrowding at the Coast Teaching 
& Referral Hospital ; 
 
3. The County government to source for funds for construction of health facilit ies in 
every ward and renovate the existing ones for easy acce ss to health care.   
 
Mr. Speaker , with that I therefore humbly ask the Hon ourable  Chairman for labour 
Honourable  Jacktone  Madialo to second . I thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes Madialo ? 
 
Hon. Madialo : Mr. Chairman  Honourable  Katana is a very good friend of mine and it is 
hard not to support his Motion , I do hereby support.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. I now propose a  
question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Allen Katana, on Measures to decongest Co ast General 
Teachi ng and Referral Hospital to be considered in this Hon ourable  House in the same terms as 
moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Allen Kata na please make your contribution to the Motion.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa  Spika nakushukuru sana kwa nafasi hii  ulionipa na pia nianze 
tayari kwa kumpongeza Mwenyekiti wa L eba Mheshimiwa  Madialo . Naamini hajaniunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kuwa ni rafiki yangu, lakini ameona hili swala ni la maana sana na 
ningependa kuzungumzia kiurefu  kidogo kuhusu hili swala ambalo liko mbele  yetu leo . 
Mheshimiwa spika k ama tujuavyo hospitali yetu kubwa ya Makadara  inahudumia kama nilivyo  
orodhesha hapa, inahudumia Kaunt i zote sita za maeneo haya ya pwani . 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Hivyo basi, imesababishwa  hali ya mson gamano ya wagonjwa pale katika kupeana 
huduma kwa wagonjwa. Mhe shimiwa Spika , ningetaka kulitaja hili ya kwamba inafika wakati, 
nimetembelea pale mgonjwa unaona kabisa hajapona, lak ini madaktari kwa kuwa wamempa yale 
matibabu wanafikiria tayari, huyu  ni uzuri apaondoke hapa ili tupate mgonjwa  mwingine . 
Mheshimiwa Spika , sasa inakuwa madaktari pale wako kwa wingi kutafuta idadi ya watu walio  
wahudumia, lakini sikukuwa na uhakika wa id adi ya wagonjwa ; tulio wahudumia wamepata 
matibabu bora na hivyo basi kwenda nyumb ani wakiwa wamepata afueni na tena utakuta 
nimetaja pale ya kwamba, ni vizuri mapendekezo ya kwamba kila Wadi yenye ina  mwakilishi 
hapa ikaweze kuwa na hospitali ili watu wa pale wakaweze kupata matibabu . Mheshimiwa 
Spika , sasa ule msongamano ulio pale katika ile hospitali kubwa yet u ya hapa Mombasa ikiwa 
wagonjwa wamehudumika pale na wamepata yale matibabu ambao hawawezi kuyapata 
mashinani  itakuwa ni vizuri wale wagonjwa bada la ya kutolewa pale kupunguza msongamano 
waende nyumbani,  itakuwa ni vizuri watumwe katika hizi hospitali zenye tunaziomba ziwe za 
Wadi ili wakaendele e kuangaliwa kwa kina katika zile hospitali ndogo ndogo zilizo  pale.  
Tena si matibabu tu ; Mheshimiwa Spika hizi hospitali zenye ziko mashinani 
zitakapofanywa k uwa imara, mimi nataka kuamini pia zita leta ajira  na hili nataka kulileta wazi 
ya kwamba nataka kuishukuru serikali iliyopita ya Mhe shimiwa  Mstahiki Gavana Hassan Joho  
aliweza kutengeneza hospitali kubw a sana ambayo ni namba mbili pwani nzima kwa ukubwa 
wake na kwa mtazamo itakapokuwa iko pale Wadi y a Shanzu  na hili nalisema na nataka liende 
katika rekodi za Bunge hili, ya kwamba bali na kwamba wagonjwa wa kutoka sehemu zengine  
watapata huduma pale, vil e vile hata wafanyikazi katika hizi idara zengine kama za us afi, upishi 
lazima watoke katika Wadi y a Shanzu la sivyo wacha iwe kwa rekodi leo ya kwamba Shanzu 
kutakuwa na maandamano makubwa endapo kuna watu wengine watakuja kuchukua ajira ya ile 
zahanati a mbayo iliyo ya maeneo ya Shanzu.  Hio ni kusema k wamba hizi hospitali zengine 
ambazo zik o kwa wadi zingine zitakapo boreshwa, vile vile pia zitawezesha tuwe na ajira katika 
watu wetu hawa, mbali na kwamba watakuwa n awanapeana huduma kwa  wagonjwa, vile vile 
kutakuwa kumetoka nafasi za ajira kwa watu wetu.  Kitu kingine Mhe shimiwa  Spika ni kwamba 
tutakapo wezesha ile hospitali yetu ya Port Reitz , kwa sababu ni hospitali ambayo imekuwa kwa 
mda mrefu, ni hospitali ya kihistoria na ba do haijapanda kwa level  yoyote  ya maana , 
itakapowezeshwa na kuwa level ya nne vile vile nina hakika sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika itaweza 
kupunguza ule msongamano ambao tunauona katika hospitali yetu kubwa, kwa hayo mengi 
naomba nikome hapo Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Ahsante sana. 
 
The Temporary Speake r (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  
Benard Ogutu make your contribution please.   
 
Hon. Ogutu: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi , japo ba do nilikua 
najiandaa vizuri. Kwanza kabisa nataka nimpongeze nd ugu yangu All en Katana  kwa ku leta hoja 
hii, kwa wakati huu. Walakin  ningependa kum refer  kwa ile Ripoti  ambayo tulileta hapa juzi , 
katika h aya maombi mengi ambayo ameweka tumeweza kuzizingatia katika ile Ripoti  ambayo 
ilipita ndani ya hili Bunge . Tuliweza katika ile Ripoti ku recommend  kwamba  Coast General iwe 
autonomous  iwe ina run kivyake  alafu katika kil a Sub County  iwe na Level 4 Hospital  ambayo 
haitafa nya watu wa hapo wafanye referral katika Coast General , alafu  katika kila area tuwe na 
Level 2 na 3 facilitates  katika hizi Level 2 and 3 facilitates  ni ile sehemu  ambayo inatibu haya 
magonjwa kama Flu… 
 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 4 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Order! You are confusing me. 
Standing Order 73 (2) , A Member who begins a speech in any of the languag es provided s hall 
continue the same language until the conclusion of the Members speech , so Hon ourable  Ogutu 
speak  one language.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Chair, can  you read that Standing Order to totality.  
 
The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ):  I have d one that.  
 
Hon. Ogutu : Because it gives a chance if you want to stress a point you can do it in 
another language Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ):  That is not provided in the 
Standing order so please just stick to one langu age. 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Nafikiri,  I stand guided I was just saying  
that in each and every Sub County we will have at least  one Level 4 facility t hen we will also 
have Level 2 and 3 facilitates whereby in Level 1 and 2 the y are tre ating diseas es like flus and 
such likes , then we will have a Level 1 the community unit so in that line you will see that there 
is decongestion of Coast General.  Then on the issue of the infrastructure we also recommended 
that most of the facilities are di lapidated an d they are in bad state  we recommended that there are 
supposed to be repaired im mediately and on the issue of staffing we also said that from Level 2 
to Level 5 which is Coast General  there should be proper staffing so that people cannot just g et 
access to  quality health services but get access to quality health services. Another conc ern was 
on the issue off…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Ab dirahman Abdulkadir ): Order Hon ourable  Ogutu. 
Please advise me are you responding to a stat ement or you  are contributing to this matter?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  I am contributing to this Motion  Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Okay please proceed.  
 
Hon. Ogutu: Another concern was on the issue of land tenure ; we found out tha t most of 
the facilities lacked title deeds  and most of them were grabbed , so Mr. Spe aker I can see the 
mover maybe wants to say something but…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): What  is your point of order.  
 
Hon Katana:  Mr. Speaker I am standing on a Point of Order;  I understand the Chair to 
Health Committ ee maybe brought in some report…  
 
[Interruption ] 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 5 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Allen Katan a, 
could you cite the Point of Order. 
 
Hon. Katana: Okay, the point of order is ; is the Honourable M ember truly in order in 
giving the repor t to Motion or he supports the Motion I do  not understand. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable Ogutu.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker , I do not know whether the mover of this Motion understands  
his motion  because he is ta lking about decongesting Coast general and the measures that am 
putting in place are aimed at decongesting the facility Mr. Speaker  so maybe  I stand guided if the  
Mover und ersta nds his Motion … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulka dir):  Yes, Honourable  Allen 
Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Okay to my level of my understanding Hon ourable  Speaker . The 
Honourable  Member to stand and say to his opinion he thinks that if he takes th ese steps then we 
shall be doing greater and instead of him saying we, we, it i s like giving us a report of whatever 
they did. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Well noted Hon ourable  Allen 
Katana. Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogutu please be advised, you are not responding to a Statement 
or report when you say issues like we recommended, we did this I think you are not contributing 
to the Motion . 
  
Hon. Ogutu:  Chair I stand guided but I was responding to prayer num ber one and when I 
say we this is something that has been done and I think even the Motion is passed by events now 
that is on the floor,  we will just co ntribute but again I just want to say it is a good Motion...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Because if anything done to ma ke healthcare accessible I think that is very important on 
the issue of having facilities in every Wa rd I think this was well captured and we said that for 
every person to get accessed to quality health services without wal king far distance we mu st 
have fa cilities at the Ward level and if possible for the start we said we could have well -
structured  conta iners to act as maybe facilities at those level at the time when we do not have 
enough funds to construct maybe a facility  in the Ward. So , I think it is a  good move and I 
congratulate the mover for it but again am advising him to read and understand that t he report, 
Chair we should not take for granted anything that we pass in this Hon ourable  House because the 
report was here , we read it and under stood it a nd we passed it so the Mover should go back and 
read that report and understand it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Well,  noted. Yes , Honourable  
Milka?  
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker f or giving me t his chance  to also contribute . I am up 
on a point of support for the Motion introduced to this House by the Chair Educati on Hon ourable  
Allen Katana.  First, before I give my contribution,  I want to repeat something that I said here 
yesterday ; for a long  time,  we have  been bringing such essential Motions to this House in fact 
there was almost a similar Motion introduced to this House bu t what happened is the 
implementation is the issue . Again, the backstops with the Chairperson of Implementation ; I 
kindly req uest tha t Chair Implementation just go back to the archives of all the Motions that we 
have passed combine with this Motion brought by  Honourable  Katana plus the similar one that 
have been passed before then see how that can be implemented and this House would h ave done 
something … 
 
[Inaudible ] 
 
The Motion introduced by Hon ourable  Katana on the prayers that he has given I will agree 
with him 100  per cent  that Coast General is indeed congested . I am a living example of having 
taken there, patients several times includi ng my own relatives and it took me to introduc e myself 
as an Hon ourable  Member and a Member of Health Committee to be near getting a service ! One 
day I stayed there the all day trying to have a patient treated ; it was such a hectic task , so for the 
prayers  he has given  including Port  Reitz upgraded is wonder ful, having each Sub County a 
Level 5 facility already we have in Shanzu I think that Utange Health Facility which can be 
upgraded to a Level 5 and am sure if all the facilities are … 
 
[Inaudible ] 
 
…It will be deconges ted and am very sure  the Honourable  Member seated next to  me 
Honourable  Ngugi would want in each Sub County a health facility to cater for the People living 
With D isabilities (PWDs) because all the PWDs are accessing the Coast General Level 5  is a 
nightmare for them . So, the p rayers that Hon ourable  Katana has brought in to t his House are very 
valid and I support 100  per cent  but that alone also when they are upgrading and the Gove rnor 
maybe tries and get more resources . We also need more human  resource ; we need more doctors;  
we need more nurs ing staff so the hospitals are well equippe d day and night. You should try and 
visit Coast General one of these fine days  at night and you will com e back a very disappointed 
person  because services come to almost a standstill  unless it is really an em ergency and you have 
some power to push for  services. So , I support the Motion by Hon ourable  Katana 100  per cent  
and my Chairman of Health has highlighted tha t the taskforce is addressing most of th ese prayers 
that Honourable  Katana has brought. We are hop ing and wishing that taskforce report is put into 
use as soon as possible so that we do not see such kind of scenes at the Coast General Hospital. 
Thank you, Chairm an Health  for highlighting that and May God giv e you more wisdom to 
continue following up o n matters of health. Thank you s o much Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Well noted. 
Honourable  Mwaka Bakari?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakar i: Ahsante sana Bwana Mwenyekiti kwa kun ipa fursa hii na mimi 
niweze kuweka sauti ya ngu kidogo kwenye Mswada  huu. Nasimama kuiunga mkono kwa 
sababu, mimi kama mkaazi wa Likoni nina masikitiko makubwa sana…  
 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 7 [Interruption ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdir ahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Ngug i? 
 
 Hon. Ngugi:  Sio Bwana Mwenyekiti ni Mhe shimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Napenda kukurekebisha Bwana Mwenyekiti ni sawasawa na 
Bwana Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, overr uled. Proceed 
please.  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Ba kari: Sawa sawa, Kiswahili sanifu hicho pia umeniregesha  nyuma sana. 
Napenda kuunga mkono hoja hii kwa sababu, unaju a kuunga mkono ni lazima inakugusa. Mimi 
nimeguswa kama mkaazi wa Likoni kwa sababu Likoni tuko na Zahanati mbili  amba zo Zahanati 
moja ni  Likoni He alth Centre, moja ni  Mrima, na Likoni Hea lth Centr e ni hospitali ambayo ni 
Mama wa Likoni tangu 1980’s na mpaka sasa ukiangalia Zahanati ile inasikitisha, ikiweko 
Waheshimiwa  wenzangu wanaweza kuni unga mkono vile ambavyo iko. Hata Mheshimiwa Juma 
Mwalimu a likuwa hajazaliwa nafikiri hio hospitali,  hata Mh eshimiwa Manuari hajazaliwa  
Hospitali ile . Ukiangalia Mheshimiwa Spika ni hospitali ambayo inasikitisha, mpaka kufikia sasa 
Zahanati ile ambayo kwamba inapokea wago njwa wa Likoni hata wengine kutoka h ata Kwal e 
Kaunti jirani, lakini pindi utakapofika  pale h akuna huduma ambazo zinatosheleza isipokuwa 
tuvuke. Bwana Spika na unaju a kama kuvuka kwetu, pahali kuna msukumano, ukifika pale gari 
la ambulansi, meli zinapita m gonjwa yule yuwapata ta bu. Tukienda hospitali  nyengine ambayo 
ni ya Zahanati ya Mrima,  vile vile Zahanati ya Mrima ilikuweko na mashirika, mashirika 
waliweza kutowezesha na yalivyoondoka mashirika hospitali ile haina sura. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi  nasimama kuunga hoja hii ili iweze uz ito na iw eze kuleta uzito na 
iweze kufwatilizwa ka ma M heshimiwa Milka alivyosema tunaweka hoja nyingi sana hapa lakini 
kufwatilizwa hakuna na wala utendaji kazi wa lile jambo lile huwa hakuna. Tunaongea kama 
nyimbo na tukitoka hapa tunawachia hapa. Kwa hiv yo Mheshi miwa Spika jambo la afya ni 
jambo muhimu sana nataka liwekwe mkazo na liweze kufwatilizwa ili iweze sura ya kuweza 
kusaidia wagonjwa wetu kule mashinani. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, just for the  record 
Honourable  Ngugi I am the Chair of this  sessi on and I am also the Speaker of this House. Yes , 
Honourable  Madialo please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . From the onset I would like to support 
Honourable  Katana’ s Motion…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
But I would also like to advice the Hous e, if the House Business Committee was keen,  they 
would have not allowed prayer number one and prayer number three;  they would have advised  
the mover of the Motion to bring prayer num ber two because all these things have been pas sed 
here barely a week ago when we adopte d the report .  
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 8 So, the reason why maybe sometimes we move Motions here and they are never taken 
seriously is because we thro w a lot of papers in the air and that is why my Ch airman for Health 
was finding a little bit h ard to execute his points because when he  was ex plaining you guys were 
thinking that he was responding to a statement. If we are keen,  we will realize that, for example 
this prayer number one, the County government  through the Department of Health to conduct  a 
strategic needs assessments survey of the inf rastructure, equipment and human resource 
capacities of all Health facilities  and blah blah it goes on. Prayer number three,  the same, all that 
was captured comprehensiv ely. So, if I would have been asked  it is the Port-Reitz  Health facility 
when it was m entioned  in the report, the recommendations were, that the mental side, mental unit 
be upgraded so maybe the only prayer here that is a bit different from that which was ca ptured in 
the report is that Port -Reitz  be upgraded to Level five of which I fully support . So, even as I 
support, I request that the House Business Committee should always be keen when 
recommending to the Motions that come to this House. I believe that the re other Motions that are 
completely new th at can enhance the business of the House which should be prioritized . So, 
Honourable  Katana, I support this Motion but I wo uld like to humbly inform you that all these 
things  apart from Port -Reitz Level 4 being up grades all  of them are in that report and the 
Honourable  Chair and the Speaker presiding over this session was there when we were giving 
the Governor that report and he said  all th ese things he is going to implement. Thank you so 
much.  
 
The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Abdirahma n Abdulkadir ): Well noted Hon ourable  
Madi alo, your message will be conveyed to the  House Business. Yes , Honourable  Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  na mimi kuweza kuniona. Kwanza 
nimesimama kidete kuunga mkono hoja hii iliokuja  na Mheshimiwa mwenza Bwana…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika , nilinde hapa Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati ya Afya  ananichokora chokora … 
 
[Laughter ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Ogutu , what 
is the matter? What is the issue Hon ourable  Ogutu.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Halloo! 
 
The Tem porary Speaker (Hon. Abdirah man Abdulkadir ): Ogutu, what is the issue ? 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Nilikuwa namuambia  aunge mkono  hiyo ya Port - Reitz maanake Port -Reitz 
iko Changamwe Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ni muongo lakini wacha tumuache hivyo hivyo na t abia yake.  
 
The Temporary Spe aker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Okay p roceed, proceed.  
 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 9 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante, ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunilinda. Kwanza 
naunga mkono hoja hii iliokuja  na Mheshimiwa mwenza Mheshimiwa Katana ; nasema hoja hii 
ni nzuri na pia itaweza kutul etea natija sisi Waheshimiwa wenye ambao hatuna mahospitali ama 
italeta natija k atika jimbo letu la Mombasa. Kwanza kusema ya kuwa Makadara  iweze 
kuwezeshwa, kuwezeshwa kwake ni hii hos pitali ya Port -Reitz iweze kuwezeshwa ndio u le 
msongamano wa pale Makada ra utaweza kupungua ndio kuwezeshwa kwa M akadara lakini bila 
kuwezeshwa hii  Hospital i ya Port-Reitz kutakuwa ni vile vile . Kwa hivyo mimi na unga mkono  
kuwezeshwa hii Hospitali ya Port-Reitz , maanake sisi tunatoka sehemu ya Changamwe, mim i 
ninawakilisha wananchi wa Wadi ya Kipevu  na kwangu pia hakuna zahanati  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Sasa mimi na unga mkono  kama vile Mwenyekiti wa Afya  alivyosema Level 2, Level 3 zitakuwa 
ama Level  1 katika kila  Wadi itakuwa vizuri sana itaweza kusaidia watu wetu k upitia kutibiwa 
ama kupitia maradhi . Sisi kwanza  Katika Wadi ya  Kipevu  tukipatwa na ma radhi yoyoye 
tunaenda kwa Wa di ya Ogutu  Changamwe, tunaenda Port -Reitz, tunaenda Wadi ya Chaani , 
vikizidi ndio tunae lekea Makadara . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi ningeunga mkono 
Port-Reitz  iweze kuwezeshwa na itaw eza kutusaidia hasa sisi wakaazi wa Chang amwe kwa 
sababu tunavuka kuja huku Maka dara wakati gonjwa limekuwa limezidi ama gonjwa halisikii 
dawa tunatumwa huk u Makadara . Hivyo basi  mimi na unga mkono  na pia na unga mkono  kila 
Wadi ambayo  haina Zahanati iweze  kuwekew a hiyo Level 2 mojawapo ikiwa ni  Wadi ya  
Kipevu . Nikipata kama hiyo Level 2 wananch i wangu wataweza kuwa na afya bora. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika n a naunga mkono hoja hii.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, thank you. Yes , 
Honourable  Mariam Baimu.  
 
Hon. Baimu : Kwanza ahsan te sana Mheshim iwa Spika kwa kunipa nafa si hii. Pili 
namuunga mkono Mheshimiwa  Katana kwa hii hoja al ioileta hapa mbele yetu ; ni hoja kweli ya 
muhimu  sana. Nikiongelea mimi ningependa kutia msis itizo sana hizo Wa di mbili ; ambayo ni 
Shanzu na Port -Reitz kama zitawez a kupewa nguvu, zikawekewa madawa ama v ifaa ambavyo 
vitasaidia ili huo msongamano ama watu kuj aa hapo Coast General waweze kupungua. Mimi 
ningeomba pia hizi Wadi  zetu kama mimi Frere Town  na hizo Kliniki  mbili h ospitali ndogo kwa 
hio ningeomba pia  kama twa weza kupata madawa pale ya kutosha na vifaa  vya zamani viweze 
kurekebishwa ili pia watu wetu wa Frere Town wa weze kusaidika. La mwisho ningem uomba 
Mheshimiwa Katana hoja yake ya kusema kw amba wafanyikazi watoke tu s ehemu ya  kwake  
Shanzu ; ningekuomba Mheshim iwa mwenzangu Frère  Town iko karibu na kwako wagonjwa 
tukubalie waje kwako na hata kazi pia wa tu wangu wapate kwako. A hsante sana.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Mwalimu ka ribu sana.  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu : Ahsante sana Bwana Mwenye Kiti . Mimi ni mesimama kuunga 
mkono hoja hii ya ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa Katana na kusema pia sisi kama Wahesh imiwa 
katika ile Zahanati ya Coast General  hua hatuheshimiki kabisa hata ukijitambulisha wale  
wahudumu ni kama ambae hawa taki kujua wewe ni nani . Kwa hivyo hii hoja  hii ikipitishwa 
ningeomba kupitia Mwenye kiti na pia kupitia Kamati ya Afya  wapeleke hata k ama ni majina 
yetu pale Coast General  ili tukiwa na shida yoyote kwenda kusaidia watu wetu t uweze 
kutambulika na watu we tu wapate huduma pia bila shida, na vile vile pia nataka pia niseme kule 
kwetu Likoni kuna Hospitali ambazo Mstahiki  Gavana  Joho alizijen ga lakini la kuhuzunisha saa 
hizi kuna Hospitali moja kule Shonda imekua ni jumba la kufugwa ku ku. 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 10 Kwa hivyo tunaomba pia hiy o ho spitali iweze kumalizwa na watu wa hi yo sehemu 
waweze kupata huduma kwa  sababu miji inakua kila kitu bado ku wekwa milango lakini wale  
wanaofanya ulinzi pale waliamua pia kulifuga kuku hilo jumba . Hivyo basi  naomba pia iweze 
kutimiza ili wakaazi wetu wawez e kupata huduma . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti kwa 
kunipatia fursa hii.  
 
  The Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Eliud 
Kimari.  
 
Hon.  Kimar i: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nasimama kuunga mkono h ii hoja ya 
Mheshimiwa G B moja am a Allen Katana katika jina lake rasmi . Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia 
hali ilivyo katika Wadi zetu hususan  Wadi yenye nimetoka ya Mkomani  hali ni mbovu , na jambo 
la kwanza tungesema hapa ningeanzia ni ile ukarabati wa zile health facilities  zenye  ziko kule 
mashinani . Ukiangalia kwa mfano  Mkomani tuko na hospitali yenye inaitwa Maweni 
Dispensary, ile Maweni Dispensary hali yake ni  duni kiangalia pale ukifika pale ndani 
Mheshimiwa Spika h uwezi hudumiwa utakua reffered  Coast General Hospital kwa  sababu kama 
tungeweza kukarabati hizo hospita li tungeweza ku decongest , tungeweza kupunguza wale watu 
wana kuja Makadara Hospital na ukiangalia hali ilivyo katika zile hospitali hata vitanda zenyewe 
hakuna , hata  ukipata dharura hususan  umekumbwa na ajali kule barabarani utapata hata ile 
huduma ya kwanza ni ngumu kupata pale Mashinani  na inabidi tunaleta  msongamano  hapa Coast 
General Hospital . Kwa hivyo jambo la kwanza nikiunga hii hoja ya Mhe shim iwa Katana ni 
turekebishe kw anza zile hospitali. Hiyo ingekua hatua ya kwanza … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
…Tuweze kuzirekebisha kama ni madawa ziwe na madawa kwa  sababu kuna yale 
magonjwa madogo madogo yanayo takiwa kutibiwa katika zile hospitali yalishinda hizo hospi tali 
ndiyo tunaleta Makadara lak ini utapata hata mtu ameumwa na kichwa pa le mtaani lakini anakuja 
wapi , anakuja Makadara. Vilevile ukifika Makadara Mheshimiwa Spika, mi mi nimepatana na 
jamaa zangu wengine lakini wamepata ajali huku barabarani wanaenda Makad ara ukifika pale 
Makadara hususan kwa sehemu ya dharura  utapata mtu ameku ja pale anatoka damu amepata 
ajali kule barabarani lakini hata kutibiwa anachukua saa moja kab la hata apate hata yule mtu wa 
kums hughulikia . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hili swala linataka kutiliwa mkazo na vilevile 
hata kupunguza watu wanaoenda pale Makadara am a Coast General Hospital kuna ile tunaita 
mobile Clinics  zile mobile Clinics  pia zina weza chang ia kupunguza wale watu wanaokuja pale 
Makadara kama zina weza kuwekwa kama zitaku wa zinafanya katika awamu tofauti to fauti 
katika Wadi zinaenda kwa mfano ; inaenda Mkomani, inaenda Old Town hata itaweza kupunguza  
ule msongamano w a pale  Makadara.   Kwa hivyo nashukuru, nashukuru Mheshimiwa Katana na 
nikimalizia nataka kumwam bia Mheshimiwa Katana si lazima wafanyaji  kazi wote asilimia mia 
kwa mia w atoke Shanzu , hata wagonjwa watatoka pale na watakuja kutibiwa. Mgonjwa wa 
kutoka kwake atakuja  atibiwe pale Maweni Dispensary si  lazima atoke hapo aende atibiwe wapi 
aende atibiwe kul e kw ake na vile vile hata wafany ikazi si  lazima watoke asilimia 100 wawe 
wanatoka kule, hiyo atakuwa anaenda kinyume … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 11 …atakuwa anaenda Kinyume na  Article  27 ya Katiba  ambayo ina zungumzia ku husu  
mambo na usawa . Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abd ulkadir ): Thank you, now may  I ask 
Honourable  Katana to respond to the Motion bearing in mind the sentiments and the inputs of all 
the Members, please respond . 
 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spika, ahsante sana kwa nafasi hii na nawashukuru 
Waheshim iwa wote walio toa changizo zao na katika h oja hii na kwa ruhsa yak o ningewataja kila 
mtu tofauti na maneno waliyosema lakini maneno waliyosema Waheshimiwa  hawa hayana 
tofauti kwa sababu wengi nawaunga mkono swala hili. Utofauti kidog o unatoka kwa 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa Leba na Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa mambo ya Afya lakini pia 
niwakumbushe  Bunge hili tumelikuta na tutaliwacha na Bunge hili halitaleta mambo mapya zaidi 
ya yale yale ya  kumtetea mwananchi kila uchao. Nitaje maneno am bayo Mheshimiwa am baye 
nina muheshimu sana ; Mheshimiwa Milka ya kuhim iza Kamati tekelezi inayoongozwa na 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Mheshimiwa wa Kongowea ya kwamba  haya mambo tunayo  yaongea 
hapa ama tunayowasilisha katika Bunge letu tukufu hili n i kwamba itaku wa bora zaidi mambo 
haya kam a yatatendeka.  
Mheshimiwa Spika l akini swala la kusema kwa mba haya yalinenwa tayari kwa hivyo 
hayastahili kunenwa, Mheshim iwa Spika kwa hakika ya kwamba miaka ya nyuma sikuwa kwa 
Bunge hili, hamna mapya walioongea tofauti na haya tu nayoongea. Kitu tunachofanya 
Mheshimiwa S pika ni kukumbushana na kusisitiza ili mw isho wa kwisha Mheshimiwa Spika 
tuhakikishe maisha ya watu wetu yanapata mabadiliko. Kitu chen gine ambacho nitakisema 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni kile Mheshimiwa Kimari alichokisema  ya kwamba waf anyikazi wawe 
watatoka sehem u nyengine nyengine lakini kuna kipengele  kingine ambacho utanisamehe kwa 
sana nimekisaha u kinachosema asilimia 70 ya watu watokee maeneo yale. Kwa hivyo 
nitawaruhusu Mheshimiwa Mariam Baimu n a Mheshimiwa K imari kwa ile thelathini 
mutagaanyizana nyinyi. Kitu chengine ambacho  sitaki kusahau Mheshimiwa Spika ni 
kumpongeza Mheshimiwa Kimari kwa kumaliza kesi yake ko rtini jana. Kwa hayo nasema 
ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Ab dirahman Abdul kadir ): Thank you. Hon ourable  
Memb ers, I now put the question that this Hou se adopts the Motion by Hon ourable  Allen Katana 
on measures to decongest Coast General  Teaching  and referral Hospital to be considered by this 
Honourable  House in the same, to be adopted by thi s Hon ourable  House. Am repeating again, I 
now pu t the question that this House adopts the  Motion by Hon ourable  Allen Katana on 
measures to decongest Coast Teaching and referral Hospital to be adopted by this Hon ourable  
House in the same terms as moved ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes C lerk?  
 
MOTION  
APPROVAL OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY CALENDAR SECOND SESSION  
 
March 1 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       15 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 12 Just a communication from the Speaker that the Motion on approval of the County 
Assembly calendar  second session was to be mo ved by the Majority Leader Hon ourable  Athman 
Mwamwiri. I understand he is not present and as such I can also see that no Member of the 
House Busi ness Committee is here to move this Motion so this Motion will be  deferred back to 
the Ho use Business or rather will be deferred in the House in the afternoon  so be guided 
Members. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members this House remains adjourned un til Wednesday at 2:00 p.m. 
 
The House  rose at 11:23a.m. 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 