February 8, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 8th February , 201 7 
The House met at 2:43pm . 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members y ou may sit down . Yes Clerk.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Honorable M embers there  is a letter here written to me,  it comes from  the office  of 
County Assembly Clerk to the H on. Deputy Speaker ; 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) read the letter)  
OUTSTANDING PAYMENTS TO MARKETING AFRICA FOR MOMBASA QUIZ NI TE 
YEAR 2014  
 Hon Deputy Speaker sir,  due to circumstance s beyond my control,  am forwarding 
herewith documents as above captioned for your perusal and guidance regarding offsetting of the 
bill quoted herein.   
 M/s Marketin g Africa have forwarded to the C ounty Assembly of Mombasa a claim of 
Kshs  696,000.00 for a Mombasa quiz  nite event that was held on a Friday 29th August 2014  at 
Sarova White S ands.  
 There have been a lot of follow ups and complain ts about the long overdue non -payment 
not only from the event’s organizers  but also other stakeholders who feel that we are being 
unreasonable and unfair for not settling the bil l.  
 However , on scrutiny  of the available document s we have been unable to trace the 
following ; first the  invitation  letter for the eve nt, two  the approval to attend the event by the 
AIE h older at that time and three a n LSO  authorizing  the event organizing  to carry on with the 
exercise.  
 In the circumstance we propose that this matter be announced in the House  because of 
interest  of som e of the M embers and at the same time the matter be forwarded to the Public 
Accounts  Committee for thorough investigation s and advice regarding whether  the A ssembly 
can pay or not so as to settle this matter once and for all.  
 Meanwhile  we note that an at tendance  list has  been provided and a published magazine 
with pictorial of the C ounty assembly fraternity, hence  leaving behind a maze for discovery and 
scrutiny so as to establish the truth.   
 Hon Speaker sir kindly intervene  as this matter is complicated  and beyond my decision. 
 Yours o bediently Salim Juma,  County Assembly Clerk . 
(End of communication from the Chair)  
 This letter is forwarded  to the  Committee on  Public Account C ommittee , thank you.  Yes 
Clerk.  
STATEMENTS  
 Reply to statements , Chairman Co mmittee of T ransport  and Public w orks Hon Amir 
Thoya . 
 Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa S pika nimesimama kati ka  
Nyumba hi i ili niweze kutoa majibu ya taarifa  ambayo iliweza kuletwa katika N yumba hii 
kuhusiana maswala ya hali ya jinsi  ilivyo  maswala ya taa za usalama barabarani . 
February 8, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2  Mheshimiwa Spika tumeweza kuwa na kikao n a Chief O fficer  wa kitengo cha Usafiri na 
Miundo misingi  na baadaye pia nikaweza kupata fursa na  kuweza kuwa na kikao na Waziri 
mhusika wa idara wa uchukuzi. .. na kwa a jili hio kwa ruhusa ya B unge  letu tukufu naomba 
kutoa majibu yafuatayo.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu ya kucheleshwa katika idara ya Ununuzi wa Kaunti hii 
ya Mombasa imekuwa vigumu kwa vifaa ya kurekebishia mataa ya usalama kuweza kupatikana 
kwa muda uliku wa unahitajika . 
 Hata hivyo serikali ya Kaunti hasa idara ya U nunuzi  hivi sasa iko katika njia ya 
kuhakikisha kwamba vifaa hivi vinapatikana  hasa zile ambazo zilikosekana zimeweza 
kupatikana ili ziweze kuhakikisha kwamba taa hizi ziweze kurekebishwa kwa wa kati ule unafaa . 
 Tunaomba Mheshimi wa Spika kuwahakikishia kwamba Waheshimiwa viongozi wa 
Bunge hili na vile  vile wana nchi kwa jumla ya kwamba serikali i mewatambua kwa tatizo ambalo 
lilikuweko na hivi sasa limechukua jukumu na kuhakikisha kwamba tutafanya lile ambalo 
tunaliweza ili kuhakikisha kwamba um ma na watu wote wana weza kupata huduma hizi amba zo 
ni muhimu katika Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Thoya kwa hayo matokeo,  
Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Thank you very much , there being no other business the H ouse stand adjourned  till 
tomorrow afternoon.  
The House rose at 2:51pm.  