March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 13th March, 2019  
The House met at 3:00p.m.  
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON AGRICULTURE , FISHERIES , 
LIVESTOCK AND CO OPE RATIVES HON. WAMBUA ON DISTRIBUTION OF LIVES TOCK IN THE 
COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Junior Wambua, Chairperson of Agriculture, Fisheries, Livestock and Co -
operatives please  respond?  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika , leo siko tayari lakini tumeonana na Chief 
Officer leo tumeongea mambo hatukukamilisha tukasema tunataka comprehensive report  kwa 
Bunge hatutaki kuleta kitu ambacho hakiko tayari. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Junior Wambua you said you are not ready today , 
when are going to be ready  with the response ? 
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Anipe mpaka alhamisi . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Kesho ? 
 
 Hon. Wambua:   Not this one, the other one . 
 
 The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay fine so Hon. Junior make sure next week you have the 
respon se. Yes Clerk?  
 

March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ENVIRONMENT , WASTE 
MANAGEMENT AND ENERG Y HON . SHEBE ATHMAN ON GARB AGE PILEUP IN AIRPOR T WARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Sal im Athman, Chairperson Environment, Waste Management and Energy 
please give the response?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir. I would like to say that it is supposed  
to be tomorrow Mr. Speaker ; the Chief Officer is going to present herself in t he Committee and I 
have already talked to my fellow Members so that they can give us until tomorrow afternoon. 
Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Salim Athman so tomorrow afternoon we 
will have the response. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STAT EMENT BY CHAIRPERSON  COMMITTEE ON ENVIRON MENT , WASTE 
MANAGEMENT AND ENERG Y HON. SHEBE ATHMAN ON REMOVAL OF GARBAG E PILEUP IN 
KONGOWEA WARD  
 
 Yes again Hon. Salim Athman Shebe?  
  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : I think these are  some of the reasons I have requested fo r the Chief 
Officer to show herself tomorrow so that we can get a detail and comprehensive report  which is 
going to take care of all the 30 W ards of Mombasa County Hon. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you will have the response by tomo rrow afternoon God  
willing ? Okay. Thank you Hon. Shebe. Yes Hon. Abrari?  
 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi naomba Mwenyekiti 
wa Mazingira hili suala la Kongowea nafikiria  hii Taarifa  ni mara nne nimeileta mfululizo ; hili 
ni juma l a nne kuleta suala hili na wiki iliopita alileta ripoti ambayo haikuturidhisha ikabidi 
iregelelewe atuletee ripoti na leo pia naona ameiweka general kuwa itakuja ripoti ya W odi zote 
30 lakini Taarifa yangu ilikuwa nataka W odi ya Kongowea specific nataka ja a la Kongowea 
kuwa litafungwa lini? Na taka za  ndani ya Kongowea ziko na program vipi? Zitakuwa 
zikiondolewa vipi? Ratiba ni kwa siku ama kwa wiki ama vipi? Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Abrari. Hon. Shebe Athman I think you 
said ea rlier that tomorrow the Chief Officer will be there with you, you can invite Hon. Abrari on 
that C ommittee whereby maybe he can get the direct answers from the Chair before you table the 
report.  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Absolutely Hon. Speaker I have no proble m with that . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So please invite the Hon. Member tomorrow to that meeting 
and then you can bring the report by tomorrow afternoon.  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Okay Hon. Speaker. Thank you.  
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speake r Sir for the opportunity given.  Mr. Speaker Sir to 
add on that also I wanted to emphasize on the same issue. Yes I gave my S tatement last time 
trying to emphasize on the issue of collection of the garbage in Air port Ward Saratoga and I 
emphasized that it is almost two years the garbage had not been collected and as the Chairman 
has put it that the Chief Officer will be here most probably maybe tomorrow I have no problem 
with that but I just want to inform the Cha irman that how can I put it because I saw some four 
trailers moving around the dumping site and they collected at least four trailers . It was just an 
eighth of the work being done so I do  not know if that is what we meant and that what they 
meant that they  were collecting the garbage or what Mr. Speaker Sir.  Therefore to add on that 
Mr. Speaker Sir also tomorrow specifically I want them to respond specifically to Airport Ward, 
Saratoga. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim.  I think  Hon. Shebe you can reply 
on that?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na kwa chembe chembe  
ndogo za hekma kesho nitaweza kumualika rasmi pia ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa wa Airport na 
kama vile nilivyotangulia kusema kuwa sikuleta ile ripot i kwanza kwa sababu mimi mwenyewe 
kama Mwenyekiti nilikuwa na mushkil nayo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ndiposa tumekubaliana 
kuwa kesho tulikuwa tumempatia Chief Officer . Kwa hivyo tutakuwa na yeye asubuhi na 
nitamuambia Karani  wangu atume ujumbe mfupi  kwa Mhesh imiwa yeyote ambae yuko 
interested ili tuwe naye pamoja katika kikao. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Amur Murfad:  Mr. Speaker Sir I want to go back to Standing Order 41 (c) and I 
want to do a re quest from the Chairperson of the Committee of Education. Mr. Speaker we have 
been promised about bursaries...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Standing Order 41 (c) ?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : 41 (c) , A Member may request for a statement from the Committee 
Chairperson relating to matters under the mandate of the Committee and the Speaker ma y either 
appoint a day for the S tatement or be issued on the same day  but Mr. Speaker Sir...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you can go ahea d and give the Statement .  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir this issue of bursary is becoming unbearable ... 
   
(Applause)  
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  We can no longer take it ... 
  
(Applause)  
 
 It is either our colle ague; the Chair be on it or he faces the consequences of this 
Assembly Mr. Speaker Sir because we have been given dates and dates, we have been giving the 
Department Kshs. 300M illion  for the bursaries yet the financial y ear is ending we do  not know  
our fa te and the blame out there is about the bursaries.  Our offices reg istered numbers and there 
were taken to the Department Mr. Speaker Sir , we do  not want to be taken for granted,  the 
second thing there was this something called milk we do  not see it in schools anymore ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 A lot of money Mr. Speaker Sir, so my  brother who is the Chair of Education we need a 
comprehensive report about the milk and about the bursaries with your approval Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Nafikiri Bwana Spika takriban wiki tat u... 
 
[The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair]  
[The D eputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the C hair] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes proceed . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Nafikiri kwa takriban wiki tatu ama mwezi ilikuwa ni msukumo wa upande 
wa Uchukuzi  lakini tu naanza kusahau zile sehemu nyeti hususan upande wa elimu  na kama kila 
mmoja anastahili kubeba msalaba wake hatutakuwa saa zote tutakuwa tunamsimamisha 
Mwenyekiti wa mambo ya Uchukuzi . Imefika mahali sasa Mwenyekiti wa Elimu hatutaki tena 
cha ahadi , hatutak i cha nini na kama ni W aziri mhusika na yeye tunataka aje mbele ya Kamati 
aje atuambie hizi pesa watoto wetu watapata ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ama hawatapata kwa sababu habari ambazo tunazozipata kule chini ni kwamba 
tunaambiwa sisi ndio tumezuia mgao huo wa basar i. Kwa hivyo wao wanakataa kutoa halafu 
wakienda kwa wananchi wanageuza habari kwamba sisi tumekataa kupitisha bajeti ya mambo ya 
basari kwa hivyo sasa ni mbivu na mbichi zijulikane kila mmoja abebe msalaba wake.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu): Yes Ho n. Ogutu?  
  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Mimi ningependa tu kusema ya kwamba ni 
wakati muafaka  tufanye kazi zetu na heshima iwe; n afikiri ni miaka miwili serikali ya Kaunti ya 
Mombasa haijatoa basari halafu  tutasikia m tu anakuambia sijui fagia Bu nge kama ambaye  Bunge 
ndio wanatoa basari.  
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Sisi kazi yetu Mheshimiwa Spika ni  kuangalia kwamba hiyo basari imetolewa? Mgao ni 
ngapi? Lakini sio sisi wenyewe kusimama kutoa hizo basari. Kwa hivyo mimi naomba 
Mwenyekiti wa Elimu  ikiwa haya maneno ni magumu  sana kwake achukue responsibility  
ajiuzulu aachane na huo wadhfa  maanake mambo ya e limu si mambo madogo , wazazi wanalia 
kule mashinani sisi ndio tunasukumwa na hayo mambo ya  karo za shule . Kwa hivyo 
hatutaki… Kabla hili  Bunge lifagiliwe Mheshimiwa Spika, h iyo nini yatakikana iwe 
imeangaliwa. Ahsante . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  
 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nikisimama kama k ijana na pia mlezi 
nina huzuni ny ingi sana kuona saa hii muda umeenda mwaka mmoja na nu su katika Kaunti zote 
ni Mombasa Kaunti ambayo haijatoa basari. Mh eshimiwa Spika tulitolewa hapa W aheshimiwa 
mwaka uliopita tukakusanya hao beneficiaries  na hakuna lolote lilifanyika  ilhali kila mwaka 
bajeti hawa wangwana wanatengewa bajeti ya basari. Mhes himiwa Spika imefika wakati wa 
Mawaziri kwa vile wanaonekana wamezembea katika utenda  kazi wao; w ananchi wanataka 
huduma na labda walikuwa wanasema tuna  vitu personal  lakini inaonekana wazi watoto 
hawaendi shuleni. Tukiwa maofisini tunasumbuliwa na wazazi watoto hawaendi shu leni na 
wazazi wakiuliza basari! Basari! Basari! Z itatoka wapi?  
 Ni wakati muafaka  Mheshimiwa Spika Waziri wa Elimu aitwe aje mbele ya Kamati ya 
Elimu pasipo kwenda kwake akuje hapa kama Waziri ajieleze kwa nini basari hazijatoka? 
Tulia mbiwa mwisho wa mwezi wa pili hundi  zitatoka za waliopata alama 300 na zaidi,  mpaka 
saa hii hatujasikia neno lolote wala hawaongei wala simu hawapokei. Mheshimiwa Spika hili 
Bunge liache kuchukuliwa mzaha na watu wafanye  kazi, kama hawafanyi nikienda nyumb ani pia 
wao watakuwa wameshatangulia. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Hon.  Robert Nyiro, come on?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri ninasimama kama mmoja wa 
Wanakamati wa Elimu ni kiwa mchan a wa leo nimebahatika kuongea na Waziri  ambaye pia ni 
Naibu wa Gavana  wetu na nisingekuwa nimeongea naye ni kwa sababu nilikuwa nimepokea 
simu zaidi ya 30. Mheshimiwa Spika nikielezwa kwamba wale watoto ambao niliwaandikia 
barua waruhusiwe mashuleni kwa sa babu basari zao zinatengenezwa wam erudishwa nyumbani 
na nikawa na muuliza nilipeana ahadi mimi nikitegemea ahadi yake ya kwamba basari zitakuwa 
tayari na  hundi  zitapeanwa na akanieleza yeye kwamba yuko safarini Nairobi lakini hana 
uhakika zitatoka lini?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hatimy? Hon. Amur?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  Hon.  Murfad Amur:  The Deputy Governor does  not go with the office. We should not 
be told yuko safarini.  He does  not travel with the office.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The office is s till there, the Chief Officer is there, the workers are there so he does  not 
travel with  the c heque book, and he does  not travel with  the offic e. We are not buying that Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : The Hon Member was…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Answering what he had talked with the Deputy Governor. Yes give us the information?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:   Mr. Speaker S ir, I think I am worried about the telephone conversation ; 
this is a House of rules and regulation s and I do  not know if the S tatement that Hon . Nyiro is 
making is an official position or can be termed as hearsay of the road. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay proceed Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri mimi nimesimama nikasema mimi ni 
Mwanachama  wa K amati ya Elimu na mbali kuwa ni M wanachama  mimi ni Mheshimiwa 
ambaye wananchi wangu wanahitaji basari kutoka kwangu na wakati wakinisumbua mimi 
lazima niulize ofisi husika na nilipouliza hayo ndio majibu ambayo nimepata sasa siongei 
hearsay . Nimeongea na W aziri wa Elimu na akaniambia mahali alipo, hana uj umbe wa kwamba 
zitatoka lini j apo alitarajia zitoke wiki hii, s asa hiyo si  hearsay  ni habari ambayo ameniambia na 
ni masikitiko ndio maana mimi pia naisema ili kama kunaweza kuf uatiliza Kamati  ya elimu 
tuanze kuf uatiliza tujue zitatoka leo ama hii wiki ama ni  vile alivyosema kwamba hajui na hana 
uhakika kama wiki hii zitatoka kwa sababu walitoa taratibu yao wa  kutupatia ratiba  na 
wakapeana na tarehe na hizo tarehe zimepita. Kwa hiyo  ni masikitiko ya kwamba h azijatoka na 
nilikuwa nafuatilia kibinafsi lakini nawapa tu faida ya maneno yale ambayo mimi nimejibiwa 
nikiwa nimeitisha kibinafsi sio habari rasmi hii ni habari ambayo mimi  binafsi kama Nyiro 
nimeitisha k wa sababu ya wanafunzi wangu ambao wamefukuzwa wak o nyumbani kwa hivyo 
nawapa yale masikitiko yangu si waambii habari rasmi.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athuman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, sababu maumbile yangu 
ya twiga saa yote wananihujumu sasa nimej aribu kuinuka mara kadhaa lakini nashukuru 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti umenitia machoni muda huu . Kwanza kabisa wavyele wanasema 
misemo mingi tu; akili ni mali, akili ni nywele kila mtu ana  zake lakini sasa mimi nikiangalia 
Mwenyekiti M wenza wa Kamati  ya Elimu n ywele hazizingatii yeye.  
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  Kwa hivyo sijui inachangia katika kukosekana maswala kama haya ya  kuweza 
kukosekana akili ya  kuweza kufuatilia haya maswala yamefika wapi? Kwa hivyo ningemuomba 
mwenyekiti mwenza azingatie na aige mfano mwema wa Mheshimiwa Rosema ry kwa sababu 
tuna imani akiwa na nywele nyingi labda huenda kutakuwa na mabadiliko. Pili Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti nafikiri imedhihirika wazi…  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Maumbile Mhe shimiwa Mwenyekiti niwie radhi...  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, nafikiri hii imedhihirisha wazi Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kuna umuhimu mkubwa sana ya wananchi wetu kule mas hinani watoto wao 
wanajulia na W aheshimiwa wanaulizwa maswali kila kukicha. Leo hizi fomu za kidato cha 
kwanza  hazijatoka naulizwa za kidato cha pili na cha tatu  zitatoka lini? Na nafikiri Mheshimiwa 
mwenza amesema kuwa amekuwa na interaction ya kibinafsi na Waziri  mhusika  na ikiwa 
Waziri  mhusika anatoa kauli kuwa hata mimi sijui zitatoka lini!  
 Kwa kweli Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ndio pale tukasema k uwa kiwango cha kibu ri cha 
Mawaziri kimevuka mipaka na vile  vile pia  kiwango cha kutojali cha hawa M awaziri pia 
kimevuka mipaka. Vipi Waziri  ambaye sisi tumepitisha bajeti milioni takriban 300 Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti na Mombasa Kaunti ndio K aunti ya pek ee Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti bado 
twajikokota alifu bee  na basari tena za  kidato cha kwanza ! Tena na  kuwekea watu masharti! Je 
Katiba inasema nini katika mpango mzima wa haki kwa watoto mbona tunabagua?  Alama 
nafikiri sote tunajua ni  alama  500, nusu ya 500 Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti inakuw a considered  
kama pass mark  vipi hawa watoto ambao wamepata  alama  250 mpaka  299 wanabaguliwa? Ni 
masikitiko kwa hivyo ningepen da Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti aidha M wenyekiti mwenza wa 
elimu.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : You have a minut e.  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Afuge nywele akili zipatika ne na vile vile pia kuitwe hii Kamati , 
Waziri aitwe maswali mazito tuweze kumuuliza kuhusu maswala haya. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Faith you have already reacted  on the issue 
so let the Chief W hip to respond or to react on the S tatement then we give a way forward .  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mwenyekiti.  Bwana Mwenyekiti nafikiri hili 
swala la basari limekuja mara nyingi katika Bunge hili na kusema kweli  ni swala ambalo 
mashinani pia wananch i wetu pia wanalia; wanalia sana na sasa imefika wakati tuweze kutumia 
kipengele 195 ya Katiba kulingana na ufahamu wako na kusaidiwa na Makarani tuweze 
kufafanua kipengele hichi kina maana gani na lau kipengele hichi kitakuwa kina maana . 
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  Vile ninavyofikiria mimi bas i ni bora Waziri  huyu aje katika Bunge hili aweze kueleza 
kinaga ubaga tuite wananchi waweze kuwa mashahidi kwa yale yanayoendelea katika Bunge hili 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  195 inasema hivi , "A County Assemb ly nafikiri ndio sisi  or any of its 
Committees has powers to summon  any person to appear before it for the purpose of giving 
evidence or providing information".  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tu ngependa kama maoni yangu mimi M wakilishi wa Wodi ya 
Frere Town  angalau  Waziri  huyu aje kwenye Bunge hili yeye m wenyewe aseme kinaga ubaga 
yana yoendelea na yanayojiri katika I dara yake ikiw a sisi tunafahamu kwamba 50 mil ioni ziko 
ndani ya Elimu F und. Leo hii sisi bajeti tulipitisha  milioni 300, sisi mimi ni M wanakamati wa 
idara hiyo ya elimu, alisema 50 mi lioni kweli ziko lakini bado tunasubiri kuweza kutoa hizi 
basari. Hata ukiangalia mtindo wa fom u wakati wa  Waziri  aliyekuwa Bwana Tendai na fom u 
ambazo zimetolewa sa a hizi ni tofauti Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hazina hata serial n umber  sasa 
tunapelekana wapi kama idara .  
Kwa hivyo twaomba Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kupitia uongozi wako utuongoze kupitia 
195 na ufafanuzi wa Makarani kama kweli yawezekana Waziri aje kwenye B unge hili aulizwe 
maswali hapa hapa sisi tuka weza kumuuliza  ukwel i ukapatikana hapa  hapa ndani ya N yumba 
alafu baadaye tuangalie utenda kazi wake na kama hatat imiza kama alivyosema ndani ya 
Nyumba hii basi sisi hatutakuwa na budi kuweza kufuata vipengele vyengine vya Bunge . 
Ahsante sana. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwali mu): Thank you Chief Whi p. I think the Chair of 
Education Committee is around .  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes, t hank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker S ir as I stand today again to 
respond o n this issue of bursary as the C hair am also affected on a serious note an d I share my 
sentiments with the M embers of this  House , most of the time I have stood here and I have tried 
to respond on the same S tatement but nothing has been done . 
  Mr. Speaker Sir let us call a spade a spade let us not pretend to call a spade a smal l spo on 
or a spoon;  I want to emphasise thi s today as the Chair  I  am very frustrated with the executive s 
who are supposed to execute what we are talking . Today just like one of the M embers has said   
that the work of MCA’s , the work of the Hon . Members in this House is only to over sight , 
legislate and represent , we only ha ve three functions .  
 Mr. Speaker S ir we hav e already done our work as the Chair of the C ommittee of 
Education  I can speak without fear and favour that I have done my work , my C ommittee h as 
done their work but there is somewhere where things are stuck and that is where now all our eyes 
are in the department of Education because they are the ones suppos ed to execute this . Mr. 
Speaker S ir as we are speaking I have been called names in this Hon ourable H ouse, today one of 
the M ember s has just talked about me not having hair...  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 And that one is the one who actually contributed on bursary  not to be brought Mr. 
Speaker S ir just because of my hair am just trying to be neat it  is sad ind eed and I still agree with 
the M ember I do  not even disagree with h im using those words he  is only trying to emphasize 
because it  is something we have talked about several time s and it  is not taking place , when will it 
take place? Today ? Mr. Speaker Sir we sha ll summon ...  
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 (Applause ) 
 
 Today Mr. Speaker Sir we a re going to do our work as the M ember s of this House and 
summon or call the CEC concern ed or even the C hief Officer concern ed; that is where again you 
will hear some people saying that we are for somethi ng else but what do we do we want things to 
be done the way they are supposed to be done , the right way . That is the interest of this House 
including me, the MCA of Airport W ard. I have no interest in any other thing , I only want to see 
the electorate  get their rights and therefore as I speak loud and clear the time has come even 
before you rule that as the Chairman of Education I want to hold ha nds with other Members of 
this H ouse and ensure that now we do  not want a Statement , we do  not want written paper s we 
do not want anything what we want is the person responsible Mr. Speaker S ir... 
 
(Laughter  and Applause)  
 
 To come before the H ouse and speak for herself or for himself , how many times am I 
going to carry this burden?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 I carrying the burd en of bursaries two to three years now Mr. Speaker Sir there is no 
bursary disbu rsement in this particular County and therefore all the guns have been let on me ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Your time is up . 
 
 Hon.  Omondi: Mr Spea ker S ir I have just de cided to extend this because it i s a very 
serious matter . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Ibrahim your time is up . 
  
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you, I think Mr Speaker S ir today I have spoken with a lot of 
passion because of that n ext time we are calling the  Minister  concerned to come and explain the 
whole issue of the bursary . Thank y ou Mr. Speaker S ir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay so do it at your C ommittee level , call the 
person concern ed and if h e/she fails you wil l report to the Assembly . Hon. Members we have got 
our own Standing O rders , not unless we change the Standing O rders that  is when the  Minister  
can be allowed to enter in this Hon ourable  House to respond to your queries but in the meantime 
it will be done a t the C ommittee level and whatever that Hon. Ibrahim was talking about we need 
to see it in a report so that the report can be discussed in this Hon ourable  House .  
 So the Committee and Chairman of Education work on that issue as soon as possible a nd 
put in mind that one of the Committee M ember s said that the person concern ed is not even aware 
as of when they are giving out the bursary . So work on that issue as an urgent issue and bring 
back the latest by next week Wednesday . Yes C lerk?  
 
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 (Interruption)  
 
 What is it Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir I wa nt to request ... am standing under Standing O rder 80 
give me one minute because it  is a very serious matter if am allowed . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone . 
 
 Hon. Omondi: To give this personal ...it is a matter touching o n a personal nature Mr. 
Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay proceed .  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you  Mr. Speaker S ir for the opportunity given again.  I want to 
give and explain a matter of a pers onal nature;  today  I have just left my W ard and as I was 
coming to perform my duties in this House which I have been given by the C onstitution of this 
country ...Mr Speaker Sir it i s very despicable that there are  people who are moving around my 
office and  the W ard in the name of Fagia Bunge  and the se people are hovering around my W ard 
collecting signature s from the innocent wananchi  who also need the services that I came to 
provide here . To make the matter worse they have faced a lot of forces from the gro und and the 
same people are trying to use dubious means to obtain signatures from wananchi but I can read 
one for if you  will allow me , with due respect ... 
  
(The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri)  nodded ) 
(Hon.  Omondi re ad the text message)  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  ‘Kuna watu w anazunguka ku  collect signature s za kuvunja Bunge  la 
Kaunti ’ and I responded , acha wapoteze wakati ; ‘Twataka tuwafukuze , wasemaje Mheshimiwa 
niwafukuze ?’I responded , ‘Now you are talking because ni upumbavu wanaleta ’ they responded , 
‘job done super MCA ’ nikawaambia ‘poa’ ‘ati wanatuambia ni MCA wa M wembe  Tayari  only 
ndio sisi hatutakuwa  affected’.... 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Na mimi I responded Mr. Speaker S ir, ‘Wanajua watu watakataa sasa wanatumia ujanja ’,  
then they re sponded ,  “Tumewatimua tukawacha pale Port Reitz kona” . Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika  
these are words coming directly and I know as I am affected also the Hon . Members of this 
House I am sure they are also affected in their Wards .  
 Mr. Speaker my request to you is that we need also to come up with a method on  how we 
can stop this and I am sure they are some people who are employees of this County I am sure 
some who hav e got the hands in those people. Y esterday if I am not wrong there was a team that 
was here which was launching this issue of Fagia Bunge  and I am told that money was being 
dished out a nd people were getting Kshs.300. 00 and Kshs.  500.00 .  It is time for us also to find 
out this money who was dishing and where was this money coming from Mr. Speaker Sir?  
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11 (Applause)  
 Today as this House is crying and  complaining about the bursary, streetlights and other 
things we have money being misused being given to people anyhow ly Mr. Speaker Sir , in fact 
just next , this is an insult of the highest order, just next to the Assembly . Mr. Speaker if it were in 
my War d I would have not allowed I may say, I will use all means to deal with those people , but 
because they were here  this is a House guarded by laws and o rder. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim. Hon. Shomari the 
Hon. Member was up on a Standing Order 80 which cannot be debated but as from his Statement 
we will look upon the Hon . Members who were also affected. B efore I proceed Hon. Shomari 
maybe you have your own personal issues or you want to debate?  
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Mr. Speaker I have the same issue concerning the signatures.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay proceed.  
 Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . Kwanza 
ningependa kukujulisha kwamba nimekaa hapa nimepata ujumbe kup itia kwa ofisi yangu na 
Campaigners  wangu kwamba kuna Ward Adm inistrator  pamoja na Sub-County Administrators  
wamekusanya watu na wanaendelea kukusanya sahihi kwa watu ambao hawaelewi ni kitu gani 
kinaendelea. Kwa hivyo ningependa unifahamishe Mheshimiwa Sp ika je ni sawa huo utaratibu 
unaoendelea ama ni vipi? Na hawa Ward Adm inistrators  ni wafanyaji kazi wa umma na ile pesa 
wanayoitumia je ni pesa ya umma ama ni pesa yao wenyewe binafsi? Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
(Consultations)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwa limu) : Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro: Mr. Speaker as things are hotting up being somebody who has some little 
information about security matters I think it is high time that we have en ough security around 
this House , we have always taken security matters as  a big joke. Yesterday one of our colleagues 
was being heckled and it is not only yesterday, it has happened time and time again. Sometimes 
we are in the Committee discussing very important matters then people are shouting abuses and 
all sorts of words out side to some extent that a Committee stops or hold a bit so that the noises 
subsidize.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir it is only in Mombasa that th ese things are happening , you go to Kilifi 
and the Assembly is guarded  by Administration Police officers with guns, you go  to Nairobi the 
Assembly is guarded  by Administration  Police officer s and this is the second largest c ity in 
Kenya and it is  at stake in matters of security .  
 Mr. Speaker Sir we are in danger and if we continue like this we would be shot here 
from the gal lery one day , so this is a matter that should be taken very seriously and if not then 
Hon. Members we should be able to r eport to the regional s ecurity o fficers because our security 
is at stake.  
 
March 13, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro . As I start responding 
from Hon. Nyiro’s concern the issue raised by Hon. Nyiro will be forwarded  to the County 
Assembly Service Board to look upon whatever that you have raised and make sure security 
issues are taken care of and whatever incident that occurr ed shall not happen again . 
 And the issue raised by Hon. Shomari you will write to the Executive Member for 
Devolution you want to know why the Ward Administrators and the Sub -County Administrators 
are the ones who are spearheading the Fagia Bunge  Signatur es. So a letter will be written to the 
Devolution Executive to respond . 
 And when I come back to the issue of Hon. Ibrahim Oyugi, Hon . Members it is right 
time now we are going not to be intimidated again and we are going to write to the Senate to 
raise th e concern by Hon. Ibrahim which is a County concern . It concerns almost all the 30 
Wards and in a matter of urgency  even if it is a petition to the Senate of which each and every 
Member will sign the petition to the Senate so that they take this matter as an urgent matter and 
they spearhead on behalf of us because in the meantime we cannot stop that operation but Senate 
can intervene and when we raise our issues to the Senate I am sure whatever  that is going on if it 
is not in the laws then it will not see even the light of tomorrow. So as an urgent issue we will 
consult and the Hon . Members you will be informed of what we are going to do but soonest 
possible we are going to write to the Senate. Yes Clerk? There is a concern, yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika hii Jumamosi nitakuwa 
na zoezi la usafi pale kwangu na ningeomba kama inawezewekana hao Fagia Bunge watusaidie 
na ufagio na pia waje  wanisaidie kufagia pale kwangu.  Ahsante . 
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwali mu): Thank you Hon. Ogutu , I think they will be 
informed and as they are in all the Wards collecting signatures then they will also come to your 
exercise and you can also talk to the Chairman for Environment to invite them in a proper way. 
So Hon. Ibrahim you will consult the Clerk on this issue so that we write to the Senate soonest 
possible. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 There being no other business the House stands adjourned until Thursday, 14th March, 
2019 at 2:30 p.m.  
The House rose at 3: 52p.m. 
 
 
 
 