March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 20th March , 2018  
The House met at 3 :15p.m. 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Speaker:  Hon.  Member s you may you be seated . Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
TRANS FERENCE OF WASTE MANAGEMENT TO WARD  LEVEL  
 
Yes Hon.  Tobias , give the Notice of Motion . 
Hon.  Samba : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for giving me this time , first of all let me 
welcome you back officially we  have missed  you and I almost introduced a Statement to seek 
your whereabouts , it is a pleasure having you back Mr. Speaker feel free and feel at home.  
The Speaker:  Thank you.  
Hon. Samba : We love you so  much.  
The Speaker:   Me too , thank you.  
Hon. Samba : Okay I hereby give Notice of Motion  of the following Trans ference of 
Waste Management to Ward  level.  
 
(Hon. S amba moved the Notice of Motion ) 
 
Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to give notice to the following Motion ; 
 
THAT AWARE that the County Government is mandated with the responsibility of  
County health services, including, in particular refuse removal, refuse dumps and solid 
waste disposal under Part 2 (g) of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of Kenya , 
2010;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that there have been challe nges with waste management in the 
County for instance garbage collection;   
 
NOTING THAT waste management , that is garbage collection and general sanitation 
has always been coordinated from the County level;  
 
CONCERNED THAT the current state of waste management  in the County may pose a 
threat to both the residents and the environment in the County;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to  RESOLVE  that: 
 
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 2 1. County Government transfer waste management to Ward  level  
2. County Government to establish Ward  waste management committ ee to organize 
and plan on how to manage waste at the Ward  level.  
Mr. Speaker I beg to move the Motion , I request Hon.  Faith to second .  
Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to second.  
The Speaker:  Thank you, yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
OBJECTION OF  DEMOLITION  OF BUSINESS  STRUCTURE S IN AIRPORT WARD 
 
Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi.  
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker sir thank you for this golden opportunity I want to read a 
statement on Objection of  Demolition  of Business  structure s in Airport Ward . Mr. Speaker Sir, I  
seek to object a demolition that is schedule d to take place tomorrow 21st March,  2018 following 
communication from Inspectorate department  on the following plots no. 2325  and plot no. 812 
in Airport Ward . Mr. Speaker Sir, these two groups  Magongo Mwisho  and Maji Mengi  are to be 
evicted from their business premises where they have been earning a living for more than 30 
years.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I humbly seek that the relevant Committee to carry out an  investigation 
and come up with a comprehensive report conc erning this sensitive matter.  Thank you Mr. 
Speaker sir.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Omondi, yes Hon. Mwalimu.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I stand 
to support the personal Statement from my colleague  Hon. Ibrahim Omondi,  but I would just like 
to add from his prayers that through your office to stop the demolition  until the investigations are 
over thank you . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
Thank you yes Hon. Fatma, do you have anything to say?  
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Kila s iku naunga tu ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kuweza kunipa fursa hii . Wameongea viongozi wawili ; mmoja wa Airport  na mmoja Bomoa , 
kwanza Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumueleza rafiki yangu  ambaye ni kipenzi changu saa 
zengi ne wajua majina mengine yanaleta nuks i na shida ye ye mwenyewe anait wa Bomoa  alafu 
kwake kwataka kubomolewa kwanza awe ze kubadilisha jina na mambo yatakwenda sawasawa 
kwa sababu huwezi kujua kama Inspectorate twataka kwenda …  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Nyiro.  
Hon.  Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I think the Hon.  Member  is misleading this House  
we do  not have a Hon.  Member  by the name  Bomoa  in this House  so please . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon.  Nyiro, yes Hon.  Fatma can you withdr aw that name 
Bomoa  we don’t have anyone by that name in  this House . 
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika sawa sawa lakini mi mi najua hilo ndio 
jina lake maarufu hivi ukienda kwa Wodi yake ukisema wamtaka Ibrahim itajulikana ni Ibrahim 
Kondo lakini  ukisema Ibrahim B omoa ndio itajulikana ni yeye kama leo jina hilo halitaki aweze 
kutuambia hapa kama jina hilo halitaki . Mimi Mheshimiwa Spika alivyosema Waheshimiwa 
walipozungumza Waheshimiwa wangu wawili mimi napinga na nao  kwa sababu huwe zi jua pale 
mahali panapotaka kubomolewa pengine ni mahali ambapo wananchi wanaweza kufanya njia 
yao ya kupita . Kwa hivyo huo uchung uzi ukifanywa pia mimi naomba niwe  hapo Mheshimiwa 
Spika ikiwa ni  njia ya watu ni wanyonge kupitia  hivyo vibanda viweze kuvunjwa  haraka sana 
iwezekanavyo . Ahsante  
The Speaker:  Thank you, yes Hon. Fahad ? 
Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa siku ya leo na fursa hii na 
kukukaribisha tena Mombasa kama alivyo tangulia kusema Mheshimiwa Samba tunakupenda 
sana kama ki ongozi wetu. Ningependa kuunga mkono hiyo  taarifa ya ndugu Bomoa na ika ungwa 
mkono na  Mheshimiwa Fadhili. Mheshimiwa Spika nataka tukubaliane kitu kimoja sisi tuliletwa 
hapa kutetea wananchi wetu  na sio kuwaumiza wala kunyanyasa na tufanye haki. Kweli tunataka 
maendeleo lakini sio kwa kuumiza wananchi ambao ni wanyonge , hapo mahali kunataka 
kubomolewa Mheshimiwa Spika kuna wafanyi  biashara wengi ambao wao familia zao watoto 
wao wanakulia hapo mahali .  
Kwa hi o kabla Serikali ya Kaunti kuchukua hatua  yeyote yoyote dhidi ya hayo mambo ni  
lazima kukaliwe chini na viongozi waweze kushauriana na kupatikane suluhu hata kama 
nikugurishwa kwa amani la sivyo basi waweze kama nikurudi nyuma lakini sio tut abomolea 
watu kwa sababu hapo ndio wanapo kulia.  Kwa hivyo tusifanye kitu Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kufurahishana ama kwa kutumia mabavu wakati sisi viongozi tulio ndani ya hili Bunge 
tumetumwa hapa kutetea watu wetu.  
Kwa hiyo narudia tena Mheshimiwa Spika naomb a ofisi yako iweze kusimamisha hiyo 
kubomolewa  mara moja  watu wak ae chini tuweze kutafuta suluhu , kwa sababu Mheshimiwa 
Bomoa  umefanya kazi nzuri sana Mheshimiwa Ibrahim kuleta taarifa  hiyo. Kwa sababu kuna 
wenzetu tayari wamebomolewa na hawakuwa na haba ri hizo kwa hiyo nashukuru na naomba 
Mheshimiwa Spika uingilie kati kwa sababu kuna unyanyasaji unatokea upande wa Executive  
kwa wanan chi wetu. Nashukuru kwangu hawajafika lakini naahidi Bunge hili siku watafika 
hawatobomoa , ahsanteni sana.  
The Speaker:  Thank you yes Hon.  Milka . 
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare:  (Technical hitch ) 
The Speaker:  Fahad!  
Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare:  Now it is working. Thank you Mr. Speaker and just as some of my 
colleagues have already stated we are happy to have you back and while you are away your 
deputy did a commendable job , probably you need to take him out for lunch or dinner … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
Now I stand to support the statement by Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . If about 30 families are 
abruptly told to vacate the premises of their business it is going to cau se a lot of chaos, it is going 
to cause depression, it is going to cause a lot of frustrations to them because they do not have any 
other place where they earn a living f or that is a place they have known , that is a place where 
they take bread home every day. So it wil l be unfair to just vacate them , demolish their business 
premises without offering an alternative place where they can be settled.  
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 4 I ask my colleagues to support this so that we have health discussions ; for the concern ed 
parties to have a health y discussion  with the concern ed parties so that a proper place can be so rt 
or can be found to settle th ese business people. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker:  Thank you , yes Hon. Samba . 
Hon. Samba:  Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker. I stood for many times because I am 
somehow affected ; today I had some complain ts within my office and the issue was the same , the 
department of Inspectorate that they have their own rules and regulations that we do not know.  
Somebody cannot just wake up in the morning and decide that I am g oing to demolish such and 
such structure.  
Hon. Speaker as my colleagues have stated before, the Hon. Member  from Mjambere 
Ward , we were elected to defend the rights of all the people whether the y are rich or the less 
privileged and in most cases we find that when s uch orders arises they mostly affect the less 
privileged individuals and we are there to protect them . Mr. Speaker I don’t see the sense where 
you would wish or would want to demolish a structure within a panya  route area where else it is 
not interferin g with anybody or with any structure , I don’t see the essence why we should 
demolish a structure of Mama Mboga  and the moment you are going to demolish that structure 
we are going to render that person jobless. We are going to render that person may be home less 
because that is the only source of income that he/she depends to pay for her upkeep  and this 
tendency is now unbecoming . My Ward  is really affected and I am not, I cannot defend or stand 
up for only my Ward  but I am d oing this for the entire County , there are those people who cannot 
get time or chance with their elected leaders , those are the people we are going to represent. I 
support tha t statement that it has to be h eld off until further notice when (??) will realize , thank 
you so much Hon. Speaker . 
The Speaker:  Thank you. Yes Hon. Kitula . 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimesimama kuweza kuchang ia kuhusiana ambayo Mheshimiwa Mwakilishi kwa haya am bayo 
ameweza kuwasilisha katika Bunge hili . Kusema kweli Mheshimiwa Ibrahim aweze … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Hatimy .     
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : I raised Standing Order number 80, is it in order to debate a 
personal statement Mr. Speaker?  
The Speaker:  Under Standing Order?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Standing Order number 80 . 
The Speaker:  Standing Order number 8?  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Mr. Speaker Sir!  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Standing Order number 80 .  
The Speaker:  Can you read for us Hon. Hatimy , the Standing Order number 8 what..  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thamanini . 
The Speaker:  Number 80, okay. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Mr. Speaker Sir!  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 5 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Under the Standing Order…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker:  Sorry, you have said Standing Order number 80 . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Yes Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker:  Wait, can you read for us Hon.  Hatimy , what is the Standing Order 
number 80 saying?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : By the indulgence of the County Assembly a Member  may 
explain matters of a personal nature , “A personal nature ” although there is no q uestion before the 
County Assembly but such matter may not be debated.  
The Speaker:  And can you read for me Standing Order Number 1 . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Hon.  Speaker Standing order number 1 it is f or things which 
are not in this ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker:  Just read Standing Order Number 1 Hon. Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Speaker there is no … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker:  Just read. Hon.  Hatimy Just read Standing order number 1 so t hat we can 
understand, what is Standing order numbe r 1 saying?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : It gives a Speaker powers for the things which are not in this 
document Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker:  Hon. Hatimy please read number 1! It is saying very clear in all cases. 
unless you don’t understand.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : May be I don’t understand Hon.  Speaker.  
Hon. Speaker:  Yes. 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Hon. Speaker but it says that in all cases where matters are not 
expressly provided by this Standing Order  
The Speaker:  Or. 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  by the other Orders of the County Assembly any  procedural 
question shall be decided by the Speaker. So things Hon. Speaker he could have ask or apply for 
the leave then grant him a leave then he can give out the statement.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Point of Order!  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
            The Speaker: Yes Hon. Fadhili Makarani . 
             Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Mr. Speaker on the same point of or der that 
Hon. Hatimy had raised . Mr. Speaker it is clear, it says that but such matter may not be debat ed 
Mr. Speaker it did not say that shall not be debated. So Mr. Speaker...  
(Applause)  
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 6  ...We are in order to debate such personal statement. Thank you.  
 The Speaker:  Yes, Hon. Kitula you can continue . 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika tuko hapa ku weza kuwakilisha 
wananchi na jambo hili limekuja la dharura kwa hivyo ni sharti tunaweza kuhudumia wananchi 
kama walivyotutuma mahali hapa Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hiyo nashukuru sana kwa kunipatia 
fursa hii kuweza kuchangia kuhusiana na taarifa  ambayo imew eza kuwakilishwa na Mheshimiwa 
Mwakilishi wa Airport. Mheshimiwa Spika Mwakilishi ameweza kudokeza kwamba sehemu ile 
ambayo inaweza kubomolewa siku ya kesho ni sehemu ya kufanyia biashara. Mheshimiwa Spika 
sisi kama Serikali lengo letu kuu ni kuhakikisha kwamba tunapata hela kupitia biashara hizi ili 
kwa ushuru bila kuweza kunyanyasa wananchi wetu lakini nina imani kwamba Serikali 
inapofanya jambo kama hilo au inapochukua hatua kama hiyo basi huwa kuna jambo bora zaidi 
linakuja kwa wananch i bila kuweza kuwanyanyasa . Kwa hivyo ningependa Mheshimiwa Spika 
bila kutia wasi wasi kwa Mheshimiwa Ibrahim ya kwamba aweze kupatia fursa Kamati kama 
vile alivyoweza kudokeza katika kifungu chake na vile vile jambo hili ni la dharura tuweze 
kulipatia kipao mbele zaidi maana siku ni ya kesho. Kwa hivyo tusiongee mengi hapa maana 
siku ni ya kesho tupatie muelekeo tuweze kujua twaweza kufuatia mkondo gani Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Ahsante sana.  
 The Speaker:  Yes, Hon. Feddis Mbura  
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika pia mimi ningetaka kuunga 
mkono mjadala ambao umeletwa mbele yetu na Mheshimiwa Ibrahim kwa sababu ukiona 
mwenzako anyolewa na wewe tia chako maji. Hili jambo ni jambo ambalo lifuatiliziwe kwa hali 
ya heshima  ili wale watu wetu wasije wakapoteza mahali kwao na pia wakati wanapo bomolewa 
basi huwa ni mwanzo wa umasikini na sisi tuko hapa kutetea jamii yetu, kutetea wanyonge 
ambao wako mashinani hio ndio kazi yetu. Kwa hivyo mimi ningeomba kuweze kutengenezwa 
jopo haraka iwezekanavyo wafuatiliziwe na pia hata kama ni kubomoa lakini watafute mahali pa 
kuweka wananchi ili wasije wakapata shida. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
 The Speaker:  Yes, Hon. Faith Boniface Mwende .  
 Hon. (Ms.)  Boniface : Thank you very much Mr.  Speaker . I am here to support the 
statement of Hon. Ibrahim from Airport Ward . It is not in order for someone to be vacated from 
the premises of its work and we know Mombasa we have the scarcity of jobs , so the good 
measure should be put in place and the p eople to be notified in good time. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 The Speaker:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Francis Nzai . 
 Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii na mimi niweze 
kuongea mawili. Kwa kweli ninasimama kupongeza hoja hii amb ayo imeletwa na Mheshimiwa 
Ibrahim na mimi kimtazamo wangu ni kwamba Director  wa Inspectorate  ataki kana mambo haya 
ameyazidisha sana maana ni juzi tu hapa tulipokuwa na ajenda ya Mheshimiwa Nyundo, ni 
Director  huyo huyo ambaye huwa hataki kushir ikiana na Waheshimiwa wala kupata maoni 
yoyote.  
 Kwa hiyo  kwa sababu pengine Mheshimiwa Spika ulikuwa safari hivi majuzi lakini pia 
tulikuwa tunakuombea urudi haraka , Director  huyu naona ni sawa Mheshimiwa Spika umuite 
mbele yetu ili aje atueleze nguvu hizi anaz ipata wapi mara kwa mara ambao hataki hata uhusiano 
na sisi.  Juzi a libomoa mabanda ya mbuzi kule i kaleta ishuu tukaizungumza hapa hapa, leo 
ameenda huko aenda bomoa bila kushirikiana na mwenzake ambaye alichaguliwa na wananchi , 
kesho kutwa yuko kwangu na kw engine hali hiyo hatutaikubali, hatutaki kuvu tana na watu lakini 
twataka tuh eshimiane.  
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 7  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ningekuomba akiwa anataka tushirikiane kwa uzuri basi 
ni aje ili tuzungumze mambo haya kuchukulia mambo juu juu awe atayawacha maana sisi 
tume chaguliwa na wananchi na yeye tumefanya kumuweka tu pale. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Nzai. Yes, Hon. Ramla . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Ramla S aid Omar : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi haya mambo 
pia yamenigusa kwa sababu huwa unamregesha mwan anchi nyuma na nauunga mkono kwa hii 
mambo ya kubomoa yasimamishwe na pia wakae kuzungumza na kuleta suluhu. Haya mambo 
yamenipata kwa sababu walemavu wameondoshwa kwenye biashara zao na wamepelekwa 
sehemu ambazo biashara haziendelei na bado napigania kuta futa suluhu. Kwa hivyo naona vilio 
viko vingi na pia mimi nimeionja changa moto hio na twaomba Director wa Inspectorate  akae 
chini na sisi tulete suluhu ambao itasaidia sisi na wananchi. Ahsante.  
(Applause ) 
 The Speaker:  Thank you. Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire ? 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and welcome back. Mr. Speaker I would also 
wish to support the statement made by Hon. Ibrahim Bomoa  on the same and that these officials 
are fo nd of demolishing the areas which are occupied by the citiz ens and nothing of importance 
is done in those areas. Mr. Speaker we must have a fundamental project, a project that will 
change the lives of Kenyans and the people of Mombasa then all of us will support for the same. 
We need those fuel, Mr. Speaker we hav e a lot to be done the garbage are outside there we are 
told there is no fuel and the fuel is there just to demolish the people areas of business. We are 
calling upon those people who are concerned to stop it and we also appeal for you good off ice to 
intervene until we get to know why such should be done. Thank you.  
 The Speaker:  Yes, Hon. Leila . 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii ya 
kuweza kuchangia. Kwanza karibu sana tumekukosa muda mrefu, karibu sana Mhesh imiwa 
Spika.  
 The Speaker:  Ahsante .  
Hon. (Ms.)  Nyache:  Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kuunga mkono pia mimi hii taarifa  
iliokuja  na Mheshimiwa Bomoa , mimi naunga mkono kwa sababu wale watu pale wakivunjiwa 
na hio riziki wanayotafuta pale labda ni ya kusai dia watoto wao, ni ya kusaidia maisha yao , 
wataanzia  wapi wakivunjiwa pale? Itakuwa  ni shida tupu na wataanz a kurudi kwa viongozi na 
kuanza kutufuata sisi, kuanza kutupatia ma  stress pia sisi na hatuna namna ya kuweza 
kuwasaidia. Kwa hivyo mimi ningeomba serikali ya Kaunti iweze kukaa kwa makini na 
kuangalia watu wetu, wananchi wetu wale ambao wana vibanda vyao v yataka kuvunjwa pale 
waweze kutafuta suluhisho ikiwa wataweza kuwaweka mahali, wataweza kufanya biashara zao 
ama ikiwa watazungumza waelewane, waweze kuwaacha pale pale. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Amriya ? 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya Boy Juma: Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for this opportunity . I 
presumed the Assembly was about to form an Ad hoc Committee to inquire about your where 
about because we were worried but we are glad that you are here now. What I wish to state is 
that first of all I support that at least we create an Ad hoc Committee to look into this demolition 
but again I want to insist and I have said in this House before that laws are not made in vain Mr. 
Speaker and laws do not operate in the vacuum so in our essence we shouldn't  be fond of making 
laws as a County Assembly and then the same Assembly to come and break them.  
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 8 So in my opinion I would have wished that the Mover of the statement could at least 
come up with a Notice of eviction because in any eviction there's a process Mr. Speaker, there's a 
law in this eviction I am sure the Inspectorate did not just wake up and decide that tomorrow 
they are going to have an eviction at a certain area...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
...am sure they have a due process and at least we should have that ; if it is a letter of the 
eviction, the reason and the foundation or the basis on which the eviction was made so that if we 
interrogate in to th ese issue s we look at them as a whole and what we are d oing now as an 
Assembly we are merely reacting and that's not go od for us Mr. Speaker and that will not keep us 
in a good place especially with our counterparts who we have devolve d functions to them for 
purposes of enforcement and implementation . This is  because we will be giving them a hard time 
but as much as that has been sa id we opt to do what we opt to be doing right now if it is in the 
best interest s of the citizens we have this status quo so be it , but in future Mr. Speaker we should 
encourage that we act in time and we look at the due process before reacting. Thank you so muc h 
Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker:  Thank you , so yes Hon. Benard . 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I am also affected by the same and I 
think the due process was not followed up to this moment we have not seen any not ice of 
eviction . So I would urge the Department concern ed; the Inspectorate Department to stop th ese 
instant notices , as much as we want to work together and as much as we want them to implem ent 
the laws formed by this Hon orable  House they must also know that there a re procedures to be 
followed . Somebody has stayed in a place for 30 years, you just wake up over night and send this 
person away , what are you up to? I support this statement and with immediate effect something 
should be done. Thank you.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Member s. Hon. Member s much ha s been said about this 
issue I can see the mood of this House is of supporting this statement .. 
  
(Applause ) 
 
...and now I direct that the Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works to 
stop the demolition , look into the matter urgently and give a reply by Thursday this week. Thank 
you.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
...Next order ? 
 
MOTION  
 
(Silence ) 
 
Yes Hon. Mwamwiri . 
March  20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            15 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor  Page 9 Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to  seek leave of the 
House to allow me not to move the amendments today because I need to receive some 
amendments from the Department , especially Committee on Health .  
So possibl y after receiving those ones I will communicate to the Clerk ’s for the 
amendments to  be tabled again Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
The Speaker:  Next order ? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Member s this House stands adjourned until Wednesday 21st March , 2018 at 
9:00a.m.      
The House rose at 4:00 p.m. 