November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 23rd November , 2022  
Third Assemb ly - Sixteenth Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 2:38p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair ] 
 
PRAY ERS 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable  Members , you may s it. Yes, Clerk next order 
please?  
MOTION  
ADOPT ION OF A GARBAGE BIN SYSTEM AND COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AT NIGHT BY COUNTY 
STAFF  
 
Yes, Honourable  Hussein Abdirahman , MCA Mji wa Kale Ward, please move the Motion.  
Hon. Abdirahman Hussein : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move 
the followi ng Motion:  
THAT AWARE That,  Fourt h Schedule Part 2 under Schedule 4 of the Constitu tion of 
Kenya, 2010 designates refuse removal, refuse dumps and sol id waste disposal as one the 
functions of the County government;  
FURTHER AWARE THAT,  collection of garbage  and street cleaning duties are undertaken 
during day time and there is a lack of garbage bin system in the County;  
NOTING THAT,  there is a need to or ganize and streamline garbage collection to 
effectively and efficiently deal with and manage the garbage m enace;  
CONCERNED THAT,  collection of garbage  by the County government vehicles during the 
day time coupled with absence of a garbage bin system poses serious health hazards and 
traffic congestion in the County;  
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
1. THAT, the County government to adopt garbage b in system in the Central 
Business District and al l other parts of the County to enhance cleanness.  
 
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 2 2. THAT,  The County government through the Department of Environment and 
Natural Resources to reschedule working h ours for staff undertaking garbage collection 
and street cleaning duties to perform them at nig ht for better garbage collection and to 
reduce traffic congestion.  
May I request Hon ourable  Mwalimu Kambi to second this Motion . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank  you. 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  I arise to second the Motion ! 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank y ou Hon ourable  Kambi and Hon ourable  Abdikadir. 
Honourable  Memb ers, I now propose the question ; that the Motion by Hon ourable  Abdulkadir 
Hussein on Adoption of a Garbage  Bin System and collection of garbage at Ni ght by County 
Staff be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
Yes, Honourable  Abdulkadir Abdirahman , please make your contribution.  
Hon.  Abdirahman Ab dulkadir:  Yes, once again thank you so much Mr. Speaker S ir. 
Mr. Speaker my Motion is on t wo as pects ; it is on adoption of a garbage bin system and a 
collection of garbage at night by County Staff. I do not wish to labour this House to debate any 
other asp ect that is outside this corporation . So, it is very concise and it  is very detailed and I will 
go direc tly to the first prayers.  In regards to the adopt ion of a garbage bin system, the provision 
of the Mombasa County Solid Waste Management Act , 2021 a re very adequate ; pursuant to 
section 15 and 16 of the Information Act s tates as follows, ‘That a person who  operates in a 
market shall deposit the waste in appropriately receptacle, that the owner of a premise shall 
designate or construct an area within the p remise, where solid waste generated shall be 
deposited, at a place appro priate, receptacle and maintai n the m with accordance with the public 
health and ensure that no waste is deposited within five meters of a premise. Lastly  the area 
designated for waste storage shall be enclosed to avoid open exposure and emission of 
obnoxious  smell.  
Mr. Spe aker, there is a sufficient Act that was passed by this House ; Mombasa County 
Solid Waste Act of 2021, however we find that there are some areas that wer e not well covered, 
especially on areas on matters for example when it com es to …, it has spoken well on t he as pect 
of refuse by the residential and as well as by the commercial cases.  Mr. Speaker , my prayer is 
that because of the garbage bin  it is the responsible of the owner, while the transport of the solid 
waste out of  the premises is the responsib ility of the County government . However , I would urge 
the County government to set up bins in the CBDs that are equal distance for example, we can 
say this that after every 200 meters you can find a garbage bin where you can litter ther e literally, 
because as we speak,  we do not have sufficient garbage bins.   
In regards to the collection of garbage at night by the County staff, the current Collec tive 
Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between the County government of Mombasa and the Kenya 
Nationa l Local Government Workers Union  (KLGWU) , collaborating with the Mombasa County 
Governme nt Workers Union  has been the main contagious  issue . Mr. Speaker , the Coun ty 
government of Mombasa feels the deployment of staff for night shift duties is restrained by th e 
CBA , while the Mombasa County Government Workers Union feels the night shift duties  is not 
fully stopped, but still open to some departments ; there are some departments where the workers 
are allowed to work at night.   
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 3 Mr. Speaker , there are adequate resourc es al so available between now and the end of 
financial year 2022/2023 ; the vote fo r operation stands at Ksh.259  Million  while allocation fo r 
the development Ward stands at Ksh430  Million , so Mr. Speaker the County has enough 
resources to enact such measures. In vie w of all above arguments, I recommend the following ; 
the County Assembly should pass the Motion and compel the County government of Momba sa 
to start night shift garbage collections, upon amicable understanding between the two parties, 
that is the Mombasa County government and Kenya Mombasa County Workers Union. An 
extraneous al lowance can be introduced to ca ter for those who will be willing to work  for night 
shifts ; it should not be compulsory , the workers who are willing to work for night shifts should 
also be comp ensat ed. Lastly necessary arrangements can be made to transport the willing staff to 
and from the work place at night to ensure the secu rity at night shift. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you Mr. Abdirahman . Yes, Hon ourable  Manua ri ple ase 
make your contribution.  
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika na nimshukuru Mungu kwa mda huu 
wa maankuli ya mchana ; kwa kut urudisha tena katika Jumba ili kuongezea jukumu lile ambalo 
wana wetu wananchi wametupa tuje tuwawakilishe.  Nimuunge mkono  ndugu yangu, rafiki 
yangu, mwandani wangu Mhe shimiwa  Abdi rahman alm aarufu Anza Freshi  kwa Mswada  wake 
huu wa uchukuzi wa taka mda wa u siku. M heshimiwa  Spika , kutokana na swala hili nadhani 
katika eneo letu hili la Mombasa hatuanzi leo wala hatusemi leo kuwa shu ghuli hizi zifanywe 
usiku bali ni suali lilikuweko t angu jadi . La kustajaabisha ni kwamba kuna muda fulani ambao 
shughuli hii ili potea na ikawa inafanywa muda wa mchana kama alivyozungumza ndugu yangu 
kwa muda wa mchana hizi gari zoa taka zikiwa zitakuwa ka ndo ka ndo mwa mji wetu huu wa 
Mombasa sana huwa huleta shida katika msongamano wa magari katika barabara zetu.  
Kwa hivyo ni juku mu letu sisi kam a waunda sheria tuhakikishe ya kwamba tumewaelekeza 
vizuri watu wetu hawa ili kwa muda ule wa usiku wawe watafany a kazi  zao kwa umakini bila 
bugdha wala tafash kut oka kwa mtu yeyote. Mheshimiwa Spika , kuongezea katika suala hili 
nadhani sua la hili ndugu yet u amelileta kwa mji mkuu wa kati ya Mombasa kwa sababu maeneo 
kama yale ya kwetu tunakotoka Likoni tukisema biash ara hi zi zifanywe usiku wale mabwana 
itabidi tuwa pe na askari mmoja awalinde kwa sababu kikule kwetu sisi amani kidogo twaijua  
wenyewe ili hapa  kwenye mji wa Mombasa twasisitiza suala kama hili sababu mchana ndio 
msongamano ni mwingi.  Kwa hivyo ikiwa suala  hili litachukuliwa na uzito lifanywe kwa muda 
wa usiku basi pia wale watenda  kazi tutakao  wapa majukumu yale ili kuiboresha k azi ile na 
kuifanya  katika hali iliyo nzuri tuwape kienua mgongo ambacho kitawapa nguvu, mori na natija 
ya kuifanya ile kazi yao bil a wasi  wasi bila kufikiria mara mbili. Kwa hayo  mengi machache 
Mheshimiwa Spika namuunga ndugu yangu mkono. Ahsante.  
 
The Sp eaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Manuari. Yes , Honourable  Allen 
Katana, please make your contribution . 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spi ka nataka nikushukuru kwa kunipa nafasi hii ili nikaweze 
kuchangia katika Hoja hii na pia nataka nimpongeze Mhes himiw a Abdirahman kwa kuleta 
Mswada  huu na mimi nitachangia kidogo maana kama kipindi kilichopita tulitaja kwa mba ni 
vyema jiji letu kwanza kwa msimu huu wa shughuli hizi za mwisho wa mwa ka ni vyema jiji letu 
Mheshimiwa Spika likaweze kuwa  safi. Kwa hiyo Mheshi miwa Spika limekuja pamoja kwa 
suala hili alilolileta Mheshimiwa Abdirahman akiwa sawia na hoja tulioizun gumza siku chache 
zilizopita.  
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 4 Mheshimiwa Spika na pia baadae huenda tukat aka muongozo wako Bunge la pili 
lililokuwa , mimi si kuwa h apa lak ini katika tafiti zangu chache nataka nitaje kama itakuwa 
sijapata ujumbe ambao pengine si wa  kuhitalifiana na yaliyotoke a. Nataka nitaje kwamba suala 
kama hili lishaletwa tayari Bungeni na Mh eshimiwa Mteule Mheshimiwa Milka Areba katika 
Bunge la pili  na kadri tunavyoendelea kwenda mbele ni dhahiri kwamba Miswada ya maana 
maana Waheshimiwa waliotangulia walileta Miswada  hii k atika Bunge hili lakini inaonekana 
kuna utepetevu mahali fulani Mheshi miwa Spika wa Miswada hii kutofanyiwa kazi na ikiendelea 
hivi itakuwa sisi ni Waheshimiwa wa  kupigiwa kura na kuja kuimba nyimbo zile zile, ngonjera 
zile zile ambazo zina imbwa na hakuna lolote linalotendeka .  
Mheshimiwa Spika , kama suala la kuweka mapipa t aka kati ya jiji letu utakut a ni kitu 
muhimu ambacho Bunge hili kwa nguvu zake liweze kusukuma ili haya mapipa yawekwe 
mapema iwezekanavyo . Hivi basi litap unguza uchafu ambao mara kwa mara unapatikana katika 
jiji letu na mara nyingi watakapoweka mapipa hay a nafikiri pia itakuwa imefungua nafasi hizi 
taasisi za ulinzi kwa sababu pia tunapoweka vitu kama hivi, kama mapipa tukiweka 
yaliyotengez wa kwa vyuma ama mabati kuna wale vijana huchukua vikaenda vikapimwa vitu 
kama hivi na vikauzwa . Sasa tutakapokuwa tum epitisha suala hili Mheshimiwa Spika pia 
tuang alie mapipa haya ima yatatengenezwa kwa plastic  sijui plas tiki ni nini na sitaki kuchanga 
lugha , plastiki ahsante kwa kusawazishwa  tuangalie pia ni vitu  gani vitakavyotumika kwa ajili ya 
kutengeneza mapipa haya  maana ni muhimu sana .  
Mheshimiwa Spika , suala lengine ambalo nitalita ja hapa ipo barabara ya kutoka Mwembe 
Tayari ile KCB ya Mwembe Tayari kuja ndio uunganishe na hii ambayo inakuja  mpaka Blue  
Room upande mmoja ile barabara i natumika kwa upande mmoja uki toka sehemu ile ya Mwembe 
Tayari kuja h ivi huu upande mwengine unatumika kama sehemu ya kuegeshwa magari. 
Mheshimiwa Spika , mara nyingi mimi hutumia hiyo barabara juzi ni kija hapa Bunge ; ilikuwa 
yapata kama saa ta tu vile una tabia ya kurauka sana Bunge hat a leo ilikuwa tumeandikiwa saa 
nne lakini hata nime  note Mheshimiwa Spika umeingia hapa saa tatu na dakika 57. S asa pia 
mimi n ilikuwa katika harakati za kuwania ili nifike haraka Mheshi miwa Spik a nikakuta lori la 
taka limesimama upande ule pekee ambao n dio magari yapite na lile lori lilisimama kwa zaidi ya 
dakika 15 ikizoa taka.  Kwa hiyo hili suala la kw amba uzoaji wa taka kupitia malori iwe usiku 
Mheshimiwa Spi ka asi eliunga mkono katika Bunge hili nafikiri atakuwa ni mteja mzu ri katika 
hospitali yetu ya Po rt Reitz.   
Nikimalizia Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kutoa pendekezo na nikitoa mfano wa nchi kama 
Rwanda na katika mamlaka na uwezo wa Bunge hili M heshimiwa  Spika ningeomba Bunge hili 
lipewe ruhusa litembelee nchi j irani hapa ya Burundi, Rais wa Burundi ametang aza siku moja 
kati ya mwezi ambayo siku ile ikiongozwa na Rais mwenyewe wanazunguka  wakiokota taka ili 
kufanya nchi yao iwe safi na kulingaman a na hiyo  Mheshimiwa Spika ingekuwa pendekezo 
langu nikiongeza katik a Mswada  huu wa Mheshimiwa Abdirahman Mheshimi wa Spika kwamba 
iwe sheria ya kwamba Bunge ili limepitisha ya kwamba Kaunti hii ya Mombasa ikiongozwa na 
Gavana mwenyewe Abdulswamad Shariff N assir kwa  kuwa tumekuwa katika historia mbaya ya 
kwamba Jiji letu la  Mombasa limekuwa chafu tuwe na siku moja ya m wezi tukiongozwa na 
Gavana tukiokota taka ili Mji wetu uwe msafi. Kwa hiyo naomba k uunga mkono Hoja hii ya 
Mheshimiwa Abdirahman. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Allen Katana. Yes , Honourable  
Hamisi Mbaya?  
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya:  Ahsa nte sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii niweze 
kuwatambulisha Waheshimiwa Wenza . 
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 5 Nitachangia Hoja hii kwa lugha ya Kiswahili tofauti na nili vyochangi a jana kwa lugha ya 
ishara.  Mimi naiunga mkono Hoja hii iliy otolewa na ndugu yangu AbdulRahman  ambapo kama 
ilivyo desturi shuka hua inabakia kua shuka na kaniki inabaki kua kaniki. K wa ukweli sababu za 
msingi za kuiunga mkono hoja hii moja wapo ni k wamba kama al ivyozungumza ndugu yangu 
Allen Katana kuhusiana na uzoaji t aka wa mchana hua una uzito mkub wa sana has wa kupitia 
msongamano wa magari ambao huwa yanapatikana.  Kwa hivyo naiunga mkono hoja hii bila 
kupinga na naiunga mkono k wa asilimia tisaini na m bili kuto kana na hoja hii ambayo imelet wa 
na ndugu yangu AbdulRahman . Ahsanteni.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri): Thank you Hon ourable  Mbaya . Yes, Honourable  Sylvester 
Kai.  
[The Speaker ( Hon.  Aharub Khatri)  exited the  Chair] 
[ The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Amriya  Juma)  in the  Chair] 
 
Hon. Kai:  Ahsante Bi. Spika na natofau tiana k wa kiwango f ulani na rafiki yangu  
Mheshimi wa  mwenza ambaye ame weza kuleta Mswada huu ; na nita weza kutofautiana na  yeye 
katika mas wala kadhaa ambayo nitaomba i wapo Mswada huu unahitaji kukua uchukuli we na 
uzito basi mambo fulani na hisi yatahitaji ku fanyi wa marekebisho ama yaongeze we na k abla 
niendelee nim wambie kaka yangu mkub wa kiongozi wa pale Shanzu ya k wamba sio sahihi 
kwamba kama viongozi wengine wana tofauti katika kimtizamo basi wao ni  wenda wazimu si 
hivyo k wa sababu ninaamini tumekuja hapa  na tuna fikra tofauti tofauti ambazo tuk izileta 
pamoja zita weza kuleta natija katika ubora wa ute ndaji kazi wetu. Mimi kitu ya kwanza nataka 
niseme h uu Mswada kama utaweza kukua vile yeye amependekeza kiongozi bila kuona ni jinsi 
gani mas wala ya usalama wa wale wafanyi  kazi ninahisi k wamba tutak ua bado tuna tatizo kub wa 
ni lazima tuele we ya k wamba wanaofanya usafi sio askari na ha wa ambao wanafanya usafi 
hawajajihami katika hali yoyote, ni lazima tuele we ya k wamba watakua wanafanya katika 
vikundi  wakiwa wangapi wangapi, na itakua usalama wao umel indwa vilevile kinamna gani hilo 
ni la k wanza Bi. Spika . 
Jambo la pili mimi ninaamini ambao watakua wanafanya kazi hizi k wa kiwango kikub wa 
vilevile pia kutakua  kuna wanawake ndani yao, na tunaamini k wamba ha wa wenzetu jinsia ya 
kike sanasana masaa kama ha ya hua wana majukumu ya kimsingi ambayo wanafaa kuyafanya 
katika majumbani k wao Bi. Spika, lakini vilevile pia hata kama ni wanaume ina wezekana labda 
wale wake zao kule nyumbani pia wao asubuhi wanarauka k wenda kufany a shughuli zengine Bi. 
Spika, masaa pek e ya ke ambayo wako nayo ili kushu ghulikia yale majukumu mengine ya 
kimsingi madam spika ni masaa ya usiku, k wa hivyo ni lazima tuangalie k wa sababu kuna 
maswala mengine huyachukulia k wamba hayana uzito lakini katika wanandoa kama sisi 
wachanga tunayachukul ia kimsingi sana. Hivyo ni lazima tuangalie na mas uala kama haya 
tuangalie labda tuseme ya k wamba kutakua kuko na shift ya kusema kwamba mtu ana weza 
kufanya m chana na vilevile afanye usiku. Lakini tukisema ya k wamba t utaiondoa na tuichukulie 
kwamba itakua ikifanya usiku peke yake basi mimi naona k wamba hii itatuletea matatizo katika 
pande hizo mbili ambazo nimesema hususan mas wala ya usalama k wa dada zetu na vi levile pia 
itaathiri wanandoa. Shukran.  
 
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Thank you Hon ourable Sylvester Ka i, 
Yes Hon ourable  Leila?  
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 6 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Bi Spika na mimi sasa hivi ku weza kuniona maanake tangu 
asubuhi hata nimefanya zoezi la kuketi kuenuka  hunioni nashukuru umeniona. Nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hoja h ii iliokuja na Mheshimi wa Anza  fresh  pole Mheshimiwa Abd ulRahman 
nampongeza sana k wa hii hoja yake al iokuja nayo na nataka niseme ya k wamba hiyo mikakati ni 
mizuri k wa sababu kuna wakati nilisafiri kwenda Dubai na nikaona watu wakifanya usafi usiku 
Mheshimi wa Spika na k wa kweli ni jamb o zuri k wa sababu ile ukiamka asubuhi wakati unaenda 
kwa shu ghuli za kikazi ama watoto wanapelek wa shule watu wanafungua biashara zao kunakua 
hakuna msongamano yoyote , kunakua hakuna vumbi kunakua hakuna shida yoyote ya ku wa eti 
acha tusongee hivi kufa giliwe, kunakua hakuna shida watu wanafanya shu ghuli zao, mukilala 
mukiamka asubuhi kumeng ’ara k wa hivyo hilo ni wazo zuri sana na kama m wenzangu 
alivyosema hapa ku wekwe usalama  ambapo ile itakua ni kazi ya usiku waweze ku wekewa 
usalama m aanake kuna watoto  wengine nao ha wasikii wakiona mambo kama yale wanapata 
nafasi kufanya maovu. K wa hivyo mimi naomba hilo jambo lizingati we na ita weza kuleta natija 
katika jimbo letu la Mombasa maan ake usafi utakua unafanya usiku asubuhi watu anaendelea na 
kazi zao na shug huli zao kujenga Mombasa kama ka waida. Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika naunga 
mkono.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Thank you Hon ourable  Leila. Yes , 
Honourable  Hamida.  
Hon. Noor:  Than k you Ma dam Speaker . I stand to support the Motion because a s you are  
aware in the modern world in the first world these things are done during evening times because 
of the people during the day have to go on with their businesses and other things but Madam  
Speaker  as you are a ware when we were here last term in 20 17/2022 t here as a similar motion 
that was brought in by my fellow Member Hon ourable  Milka about the dustbins that are going to 
be put up in the CBD ’s. The problem that we really face  is implementation Mad am Speak er, it is 
the key we are facing because they are no t implementing most of those things but if this is going 
to be implemented since we are tourist destination I think it will be a good idea when the people 
in the morning wake up and find out that o ur stree ts are clean and they can go on with their 
business es, Madam Speaker at this time its holiday season so I think if this thing is going to be 
implemented early, it’s going to be fantastic for all of us in our County so I do sup port the 
motion. Thank  you ver y much.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Yes, Honourable  Fatma?  
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Bi. Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa huu . Kwanza 
namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu muumba mbingu na ardhi pasi na kizuizi kuwa hapa siku ya leo. 
Bi. Spika mimi nimesima ma kidet e kuunga mkono Mswada  ulioletwa na Mhe shim iwa 
aliye chaguliwa kwa kura nyingi sana kuliko Waheshimiwa  wote hapa Mombasa. Bi. Spika 
Mswada ulioletwa na ndugu yangu…  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Honourable Jackton  Madialo and 
Honourable  Katana, h e is on a point of orde r and you are on a point of …? 
Hon. Katana:  Point of order!  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Also point of order. What  is your point of 
order Hon ourable  Madialo?  
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 7 Hon. Madialo:  Is Hon ourable  Kushe in order to say that Ho nourable  AbdiRahman  was 
elect ed w ith the highest votes ; it will be an insult to the people of Mikindani Ward who gave me 
an overwhelming number of votes, infact I was not only the leading in Mombasa County but 
Coast province as a whole. Thank you.  
[Applause ] 
The Tempora ry Speaker (Hon . Am riya Juma ): Mr. Madialo you said  you are on a point 
of order, that is a point of information, what  is the point o f order or that  is a point of information. 
Yes Hon. Katana? Hon ourable  Fatma please take your seat.  
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Thank you. 
Hon.  Katana:  I also just want to inform Hon ourable  Fatma… but thank God Hon ourable  
Madialo did it. Thank you, Hon ourable  Speaker.  
The Temporary Sp eaker (Hon.  Amriya  Juma ): Honourable  Fatma proceed.  
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Bi. Spika. Ya Mungu tumpe Mungu na  ya Kaisari, 
tumpe  Kaisari  Bi. Spika na usiloliju a ni usiku wa kiz a Bi. Spika ; nasema kwamba  narudilia tena 
kwamba Mheshimiwa siku ya mchujo  wa chama cha ODM ni yeye aliyechaguliwa na kura 
nyingi kuliko Waheshimiwa  wote Bi. Spika.  
[Applause ] 
[Point of info rmation] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Order Hon ourable  Madialo Order! Order!  
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Mheshimiw a Spika … Bi. Spika, ahsante kwa kuweza kunilinda.  
[Point of information ] 
I do not want t o be infor med, sitaki kupewa taarifa yeyote .  
The Tem porary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma ): I have ruled Hon ourable  Madialo, le t her 
proceed. Yes?  
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Sitaki kupewa taarifa niko sawa Bi. Spika, ahsante kwa kunilinda.  
Bi. Spika, Mswada  ulioletwa na ndugu yangu Mhes himiwa Abdirahman , ni Mswada  amba o ni 
mzuri sana, kwanza kabisa nakupa kongole kakangu ambaye ni Mheshimiw a. Pili, Bi. Spika  
itakuwa ni vyema sana kwamba takataka ziweze kuondolewa usiku, sababu ya kwanza ni 
kuondoa msonga mano na sababu ya pili ni kila mtu  akiamka m ji wetu utakuwa ume ng’ara na 
uko sawa na naomba k uongezea . Hawa wafanyikazi wetu ambao wanafany a kazi usiku kwanza 
kabla sijasahau mimi mwenyewe nilikuwa nikifagia usiku katika hili jimbo la Mombasa kabla 
sijakuwa Mheshimiwa n a wakati h uo nikifagia tulikuwa tukilipwa shiling i 200, wakiamka wakuu 
ama wakaazi wa Mombasa walikuwako wana ona mji uko imara na maridadi kabisa na Bi. Spika 
bila kuogopa itakuwa ni vyema taka ziondolewe na usiku ili pia wafanyikazi wetu wasiweze 
kukoswa kosw a na magari barabarani maanake magari m engi h uwa yanatembea mchana lakini 
usiku huwa magari kil a mtu ameenda kwake nyumbani kulala lakini cha kuongezea , wafanyikazi 
wetu wakifanya usiku , nazungumza na sauti ya kusikitisha  na wa o pia waweze kuangaliwa na 
jicho la huruma. Ahsan te sana.  
[Applause ] 
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 8 The T empo rary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Yes, Honourable  Frankline?  
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa nafasi hii kuweza kuchangia Mswada  
huu na kwanza nianze na kump ongeza ndu gu yangu Mheshimiwa Abdirahman wa Mji Wa Kale 
ambaye anawakilisha wa wale wa lioishi zamani na sasa . Kwa hivyo Mswada  huu unatuhusu sisi 
wote wana Mombasa ; nianze na kusema ya kwamba swala la kufanya kazi ama kusafisha mji 
usiku ni swala a mbalo mimi naliunga mkono mia kwa mia kwa sababu litaturahisishia mengi ya 
yale ambayo tumekuw a tukiyaona  na mara nyingi tumekuwa mimi binafsi nikiwa katika 
hospitali kupeana matibabu nimekutana na wafanyikazi katika idara ya mazingira wamegongwa  
na magari  wakati wanaendeleza shugh uli zao za kusafisha mj i wetu. Niseme hivi Mheshimiwa 
Spika ; kwamba wazo  hili la  kwamba waweze kusafisha kati ya mji masaa ya usiku ni swala 
ambalo linafaa kuungwa mkono na kuongezea Mheshimiwa Spik a ni kwamba  hawataku a wao 
wa kwanza kufanya kazi usiku, tunao askari ambao wameol ewa na familia zao na wanafanya 
kazi usiku, m adak tari na  manesi ambao wanafanya kazi usiku bila kuogopa kwamba ndoa 
zitavunjika . Mimi ninaloju a ni kwamba ukiwa katika ndoa ama ka tika mapen zi siku zote huwa 
unatenga mda wa kuwa  nae yule um pendae Mheshimiwa Spika…  
[Applause ] 
Kwa hivyo wale wenye hofu y a kw amba swala hili litafanya ndoa zivunjike, huwa hii ni 
kihere here Mheshimiwa Spika , lakini huwa haisimami kaidi ya dakika nusu saa ... 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma): Yes, Honourable  Samuel , you are on a 
point of …? 
Hon. Mwaura:  Mheshim iwa Spika  nataka kuuliza tu kama kiherehere ni lugha ya Bunge.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Amriya Juma): Ok thank you. Hon ourable  Franklin e 
please kihere here is not a conversant to the language of  the parliament so you can proceed noting 
the same.  
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante, Mheshimiwa Spik a na samahani kama kwa njia yoyoye 
nimekosea mtu heshima lakini kile nasema ni kwamba saa nyengine tunafanya mambo tu kwa 
misisimko nafikir i hio ndio neno sahihi ningefaa kutumia mimi ni seme hivi sisi sote ni wa ndoa 
na kwa njia moja a u nyengine hata  kama usiku tuko kwa nyumba zetu Mheshimiwa Spika, hisia 
kuna  wakati zi naushuka h ata wake zetu kuna wakati hawataki kuguswa, huo n i ubinaadamu 
Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa hivyo mimi n inasema ya kwamba hili swala la hawa wanaofanya 
katika mazingira , wa weze kupangiwa kazi, wafanye katika kubadilishana, wengine wafanye 
mchana mahali ambapo hak una msongamano na wengine wafanye usiku mji wetu uwe msafi 
Mheshimiwa  Spika . Pia nikiunga Waheshimiwa  wenza ambao wamesema kuhusiana na swala 
hili la usafi  nafik iri sisi kama Jumba katika yale ambayo tuta amua kufanya tuweze kuekeza 
nafasi ya si si kutembe lea hizo nchi kama Rwanda na Burundi tutoke sisi kama Bunge hapa 
twende kule tujue siri ya usafi  ni nini . Mheshimiwa Spika , ikiwezekana hiyo safari iwe mwezi 
wa nne kw a sababu hii Disemba  tuna shughuli nyengine za kufanya. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Yes, Honourable  Patrick Mbelle?  
Hon. Mbel le: Thank you Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I rise to support this 
Motion by  Honourable  Abdulrahman from Old Town and I think this Motion is timely enough 
for the rea sons of His  Excellency the Governor who must see pictures s miling over there.  
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor   Page 9 He should  smiling wherever he is because he has done a wonderful job when it comes to 
maintenance of cleanliness of this County but at the same time,  we have seen posters erected in  
different places stipulated that there will be fines that will be charged to anyone who will  litter 
the city of Mombasa if and when they are caught by the Inspec torate. But again,  Madam Speaker 
I would wish to ask the question ; where do we expect th ese peopl e to throw the litter so that we 
do not then fine them for littering the city? ! So, I rise to s upport this Motion because then we will 
be giving th ese people t he alternative of knowing where to put this litter.  Madam Speaker, t here 
is a time the Inspectorate was too harsh i n that part icular matter and I saw women who had to put 
in litters that they have accumulated  from eating bananas and sugar cane in their bags  so that they 
can go and throw those particular litters back to their homes . It is something that is not over of 
good health s tandards to make those women and people of Momba sa to undergo such matters.   
Two, I also I wish to support the night cleaners , but again Madam Speaker I think this 
world as it is now has advanced in matter s of technology  and we still use technologies I think ten  
or twenty years back of letting this people swe ep and collect the garbage using t heir hands . I 
think the County should  also invest in proper technologies to help th ese people under take this job 
in a better manner ; we have trucks that do the sweeping , trucks that do the collection , trucks that 
makes these things  easier. I do  not know the names in particular but I think it is a better 
technology to do this particular agenda.   
Number three, I also rise to support Honourable …I am sorry I f orgot her name, 
Honour able Hamida ! Honourable  Hamida and also Hon ourable  Katana they have talked of the 
matter us talking of so many things here in the House and they are never implemented. I think it 
is time that this House also passes Bills or Motions that then give s fines to either Chie f officers 
or administrators that do not adopt the Motions that we bring to this Assembly because I 
understand that such kind of things we would also put the County in the map as one of the 
cleanest city in this world but if all ends here in matters of wor ds then again  we are not doing the 
service to the people of Mombasa but I should be as some fines or punishment  to people do not 
undertake the jobs that they have been given by this particular Assembly. Thank you, Madam 
Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Amriya  Juma ): Yes, Honourable  Milka?  
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me this chance to also giv e my  
contribution on the Motion that has been introduced by Hon ourable  Abdirahman Abdulkadir 
Hussein of Mji wa Kale . I rise to su pport that this Motion h as found it self again in this House  
after we passed the same in 2018 as Hon ourable  Hamida and Hon ourabl e Katana have stated.  It 
is a pity that we pass Motions and they are never implemented ; we are hoping that we have a 
more aggressive Chair of Implementation and as we  have been given the mandate of ove rsight 
that we shall also take it more seriously to ens ure that such important Motions are implemented , 
actually bins or litter bins should have been erected way back in 2018 when we passed this 
Motion from my little resea rch, I foun d out that … 
[Interrupt ion] 
Just a second ! I found out that Mombasa ge nerates a pproximately 879 tonnes of waste each 
day but only 46  per cent of that waste is collected ; most of what remains finds itself to the along 
the roads  which end up blocking dra inage sys tems and of cause increa ses the risk of flooding and 
finally we end up get ting sick . If these litter bins were erected in proper areas,  we would have 
more order ; the litter bins would be emptied later in an orderly manner and we would not have 
such kin d result of flooding and having s everal diseases . 
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor  Page 10 So, I want to support the  new idea that is coming of collection at night because that will 
bring order during the day as it will not interfere with traffic and human traffic or vehicles  and 
human traffic as ther e will be  a smooth running of the  same . So, collection at night will be 
orderly and it will give them more time maybe to collect garbage so that our city will remain 
clean . We are a major tourist city and when tourist s come and find our town clean,  they will b e 
attract ed and come back to the same city because of the cleanliness . As Honourable  Leila has 
just said whenever we go to other countries or other areas of this world like when she was in 
Dubai,  I was there with her and we remained  admiring how clean Dubai was. Whe n we went to 
Singapore,  I was with … no I was not with her I  was wi th another Hon ourable  Member and the 
story was the same. They had clean cities , well maintained and you wish that back at home 
things were the same ; so I do support  this Motion and I hope of  course  I know my colleague s all 
of us are going to pass it  and after that we should be more aggressive to ensure that it is 
implemented . Let us not pass Motions and they are never implemented , it will demotivate most 
of us , in fact mos t after you pass the Motion once, twice, a third one and a fourt h one and are n ot 
implemented you get de -motivated and you become idle so that has been happening to most of us 
but i hope with the new energy we are going to be having our Motions implemented, thank  you I 
support.  
[Applause ] 
The Tem porary Speaker (Hon. Amr iya Juma) : Yes, Honourable  Jacktone Madialo?  
Hon. Madialo : Thank you Madam Speaker . I rise to support my brother Abd ulRahman for 
this wonderful Motion and I will also want to suggest to the House on  ways to ensure that the 
Motions and Bills passed are implemented. We kn ow that we have the Committee as Hon ourable  
Milka Ngare has said ; the Committee on Implementation but also as a whole House we have a 
tool that we can also be able to force the Executi ve to implement the Motion s that we  pass. For 
example; if we  pass a Motion and it is not implemented  by the Executive from time to time, they 
will be bringing  in Bills to be passed here so before passing them we can tell them that we are 
not going to pass this  one coming from the Execu tive…  
[Applause ] 
…Until and unles s the Motions that have been passed in t his House awaiting their 
implementation is done ! That is a very simple way of ensuring that implementation is done from 
their side. I would not want that this House be a House that  passes B ills in futility, it wil l be very 
unfortunate , so let us use the  powers that we have to ensure that Bills and Motions that are 
passed here are implemented . We have that power and we should use it and we must use it. 
Lastly in  implementing this, I woul d also pr ay that the security of those th at will be going round 
collectin g the litter be enhanced. Thank you so much.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma): Thank you Hon ourable  Madialo.  
Honourable  Members, jus t to inform the House that we have the Mombasa County  Solid Waste 
Management Bill , 2021 in which the Motion mover has anchored  his Motion on as earlier stated . 
So, Honourable  Members we will be alive to the fact that we have an existing Bill on the same. 
Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Juma  Mwalimu?  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Ahsante Bi. Spika. Nimes imama  kuunga mkono ndugu yangu 
AbdulRahman Abdulkad ir Hussein . 
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor  Page 11 Pia, niwakumbushe katika ile Bili ndugu zangu  kuna kipenge le kinasema hata kule 
mashinani katika zile garbage collectors  zetu twafaa tupeane  magunia ya kuweka taka taka na  
pia tuvipe nguvu vile  vikun di vya kubeba taka taka na kila mwisho wa mwe zi wanafaa kuto a 
shillingi 200. Kwa hivyo ndugu zangu hii pia ni fursa kuimarisha vikundi vyetu ili wajiandikishe 
katika ofisi husika na w aweze kuokota  zile taka taka na waweze pia h izi garbage collectors 
wawez e kutoa zile shilingi mia 200, hii pia ni moj a wapo ya kutengeza kazi kwa vijana. A hsante 
Bi. Spika kwa nafasi yako.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma ): Than k you Hon ourable  Juma Mwalimu. 
Yes, Honourable  Nusura?  
 
Hon. Nusura Mwinyi:  Ahsante Bi.  Spika kwa kuni pa nafasi hii. Kwanza nataka 
kumpongeza sana Mhesh imiwa Abdirahman Hussein kwa kuleta hoja hii, pongezi sana. Nafikiri 
maneno mengi yamezungumziwa, wafanyi kazi walioko mabarabarani wengine wana  uoga 
magari yako mengi, ba do wengine h awajiaam ini kufagia mul e mabarabarani . Kwa hivyo hoja 
itawasaidia mpaka wa le wen gine wenye uoga. Nafikiri wakati wa M anispaa  kazi hizi zilikuwa 
zikifanywa usiku na wale wafanyi kazi waliokuwa wakifanya kazi hizi ni wale ambao 
hawakuajiriwa. Sasa pi a ningependa kuo ngeza l abda kama hizi kazi zitakuja ama zitatokea, 
waanga lie pi a wale ambao ni garbage collectors  kule mitaani wapewe hizi nafasi angalau nao 
wapate riziki kwa sababu kule mitaani watu si wepesi wa kuto a hela ili nao wapate mkate wa 
siku. Kwa hivyo nauunga  mkono  hoja hii na nasema a hsante sana Bi. Spika.  
 
The Te mporar y Speaker  (Hon. Amriya  Juma ): Thank you Hon ourable  Nusura. Yes , 
Honourab le Abdulkadir you may now respond to your Motion.  
 
Hon. Abd ulRahman Hussein : Thank you Madam Speaker. This was a very  brief and 
direct Motion and I am glad most of the Members have agreed wi th me to ad opt it. The only 
major concern they have raised was the security which I also raised it as part of my 
recommendation ; I stated clea rly that necessary arrangements should be  made to transport  the 
willing staff to and from work places. Madam Speak er, I would also like to respond to an issue 
also raised by Hon ourable  Katana ; he took an example of Rwanda where the country President 
leads citizen s on a clean -up day exercise . I can st ate proudly that I ha ve initiated the same 
exercise in this Ward, Old Town, dubbed Old Town fresh  where every first Saturday of every 
month the residents come out in the numbers and they partake in the cleaning exercis e. So , I 
would also equally urge my fe llow MCAs to take note  of that and implement the same in their 
respective Wards.  
Madam Speaker , just to stress the element of dustbins or rather the litter bins ; with the litter 
bins can generate actually a source of in come for the County government. We s hould  actually 
encourag e corporates and firms to adapt these dustb ins, I have seen it been done in Nairobi . I can 
see Firms like P.K  Juicy Fruits for the companies that deals with tissues they have adapted t hese 
bins and they generate source of income for the C ounty  government of Nairobi , so we can 
equally pursue that sam e route.  Madam Speaker , on my parting shot, I would like to request that 
this Bill be implemented to the l etter, they are just two prayers her e; we should compel the 
County government to en gage in  a night shift garbage collection and as well as the erectio n of 
dustbins  collections and once constituted, the relevant Committee on Environment should take 
heed and should take this matter with the se riousness it deserves. The Committee on Labour also 
should intervene with the County government and the County Government Local  Workers Union 
to come up necessary arrangement to entice the county workers to join in this noble work.  
November 2 3, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Off icial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certi fied version  of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansar d Editor  Page 12 Thank you, Madam Speaker .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Amriya Juma): Thank yo u Hon ourable  AbdulRahman 
Abdulkadir. Honourabl e Members , I now put the question t hat the Motion by Hon ourable  
Abdirahman Abdulkadir on the Adoption of a garbage bin system and collection of garbage at 
night by County staff be approved by this Honou rable  House in the sam e terms as debated?  
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 The Motion by Hon ourable  Abdirahman Abdulkadir on the Adoption of a Garbage Bin 
System and Collection of Garbage at Night by County St aff is adopted by this Honourable House. 
Yes Cle rk? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable Members , this House stands ad journed until Tuesday, 29th November , 2022 at 
10:00 a.m. 
The H ouse rose at 3:33 p.m. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 