March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 14th March, 2019  
The House met at 2:45p.m.  
   
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated.   
(Consultations)  
 
 Yes, Clerk.  
 
PAPERS  
MOMBASA COUNTY FISCAL  STRATEGY PAPER , 2019  
 
 Yes, Hon . Fadhili  Makarani, please lay down the P aper.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. S peaker.  Mr. Speaker on behalf 
of the C ommittee of Finance , Budget and Appro priation I ha ve risen to lay a P aper on Mombasa 
County Fiscal Strategy Paper , 2019 and I wish to lay.  
 
(Paper laid)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, Clerk . 
  
STATEMENTS  
 
 Yes, Hon . Renson Juma Thoya please give the response . 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON LABOUR HON . THOYA ON 30 PER CENT 
RULE ON EMPLOYMENT A T JOMVU KUU WARD  
 
 Hon Thoya: Thank you Mr. Speaker . While the House  was on recess I did visit  some of 
the companies that Hon . Shebe wanted to  get some feedback . 

March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  I did visit  KKM alongside his Ward M anager and Munaka and indications are very clear 
that the drivers within those said companies are from Congo and Rwanda . I did vis it Welcon and 
there were no indication that there were foreigners except the top level in the hierarchy of 
management and I indicated the same with Hon . Shebe of Jomvu that we need again to visit with 
him to share some  sentiment s  as to why those youth s or drivers from Jomvu are not employed 
within those companies . 
 That is the brief report but I have a feelin g that we need t o do a detail ed visit to both 
KKM and Munaka companies to establish the reality and if we can get a detail ed report of the 
staff that are within these  companies and their nationalities.   Thank y ou.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Renson Thoya . Yes, Clerk.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON EDUCATION ON  RENOVATION AND 
SUPPLY OF LEARNING E QUIPMENT /TOOLS IN THE EARLY C HILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT  CENTRES 
(ECDE S) 
 
 Yes, Hon . Ibrahi m Omondi please give the response.   
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON EDUCAT ION HON.OMONDI ON RENOVATION AND 
SUPPLY OF LEARNING E QUIPMENT / TOOLS IN THE EARLY C HILDHO OD DEVELOPMENT EDUCA TION 
CENTRES (ECDES ) 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to give the following Statement on renovation an d 
supply of learning eq uipment/ tools in the Early Childhood Development Education Centre s 
(ECDEs) in response to concerns raised by Hon . Raphael Musumba Bwire in the House on the 
12th sitting seeking to know from when the  County g overnment intends to renovate the ECDEs in 
the Co unty and when it plans  to supply learning equipment/tools in these c enters.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ) left the Chair ) 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, this Financial y ear 2018/2019 the Department of Education, ICT and 
MV 2035 had planned to renovate 12  ECDE Centers, t hey have so far received three  Bill of 
Quantities ( BoQs ) from Public Works, where two were advertised for tendering on the 29th 
January,  2019  and tender process is on -going. One had to be dropped due to land  issues at the 
school, t he other nine are still being worked on by Public Works and they have informed us that 
we will receive BoQs and tender documents for seven ECDE c enters by 20th March, 2019.  
 Below i s a s ummary, Mr. Speaker S ir as you look for that  summary every M ember has 
been given a copy of this particular response and there is summary there I would like to seek 
your permission if I will read or I just  skip because every M ember has got this copy . Mr. Speaker 
Sir is there importance of reading this summary or …  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes, for purposes of Hansard just read them . 
 
 Hon.  Omondi: Okay Mr. Speaker below is the Summary ; 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 S
.
N
O NAME OF 
SCHOOL  SUB -COUNTY  WARD  STATUS  
1.  Mtopanga ECDE 
Centre  Kisauni  Mtopanga  Tender process on -going  
2.  Baraka Voroni 
ECDE Centre  Kisauni Mwakirunge  Tender process on -going  
3.  Pentrose ECDE 
Centre  Nyali  Mkomani  School to confirm title 
deed issue  
4.  Kengeleni ECDE 
Centre  Nyali  Kongowea  Waiting BoQs & tender 
documents  
5.  Ronald Ngala 
ECDE Centre  Mvita  Tudor Waiting BoQs & tender 
documents  
6.  Sacred Heart 
ECDE Centre  Mvita  Ganjoni  Inadequate land, to look 
for alternative school  
7.  Mwangala 
ECDE Centre  Likoni  Mtongwe  Waiting BoQs & tender 
documents  
8.  Shika Adabu 
ECDE Centre  Likoni  Shika Adabu  Waiting BoQs & tend er 
documents  
9.  Amani ECDE 
Centre  Jomvu  Mikindani  Waiting BoQs & tender 
documents  
10.  St. Mary's ECDE 
Centre  Jomvu  Mikindani  Land d ispute  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  
Mr. Speaker Sir, on supply of teaching and learning materials in ECDE Centers, the 
current budget that was passed by County Assembly had the vote item for this was removed.  
Hence, due to budgetary constraints Mr. Speaker Sir we have no t been able to procure the same. 
Nevertheless, in the supplementary budget that we are currently doing, we have submitted a 
proposal for bu dgetary allocation for the same, once approved  we will be able to procure the 
teaching and learning materials.  
Mr. S peaker Sir, the Department ha s a few materials in stock which are being distribute d 
to all the 97 p ublic ECDE Centers as we wait for more budgetary allocation. The bursary forms 
have been designed and are ready for printing and waiting for confir mation of availability of 
funds to facilitate printing of forms and final logistics . The Department has requested the 
Department of Finance Mr. Speaker S ir I want emphasize on that or rather to stress the 
Department has requested the D epartment of Finance  for Kshs  100 million … 
 
(Interruption)  
(Loud Consultation)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Order! Order!  
 
 Hon.  Omondi: ...And the request ... I beg for your protection Mr. Speaker and the request 
is being processed . Thank you  Mr. Speaker S ir. Hon. Ibrahim Omondi , Chairman of Committee 
of Education, IT and MV2035 , Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes, the Chief Whip  is up ? 
 
 The Chief Whi p (Hon.  Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. N afikiri lazima 
tuweke wazi tuko hapa  kuweza kuwakilish a watu wetu na vile vile kutende a haki watu w etu 
ikiwa tunawakilisha katika B unge hili . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi ni M wanakamati katika 
Kamati ya Elimu lakini kusema kweli j ana nilipata ujumbe kwamba leo Kamati itakaa ku anzia 
saa saba na  nusu nimekuwa hapo nikisubiri Wanachama  wengine lakini la kushangaza  
Mwenyekiti wangu mpendwa naye pia hakuja . 
 Kwa sasa tumekutana naye njiani tu kuniamb ia kwamba hii inakuja , mimi nikamuambia 
sawa tunaona katika B unge ndani na kusema kweli hata ukiangal ia hapa kusema ripoti 
haitutendei haki . Watu wetu tayari tutaelezea nini ikiwa yeye Mwenyekiti kulingana na ripoti hii 
ambayo tayari mimi naipinga kwa sababu atasema je ikiwa hadi sa a hizi fomu za basari  zengine 
zatengezwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , are we seri ous? Jamani twatendea haki watu wetu 
tumetoa fomu za basari  mara ngapi kwa watu wetu?  11.  Gome ECDE 
Centre  Changamwe  Changamwe  Waiting BoQs & tender 
documents  
12.  Kwa Hola ECDE 
Centre  Changamwe  Kipevu  Waiting Bo Qs &  tender 
documents  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Tena  saa hizi zengine zinakuwa designed  tena tuitishe shi lingi milion i kadha za  
kuchapisha  hizo fo mu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , tena baadaye wanasema kwamba supply of 
teach ing and learn ing materials in ECD centres re current budget that was passed by us the 
County Assembly had a vote item of this removed ilitolewa na nani Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti? 
Nani alitoa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ? 
  
(Applause)  
 
 Nani? Jamani W abunge wenzangu tu semeni haki sisi macho yote yatulenga sisi , wale wa  
mashinani wananchi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hawajui kwaendelea nini katika B unge hili , kwa 
hivyo tusemeni ukweli jinsi inavyopelekwa katika hali hii hatuendi sawa watu wetu wanaumia 
wanafunzi wako manyum bani na W abunge pekee Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wanatoa basari . Sisi 
kama  serikali ya Mombasa Kaunti tuki ongozwa na Gavana wetu tuna weka sura gani mashinanai 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ; kwa hivyo napinga vikali ripoti hiii na mimi mwen yewe natangaza 
msimamo wa sina i mani na Mwenyekiti wangu wa Kamati wa E limu. Ahsante s ana. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon ourable let us go to the other side . Hon. 
Nyiro ? 
 
 Hon.  Nyiro:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka nikushukuru kwa kunipa hii nafasi na mimi 
nataka nionge kama mwali mu, leo staki kuongea kama Mheshimiwa … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Are you a Member of that C ommittee?  
 
 Hon.  Nyiro:  Mimi ni Mwanachama wa hio K amati na nataka nitoe masikitiko yangu ya 
kwamba r ipoti zinakuja ndani ya B unge hili ka bla hazijapi tia kwa K amati na inakuwa ni miujiza 
kwetu Wanachama  kuja kushabikia upuzi kama huu and I want to be on record  Bwana Spika  sisi 
tunavyojua ni kwamba fomu za basari  wanafunzi walipewa wakajaza wakarudisha wanangoja 
hundi  na hapa twaambiwa  fomu z a basari  has been designed ready for printing  sasa printing  ipi 
na zile wanafunzi wamepewa wakajaza wanangoja hundi  tafadhali na kwa sababu ya mambo 
kama haya tafadhali M heshimiwa Mwenyekiti wetu usitu aibishe ripoti kama hii ilikuwa uje nayo 
saa saba tuian galie na hatun geruhusu ije B ungeni .  
 Hii ni  kwa sababu si kweli nasema mambo yalivyo kwa sababu ...kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti nasema ya kwamba imefika ule wakati ambao Mheshimiwa O gutu alisema jana 
kwamba Mheshimiwa wetu aruhusu nywele zimee kwa sababu mambo kama haya si saw a kabisa 
kufanyiwa B unge wakati hali iko kama hii ; si ripoti ya ukweli , haina ukweli na haiwezi 
kuthibitishika , kwa hivyo Mhe shimiwa Mwenyekiti amedanganya B unge hil i na ikiwezekana 
aombe msamaha B unge hili kwa ripoti haina ukweli wow ote.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Members on this issue of the Statement of 
other reports the response from Hon . Ibrah im I will just let another one M ember to react then I 
will give out my direction Yes, Hon . Amur ? 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Hon.  Murfad  Amur: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ni huzuni , ni kilio wananchi 
wanalia basari kupotea hazionekani zaenda wapi Mheshimiwa Spika ? Ni jana tu nilileta jambo  
hili nikisema basari tulipea pesa tukaambiwa imebaki milion i 50, hatujui watu wanakula hio pesa 
wamew eka kwa interest account  ama nini twataka tuambiwe kwa sababu kama tuna milion i 50 
wale wahitaji wakati huu w angekuwa washapata . Hii nyimbo y a milion i 100  hatutaikubali 
kwamba kila siku twa ambiwa milion i 100  yaja haiwezi toka mbinguni pesa tuli i allocate  pale 
zilienda tuambiwe zilienda lakini Mheshimiwa Spika hatutakubali kufanywa kila mwana paka 
alala kila siku na tena nataka niseme tusiite ma  Chief O fficer  kuja kujisongonyoa hapa . 
 Wakati umefika kila mmoja abebe msalaba wake kwa sababu ma  Chief O fficer  
washakuja mara nyingi hapa tusiwatoe ma  Chief Officer  kuwa ndio vitega uchumi ama wa 
kuliwa . Ma Chief O fficer  washakuja hapa waka wajibika wakaeleza tunangoja milioni 100  
tukafanywa watoto wa shule tukaam biwa mkalete wale wa 300 na zaidi  tukapeleka sisi twat aka 
kujua hii milioni 50 kuna mtu anakula interest ndani yake ama nini? Ama tuambiwe kama 
hakuna kabisa zilipotea pia tujue ili tuwaambie watu wetu waachane na mambo ya basari lakini 
habari ya  kuambiwa fom u za designiwa  kila mwaka wa na design fomu hio; kwanza ni njia ya 
kula pesa kwa sababu fo mu ikisha  design iwa mara moja inatosha sio kila mwaka watu wanakula 
kwa printers  hio ni njia ya kula kwa printers  kila siku wa  design  fomu hio, ni njia ya kula pesa 
za wananchi . Sisi tunataka tuambiwe kama zatokaa ama hazitoki na ikishindika na tunataka 
Waziri mwenyewe aje ha pa ajibu maswali hapa ndani ya B unge … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Tuna uwezo  kifungu cha 195 kinasema ndani ya B unge si kule kwa chumba cha 
mikutano . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : It seems the Hon . Members are so bitter about 
the issue so I w ill not give my direction , we will hear from the three Hon . Members who are up 
then I will give out my direction so we will start with a voice of a lady from Kipevu , Hon. Faith . 
  
 Hon.  Mwende: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii na mimi naongea 
kama M wanakamati wa Elimu na kwanza nagadhabishwa na hii r ipoti ambayo imeletwa katika 
Bunge hili siku ya leo. Mheshimiwa Spika hili B unge si la mza ha wala kuchezewa k amari , kitu 
kinacholet wa katika B unge hili ni k itu cha uhakika kimekaliwa kwa K amati k ikija hapa kiwe ni 
kitu kimeiva . Mheshimiwa Spika nikiangalia siku zile kandarasi  zilianza kutolewa ilikuwa tarehe 
29 January mwaka huu 2019  bajeti tulipitisha mwaka uliopita mwezi wa sita .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika nashang aa mpaka leo hii tumebakisha miezi miwili mwaka wa fedha 
uishe  hakuna hata marekebisho  hata moja ECD imeweza kufanyika . Mheshimiwa Spika ni ndani 
ya B unge hili nilikuwa nikilia kuhusu Kwa Hola ECD  ambayo inak aa kama nyumba ya kuku ; 
wanafunzi hata hawa wezi kwenda kwa hio shule mafuriko na nyoka inapita pale . Nilikuwa 
nikilia mpaka leo sioni kitu ikifanyika , imefika wakati tuwache kuchezeana akili ; Mheshimiwa 
Spika naongea na uchungu mwingi kama mzazi mimi mwenyewe si wezi kubali mtoto wangu 
asome mahali kama pale . Umefika wakati watu waache kuchezeana sher e Mheshimiwa Spika na 
mahali pesa zinaenda tuambiwe zinaenda wapi ni pesa nyingi zina wekwa … 
 
(Applause)  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Lakini hakuna lolote  tunakuja hapa B ungeni tunalia hakuna kitu  inafanyika ; nikija 
kugusia mambo ya basari na jana n iliongea vizuri sana mimi kama M wanakamati yule 
anasimamia Elimu F und alinihakikishia ako na milioni 50 kwa akaunti yake hana haja hundi 
mpaka leo hii hazijatoka sa a hii wanatuambia wana chapisha zengine sijui ni za ukwaju gani ! 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi hii ripo ti siikubali na imefika wakati W aziri aje mwenyewe hapa ndani 
ya Bunge … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Tuna majibu mengi sana ya kujibu Mheshimiwa  Spika katika mashinani ninahuzunika 
sana na imefikia wakati hata ikiwez ekana twende tutoe ma AC zenye wanakaa nazo kwa ofisi 
ndio zinawafanya wasiende mashinani wajue ni nini tunapitia sisi kama MCA ’s. Naona 
nikiendelea na weza nikatoa machozi ama nikapiga mtu wacha nifike hapo...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalim u): Yes Honorable from Junda , Hon. Bwire ? 
 
 Hon.  Bwire: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker it i s very unfortunate that we are 
discussing a report  that has not gone through the C ommittee ; that r eport that has no blessings of 
Committee and this shows how inc ompetent the Chairman of this s aid C ommittee and that is 
why we had been advocat ing the dissolution of all the C ommittee s so that we come up with  very 
competent people who know  what they should be doing . 
 Mr. Speaker I think the Deputy Governor who happens  to be the CEC on Education in 
my view should also be on the long list of the CEC M embers who should be ready parking 
because he has shown how incompeten t he is , being a l ecturer it seems that the Deputy Governor 
still do not believe in the power of e ducat ion.  
We recruited the documents of the student who sat for the KCPE last year early January ; 
as we speak Mr. Speaker they left with less than three weeks to do away with the first term and 
we are still talking of printing the bursary forms ! I do not know  which C ounty we are , I do not 
know whether we are serious , I do not know whether some of these people went to school , I do 
not kno w whether  the Deputy Governor became a l ecturer by an accident , I do not know whether 
he went to school Mr.  Speaker , you see you cannot imagine a lecturer who has been lecturing 
students who knows what the school fees means and he is still telling us that he  is busy waiting 
for the printing out of the copies . 
 Mr. Speaker it  is very un fortunate that the neighboring C ounty gave o ut bursaries as 
early as January ; some as early as February and we are still talking of printing the bursary forms ! 
It is very unfortunate and in my opinion after what we  are handling today the Deputy G overnor 
should be told and I want to  be on record that  he should be ready to face the same music  because 
he has shown  us that he cannot handle this D epartment .  
Mr. Speaker we also want to be told that the alleged vote  that was transferred to other 
Department s was done by who and in which D epartment was that vote taken to and what has 
those votes or that vote that was transferred to other docket s what has it done to the Mombasa 
County people , we should be told.  
Mr. Speaker as I finalize I want also to sympathasize with the Department of Education 
under the ab le Chairmanship of Hon. Ibrahim Oyugi . 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 With less than three  months to another budget allocation that is maybe May, June if I am 
not wrong and according to what I have as a report or a response is that more than 50  per cent  are 
waiting for the Bill of Q uantities and tender  documents. So Mr. Speaker I wonder when will this 
happen? If a t all we are going for another budget, the b udget that we passed 2018/2019 is still 
waiting all this. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you. Yes H on. Athman Shebe, MCA 
Jomvu Kuu Ward.  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Naam, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwanza kunifanya 
wa mwisho kumalizia filamu hii ambayo tumekua nayo katika Bunge hili kwa muda mref u. 
Kwanza kabisa Mheshimiwa na W abunge wenza nataka muanga lie kinaya kilichokua hapa, 
kinaya ni ipi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti? Mheshimiwa mwenza amba ye anasimamia Kamati ya 
Bunge ni Mwalimu, Mheshimiwa Waziri amba ye anasimamia  mpango mzima wa elimu kuanzia 
chekechea mpaka juu ni m walimu , kinaya kikubwa kuwa hawa wali mu wawili hawazingatii 
umuhimu wa falsafa nzima ya masomo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti…  
(Applause)  
 Ndipo sasa nikatangulia kusema Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuwa wavyele wasema akili 
ni ny wele kila  mtu ana zake ndio nikamshauri M wenyekiti mwenza kwa sababu miaka yote  
namuona na kipara labda nikamwambia fuga nywele kidogo akili itapatikana Mheshimiwa ni 
masikitiko makubwa…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir I just wanted to confirm…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : What is it Hon. Ibrahim?  
 Hon.  Omondi : Point of order Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes proceed.  
 Hon.  Omondi : I just wanted to confirm from you Mr. Speaker Sir if really indeed the 
statement that my fellow Member has used that actually the removal of the hai r is stupidity if 
really that one can be confirmed it is a nice word that can be used in this Honourabl e House Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes proceed Hon. Shebe Athumani.  Hon. 
Ibrahim it is just a Swahili saying…  
(Applause)  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Nitamwambia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mwenza kwa sababu 
labda hana ufasaha wa lugha kwa sababu ni misamiati ; nikiendelea tu ili kuchelea wasaa 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuwa ni masikitiko makubwa sana leo tunaz ungumzia takriban miaka 
miwili Kaunti ya Mombasa ambayo ndio ukubwa Kenya nzima ka tika 47 katika mamlaka na 
rasilmali zinazozalishwa hapa tunazungumz ia hakujatoka basari hata moja w allahi ni aibu haya 
ndio masuala tukasema lazima Bunge la 12 liweze kuwajibikia na kusimama na haki…  
(Applau se) 
 
 Tuwaambie b ajeti tuliyopitisha pesa zimeenda wapi ; ni masikitiko kuona Mheshimiwa 
anakuja na ripoti ambayo ni urongo mtupu na inadhihir isha ukiritimba ulioko katika W izara 
husika ya e limu, sisi wametushukisha hadhi sisi kama W abunge wa Kaunti tukapat iwa jukumu 
tukaambiwa tukusanye majibu ya wale watoto waliofanya vizuri Mombasa iweze kuwapatia 
basari.  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kila Mheshimiwa alijukumika tukafanya zoezi hilo baada ya 
kufanya zoezi hilo baada ye hakuna ripoti yeyote ya kimsi ngi ambayo i metoka, tunaulizwa b asari 
za Mombasa Kaunti zimetoka lini? Zitatoka lini? Wananchi wetu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni 
masikitiko wazazi wana watoto nyumbani wamefukuzwa mashule sisi katika hali ya kutetea 
Kaunti tumeandika barua , mimi nimeandika barua kama ofisi y angu kuwaeleza wale walimu 
kuwa jamani tupeni muda tunawashughul ikia hawa watoto hivi karibuni b asari zitatoka . Angalia 
tunaonekana wanafiki tumesema hatutakubali kamwe kutetea na kubeba msalaba wa mtu…  
(Applause)  
 Na nikizungumzia hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyek iti... 
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Your time is up.  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Ni kutaka kuonyesha Mwenyekiti kuwa wazazi, watoto 
wame ngoja milele hizi b asari wanakufa bila kelele mashinani , Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
tumesema tumekataa na ning ependa Mheshimiwa Waziri husika aitwe hapa Bungeni ili aweze 
wajibikia majukumu yake . Ahsante s ana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. ..  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you. Honourable Members it is evident 
that the report entered the floor of  the House on a back door…  
(Applause)  
 The Honorable Members from the said Committee have proved before this floor of the 
House that they have not sat for the report so I a m directing the Committee to si t down with t he 
report and as from what the M embers h ave raised they are saying it is a fake report . 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  So please Hon . Members from that Committee look upon the report and bring back a 
report that will be welcomed by each and every Hon . Member in thi s Honourable House. But 
first si t and after s itting  liaise wi th the Liaison Committee that you have sat as a Committee on 
this report then the report will brought back in this Honourable House latest next week Tuesday 
afternoon…  
 (Applause)  
 Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON LABOUR AND S OCIAL WELFARE HON . 
THOYA ON INTIMIDATION  OF MCA S BY COUNTY OFFICIAL S OVER THEIR OVERSIG HT ROLE  
 Yes Hon. Renson Juma Thoya . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Spika nafikiri kwangu m welekeo utakua tofauti kwa 
sababu mwenzangu ameleta ripoti na mlango wa nje ama na n yuma ; mimi ripoti hiyo ilikuja na 
nikaiona ripoti hiyo haitatosheleza mimi, Kamati yangu na Bunge kwa jumla na hio ripoti 
nikaamrisha iregeshwe tena huko mpaka pale tutapata majibu ya kutosha kwamba tuli kuwa 
tunataka kupata habari mah susi ya kuhusu Bwana m moja anaitwa Idris na ile ripoti ambayo 
tumeweza kupata ni pekee yake kwamba nafasi yake iliweza kutangazwa na ikawekwa katika 
magazeti ya Kenya hii moja yapo ikiwa ni Daily Nation  tarehe 22, Februari 2019 . 
  Lakini Bunge hili lilikuwa linataka habari muhi mu hususan makaratasi yake alivyopita 
na alivyoajiriwa na kila kitu tumeweza kuregesha ripoti h io na hatukuiregesha tuu kwa CE O wa 
Public Service Board tumeweza kuiregesha kwa County Secretary amba ye yeye ndie mkuu wa 
wafanyi kazi wa umma  na aweze kuhakiki sha kwamba anatupatia habari mahususi .  
 Ni imani yangu kwamba wiki ijayo itakua wiki ya maamuzi na nataka kuhakikishia 
kwamba Bunge hili kitaeleweka hapa ndani. Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members first I want revisit my d ecision 
on my directive on the education report, the e ducation report will come back to this Honourable 
House on Wednesday morning not Tuesday afternoon, Wednesday morning the report to be 
back. So Hon. Renson Thoya you requested for a week’s time so hopef ully next week Thursday 
afternoon. Yes Clerk?  
(Interruption)  
 What is it Hon. Athumani Shebe?  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Shukran sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
mwenza wa wafanyi kazi na maslahi ameleta ripoti hii na naomba kupitia nguvu zako kwa 
sababu ameomba tumpatie wiki moja . 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Na hii wiki moja mpaka hivi sasa kuna pesa za umma ambao zinatumika kuhujumu 
Bunge hili amba ye huyu Bwana aliyeletwa hapa Bungeni ama tuna yetaka habari kum husu ni 
mhusika mkuu . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tumepatiwa wi ki moja na hii wiki moja 
pesa za umma zinatumiwa viba ya na hatujajua ukweli wa mambo, hivyo basi  tunaomba utupatie 
muelekeo tujue tutafanya vipi Mheshimiwa…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Athumani Shebe this is a House of rules 
and procedures and we do not go by allegations so if you have evidence that public funds are 
being wasted by the said person that was suppos ed to be discussed you can prove  to the House 
but if you do not have the evidence it is just allegations then we will p roceed . As I said before 
Hon. Renson Juma will bring back the report in a week’s time unless you have evidence  on what 
you are saying or proof  of what you are saying that public funds are being used, do you have any 
evidence that the public funds are being  used?  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ahsante sana kwa kunipatia nafasi hii ; 
kusema je ushahidi upo ama ushahidi haupo ni juzi tu nimeku wa pale nikipata cha mchana na 
nikachukua baadhi ya picha ambazo vijana waliku wa wanagawanya pesa wakisema ku wa 
zimetoka kwa mhusika huu na picha hizi nilipiga Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Ath mani Shebe it seems you cannot 
substantiate the allegations ; please if you have evidence not just the photos you are talkin g about , 
that there are monies being  wired , they are monies from the public coffers and if not just let Hon. 
Thoya to proceed and bring back the report and when maybe you come by and f ind out that the 
monies used  were public  funds then you are at liberty t o bring the attention to this Honourable 
House so that the House can take proper action.  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nashughulikia kukusanya 
ushahidi huo. Ahsante.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you. Y es Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPE RSON COMMITTEE ON TR ANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON CLOGGED DRAI NAGE SYSTEM AND MANH OLES AT WAYANI , 
BOKOLE AND BOMU CATH OLIC CHURCH  
 Yes Hon. Prischilla Mumba?  
 Hon.  Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nimeona hapa n imekumbushwa kuhusu 
Clogged drainage system and m anholes at  Wayani, Bokole and Bomu Catholic Church , nafikiri 
tuliandika kwenye W izara husika ambayo hatujapata majibu ya hii kazi kwa sababu 
hawajaniletea majibu yake na mimi siwezi kuzungumza kitu ambacho n i cha urongo ni mpaka 
nipate majibu ndio niweze kuzungumza kuhusu kazi ya Bokole imefikia wapi . 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  Na ikiwa nitaletewa majibu nitaweza kujiba katika Nyumba hii. Kwa hivyo ninaomba 
pia bado nipewe muda nitakapokua bado nasubiri majibu haya. Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Are you reacting on th e Statement from 
Honourable ...? 
 Hon.  Omondi:  I am reacting Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Spea ker with due respect my fellow 
Member has just responded on the issue of drainage system particularly in  Airport Ward but she 
has said the D epartment concerned is not ready and time is running out we all know that and the 
rains are just around the corner and I want to say that this matter should be taken very seriously 
because what I am seeing if it is not g oing to be taken serious ly this issue is going to move with 
somebody and that one I want to confirm…  
(Applause)  
 The issue of drainage systems before the rains start ..., this is a disaster  in Mombasa 
County and let the D epartment concerned take this seriou sly. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you and it is well noted so Hon. 
Prischilla Mumba the Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works the 
Honourable Member has come clear it is an urgent issue so please work o ut on it , take note we 
have noted that it is an issue that came before and it has come back today but there is no response 
so please as you have said we are giving you a week’s time we will be waiting for a good report 
but we will  not tolerate the issue of  the D epartment not responding. Proceed yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON TRANS PORT , INFRASTRUCTRURE AND PUBLIC WORKS 
HON. MUMBA ON CLEAN UP OF MAGONGO MAINLAND AKA MBA HANDICRAFT DRAIN AGE SYSTEM  
 Yes Hon. Prischilla Mumba ? 
 Hon.  Mumba:  Ahsant e Mheshi miwa Spika . Naona tena ni sw ala la usafi wa  Magongo 
Mainland Akamba Handicraft drainage system ; nikinukuliwa nafikiri jambo hili sasa limeingia 
kwenye hii Nyumba katika mwezi mmoja zaidi ya mara mbili , tatu na nafikiri niliwahi kujieleza 
hapa v izuri sana kuhusu hii shida ya M ainland na nikaeleza kuwa kumeku wa kuna vikundi vya 
vijana ambao waliku wa walipewa hii kazi na nilipokwenda kutafuta sababu ya hii shida 
kutoku wa haiendelei kufanywa nikaambiwa ilisimama hii shida kwa sababu vijana waliku wa 
hawa jalipwa na mpaka dakika hii waliniambia kuwa ni mpaka wamalize kulipa hawa vijana 
waliofanya zile kazi ndipo sasa wataendelea na hizi kazi .  
 Sasa ikiwa kama hii kazi bado haijafanywa basi ni kuonyesha kuwa wale vijana bado 
hawajalipwa wa makundi ambayo wa likua wamepewa hizi kazi, k wa hivyo ya ziada kusema 
kuwa hii kazi kama haijafanywa tena ni kuwa kunaonyes ha wale vijana basi hawajalipwa, hivyo 
basi tunangojea kama watalipwa ndio waendelee na hii kazi , ya zaidi siwezi ku eleza mpaka nijue 
kama wamel ipwa am a hawataendelea na kazi…  
(Interruption)  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): There is a Member who is up , what is it? Yes 
Hon. Amur . 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir , whenever a job has been allocated we believe 
there is a budgetary amount that has been k ept aside for that particular assignment , the boys have 
done their job they have not been paid and the money has been allocated for that job, where is 
the money? Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : The Hon . Member who brou ght the S tatement 
she is up so let us hear from her, yes Hon. Faith?  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Hii taarifa nimeleta nda ni ya hili 
Bunge mara zaidi ya tatu  na kusema vijana hawajalipwa ni kumaanisha Mwenyekiti wa 
Uchukuzi hajafanya utafit i; ni vijana wenye waliku wa wamepewa kandarasi ya kusafisha mitaro 
lakini kutoka Mainland mpaka Akamba Handicraft hakujawahi ku wa allocated  vijana wowote 
kusafisha ule mtaro na sw ala la kusema haijalipwa hilo halifai kuzungumziwa katika hili Bunge 
kwa vile  bajeti ziko na mtu hawezi kupatiwa kazi kama hakuna pesa.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni juzi tu kuliku wa kunanyesha nikaja hapa Bungeni nikisema 
kwangu mafuriko yako na kwangu kunaitwa Mcheleni wacha ni taarifu hili Bunge, kulikuwa 
kwapandwa kitambo mchele kwa hi vyo ni ziwa na ukisikia Mheshimiwa Bomoa anasema 
mambo ya Wayani hiyo mitaro yote…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Who is Hon.  Bomoa ? 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi ...; samahani Mheshimiwa Spika ukisikia 
Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omon di akisema mambo ya Wayani hio ndio main storm water drainage  
yenye inabeba hayo maji yote hata kupitia kwako Mheshimiwa Naibu Spika. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika kama hili suala halitafanyika sijui tutaanza kukimbizana hapa tukitafuta 
mikate na blanketi amb apo itakua ni bajeti nyengine itatafutwa badala hio kazi ingefanyika na 
sijui ni kwa nini kwa sababu kuna wakati Kamati  ilipatiwa kutokana na muelekeo kutoka kwa 
Kiti chako Mheshimiwa  Spika kusema Kamati  iende kwa site visit  na wakawa wameambiwa 
waende na mpaka leo hii hawajasema kama walienda ama walifika Kibarani wakarudi wakakosa 
kujua Kipevu iko wapi.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika wana wa Kipevu  kama walipa ushuru kama hili sw ala 
halitashughu likiwa leo hii niambie na hio Id ara ya Uchukuzi na Miundo Msingi Kipevu i ko 
ndani ya Kaunti gani? Kwa hivyo sitakaa watu wangu wakinyanyasika na mambo kutokufanyika 
na bajeti wako nayo , tena bajeti kubwa sana kuliko i dara zozote. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok thank you. Yes Hon. Mwalimu M gwisho.  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  Hon.  Mwalimu Mgwisho: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa kuweza 
kunipatia hii nafasi ili niweze kumtetea Mwenyekiti wa Uchukuzi. S hida ni kwamba Mwenyekiti 
wa Uchukuzi amejaribu kutafuta kila njia ili atuletee jawabu mw afaka lakini shida iko n a Idara 
ya Uchukuzi…  
(Applause)  
 Ndio maana sisi kama  Wabunge wa Kaunti ya Mombasa tumekaa chini na kuona 
kwamba hii idara iko na matatizo na pia twataka wananchi wetu wa Mombasa wajue kwamba 
shida si W aheshimiwa, shida ni Idara ya Uchukuzi yahitaji kupigw a msasa kisawa sawa…  
(Applause)  
 Mheshim iwa amejaribu sana na namshukuru sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa 
Uchukuzi amejaribu kutafuta hii njia lakini hii shida si yake hapati majibu sahihi kwa hivyo 
Bunge hili lazima tusafishe hii i dara ya Uchukuzi ili kazi i weze kufanyika kisawa sawa ndani ya 
Mombasa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho for 
appearing for Hon. Prischilla Mumba. Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika  nachukua uzi huo ku toka hapo kwa Mheshimiwa 
Mwalimu kwamba hizi habari zote a mbazo zinahusu i dara ya Uchukuzi kwa sasa hivi 
zinatakikana zikusanywe ziwekwe katika kapu moja tufuate ile biashara ya wiki ijayo tuwe 
tushatibu na tumemaliza…  
(Applause)  
 Kwa sababu kufikia saa hi i ni Mwenyekiti amejaribu na pale inapofikia naona karibuni 
naona mutasikia amepelekwa hospitali na aidha  presha  ama nini? Na ni vizuri tuanze  kujipanga 
na mapema tusije tukatiana magonjwa na maradhi kwa matatizo ya watu ambao hawako tayari 
kuwajibika. Kwa  hivyo ni kitu ambacho ninasema hata ninaona baada ya hii taarifa kuna 
nyengine pia yeye pia anasimama , mimi ningeomba tu zingewekwa katika kikapu kimoja 
tukaangalia wi ki ijayo tutatafuta jibu gani mw afaka mambo haya yaweze kwisha zaidi ya yote….  
(Interrup tion)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Renson Thoya , stick as the order that you 
are in the issue of Akamba Handicraft drainage system.  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Yes Mr. Speaker the issue is Akamba Handicraft drainage system and it 
is under the Department of Tr ansport ; I have articulated very clear ly that wherever a problem is 
brought before this House related to that Department it does not yield fruits and in that regards I 
was requesting your intelligence na hekima yako haya matatizo tuyachanganye kwa kikapu 
kimoja, tufanye kazi moja kwa sababu huyu Mama ama Bi . Mwenyekiti m tamuangusha na 
presha maana yake hivi kuna sw ali lingine pia na wiki ijayo kazi ni hiyo hiyo . 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Ndio Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho  hapa akasema mwaonaje tuangalie ile i dara mbali na 
kumhangaisha huyu kwa sababu masuali bado tuko nayo mengi kwangu Mikindani ndio sasa 
yaja kweli na ajipange. Lile ambalo ilikua nasema t atizo lilikua ni moja la kule m mesema ni 
huko Akamba Handicraft  lakini tatizo la pili nataka nijue hawa vijana walifanyishwa kazi na 
serik ali ya K aunti ya Mombasa  na kwa nini hawajalipwa nazungumza kama Mwenyekiti wa 
ajira sasa tatizo sasa liko mara mbili Mwenyekiti. Ahsante.   
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya for picking 
from where I was about to direct the Com mittee on Labour to take charge , so Hon . Prischilla 
Mumba Committee on Transport you will have to sit with the Committee on Labo ur and sh ed 
light on why the se youth s have not yet been paid and furth er more to fast -track and see the 
Akamba Handicraft draina ge system is cleaned and bring back a report to this Honourabl e House 
also in a week’s time a nd Hon . Members it is the duty of the House Business Com mittee that 
plans the b usinesses of this Honourable House so it was for the  Committee  to see if it could 
combine all the issues from all the Department of Transport and put them in one basket but as 
long as they are in the floor of the House we have to follow the order paper. Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  FROM CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTU RE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS  HON. MUMBA  ON COUNTY DISASTER P REPAREDNESS DURING T HE RAINY SEASON  
 Yes Hon. Prischilla Mumba?  
 Hon.  Mumba:  Ahsante tena Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii na hapa nimeona tena 
kuna County Disaster Preparedness during the rainy season . Haya  ni matayarisho ninaulizwa 
nijibu ambayo yatakua wakati wa mvua kusema ule ukweli nitajibu nini na sina matayarisho kwa 
sasa…(Off mic rophone )...(Technical hitch ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : There i s a point of…  
 
(Consultations)  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  I respect my learned friend as the Chair but we cannot be fooled 
there  is one per cent  of the  total budget of Mombasa County … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 That is set aside for disaster issues Mr. Speaker rather than that we have donors who 
volunteer during disaster; Re d Cross, Mombasa Cement, Tororo Cement and the rest we should 
not be taken for granted where is the one per cent if we are not prepared today, when are we 
going to be prepared? Until death do us apart? Mr. Speaker let us be serious as the House.  
 
 The Depu ty Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  
 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nikikumbuka vizuri na kama inaweza 
patikana kwa kumbukumbu  nilileta Mswada  ya kuhusu kujitayarisha wakati wa majanga . 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  Na hatukukaa muda mwingi pakaletwa Mswada  mwengine na  Mwanachama wa Kamati 
ya Fedha  na akadhihirisha mbele ya  hili Bunge kusema kuna moja mambo inatengwa...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa ajili ya masuala kama haya. Mheshimiwa Spika vyenye tunaongea tarehe 28 
inasemekana mvua yaanza Kaunti ya Mombasa , sasa Mwenyekiti akisema hajapata majibu na 
hio Miswada ikija hapa na tuki jadiliana  alikuwa kwenye hii Nyumba sitaweza kuelewa mahali 
imefika . Yaonekana bayana Idara ya U chukuzi imezembea kazini na haiwezi kuendele a kufanyia 
kazi wana wa Mombasa;  hawachukulii wa na wa Mombasa,  walipa ushuru kama ni watu wa 
muhimu Mheshimiwa Spika hili si jambo la matani.  Wakati wa mvua sisi W aheshimiwa ndio 
tunaonekana kule mashinani ukiwapigia simu hawapatikani , imefika wakati wa watu kwenda 
nyumbani tuchukue vijana wetu wenye wa mesoma kwa sababu tuko na wao wengi ambao 
wanaweza kufanya kazi kiuadilifu , sioni kwa nini tunapoteza wakati hata angekuwa ashaenda 
kama jana. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay yes Hon. Ibrahim are you up on the same 
issue?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes proceed.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  I have some few remarks to make , just as I said this is a matter which is 
very serious Mr. Speaker Sir and I just want to give my sentiments that first when our able Hon. 
Governor Ali Hassan Joho appointed this particular personality into this particular work and then 
the House we vetted these p eople and we looked at their papers and we were convinced so I do  
not know where the problem is . It seems the ca pability is being compromised in this matter and 
Mr. Speaker Sir remember that the Excellen cy the Governor this one is his last term and he needs 
to leave a legacy to this particular County and all in all we are all wishing that our Governor will 
be next P resident 2022 and if today this Chief Officer and this the so called CECs are not able to 
work I can see that our dream is nowhere to be seen . Mr. Speaker Sir something has to be done , 
just like my fellow Members said the time has come to c all a spade a spade and not a big spoon 
let them come here…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  Let them come here and stand for themselves Mr. Speaker , we are not 
ready to carry burdens for any other person. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir and God bless you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you.  Hon. Members please we are in 
Order number 12 so when you are contributing or when you are reacting to the response please 
stick to that order. Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika tukiangalia idara 
nzima ya  Uchukuzi  tunapata tuko na kitengo cha Uchukuzi chenyewe , part of inspectorate  wako 
hapo, infrastructure  iko hapo ndani, drainage system  wanaangalia wao, maswali y ote 
wanaa ngalia, idara ya wazima moto  wanaangalia na kuegesha magari  na kushughulikia majanga  
pia iko hapo . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naona kutokana na yale ambayo yanaendelea hapa ndani 
wameshindwa na kazi manake hizi Department ziko nyingi sana ikiwezekana zigawanywe  
ziregeshwe ili wabaki na kitengo ambacho wanaweza kumudu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay, yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Boy: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker the flo or is highly honoured.  Mr. 
Speaker I wish to sta te that information is power and for the information of this House disa ster 
management is not part of Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works D epartment what it is an 
Ad hoc Committee that is under  the Governors’ office and the C ommittee only sits where  there is  
necessity although I think there  is a mis understanding because when the C ommittee was formed 
at that time around 2015 Mr. Tawfiq Balala was the interim Chair but disaster management is not 
and I should repe at that again is not under the Departme nt of Transport, Infrastructure and Public 
Works so it i s important for this House to differentiate issues. Thank you very much.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Amriya for your guidance so 
we will let the Hon. Member on this issue Hon. Prischill ah the Committee on transport, 
Infrastructure and Public works will sit with the Liaison Committee and see a way forward on 
how we are going to tackle the se issues and I will bring back the report by next week then we 
will see if we can sit with t he Adhoc  Committee because am sure as the rains are knocking the 
doors the Adhoc  Committee is there so we will sit with the Adhoc Committee or wh atever 
Committee that is there for the House to get a proper information. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON DEPARTME NT OF ENVIRONMENT , SOLID WASTE 
MANAGEMENT AND ENERG Y ON SOLID WASTE MAN AGEMENT IN THE COUNT Y 
 
 Chairpe rson C ommittee on Environment, Waste Management and E nergy Hon. Salim 
Shebe Athman?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I just  want to inform my Hon. Members 
that I have a letter here of course with your indulge nce if you allow me to read but before I read 
it I have already consulted the Hon. Members concern ed and we have agreed.  So Mr. Speaker Sir 
I have re ceived a letter today from the D epartment of Environment, Solid Waste Management 
and E nergy and if you allow me of course Mr. Speaker Sir , ‘I just want to read the report'.  
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Go ahead . 
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir from the C ounty Executive Mem ber 
Department of Environment, Solid Waste Management and E nergy dated 14th March, 2019 .  
 
 Ref: Report of the solid waste management situation.  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18  In reference made to your letter dated 11th March , 2019 in which above the matter refers 
unfortunately…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya is responding , it is not a report it is 
just responding so be calm. Yes Hon. Athman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker and I, ‘U nfortunately I am away together 
with my  Chief O fficer Dr. June Mwajuma attending the United Nations Environmental 
Assembly 2019 in capital Nairobi, we will also be away next week from 18th to 22nd March, 2019 
on invitation by energy stakeholders to share and deliberate on matter s concerning  energy of the 
County of Mombasa that being said that I would like to say that I personally make the 
representation has requested on our return I will be available…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amur? Use your microphone . 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker we have been told they are not here, they are in 
Nairobi attending that conference again the next one where are they heading? Because when we 
travel as an Assembly the big question comes how we are travelling s we want to know where 
are they travelling to and are they going to be given perdiems and what and what? We want to 
know that.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Athman Shebe read 
from where you left . 
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker Si r. My fellow Hon. Member is jumping 
the gun , I was coming into that Hon. Speaker that is why the CEC stated that being said I would 
like to request that I  will personally make the presentation as requested upon our return I will be 
available from 26th Marc h to 29th March, 2019 . I will appreciate Mr. Speaker your response on 
the date that is favourable to this Assembly.  
 
 Yours Faithfully,  
 Dr. Godfrey Nyongesa Nato  
 CEC, Environment, Waste Management and Energy  
 Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Okay thank you Hon. Shebe Athman as the 
Chairman of that Committee you found that was a good response to respond to this Hon ourable  
House in your own capacity as the Chairman of that Committee you found out that is a good 
response to come and respond to  this Honourable  House, the D epartment has D irectors, office 
staffs who are capable of responding on w hat has been raised by this Honourable  House so is 
that the response that you think the Hon. Members…  
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19 (Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Mr. Speaker you  are being sarcastic ...  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 I can agree or disagree with you on that aspect but I was trying just to put a cross so that 
Hon. Members can know they make it very clear Hon. S peaker they were not after the D irectors 
nor what, this is a letter whic h… 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  What I am saying… (Inaudible) . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  They do  not go with the offices they only go with their luggages ; 
the office is there to work Mr. Speaker an d this have been repeating it dai ly day in day out 
whenever the Executive, the Chief Officer travel they do  not travel with the office the building is 
still there, there  are other guys who are working . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwal imu) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika , ni vizuri kujua misemo na mafumbo kama vile 
nasema akili ni nywele kila mmoja ana zake lakini si wote wana akili wana nywele wana akili 
hata wenye vipara pia wanaweza saidiana . Ni vyema k ujua kwamba sisi hapa tunahusika na 
mambo ya huduma na leo wako Nairobi , wakitoka Nairobi wanasafari ya kwenda kwengine basi 
tuwaombee mema warudi pia wakati tunawao mbea mema Mwenyezi Mungu pia ya maanisha 
kwamba majibu hapa hayataweza kufika? Muhimu tunata ka yale majibu basi yataletwa na 
messenger , yataletwa na K arani, yataletwa na nani? Zile takataka za Kongowea tupate majibu 
zinaondolewa lini na kwengineko?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : We are not yet in Kongowea, we are still in 
Airport Ward . 
  
 Hon. Thoya:  Haya huko huko Airport , huko huko hata kama ni wapi unakujua wewe sisi 
tunayotaka ni majibu tena ikiwezekana leo kwa sababu jana tulitiwa hamu na ghamu kwamba leo 
tutapata hayo majibu, tu meamka leo twaambiwa Waziri na Afisa mkuu  wake wako Nairob i 
wakitoka Nairobi wana mahali wanaenda sijui baada ya tatu itakuwa ni gani? Mimi ndio 
nimekwambia si wote wana nywele wana akili hata wenye vipara pia nao wanaweza kuwa na 
mchango kama huo. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Aran Moses?  
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20  Hon. Aran : Thank you Mr. Spe aker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir according to the observation 
made personally and almost the Hon. Members in this House Hon. Shebe Athman is considered 
amongst the best debaters we have actually and we should acknowledge that and by bringing a 
vogue report like that I think he should join Churchill Live ... 
  
(Laughter)  
 
 Because that  is a joke Hon. Speaker just like what Hon. Amur have said they are not 
walking with the offices they can even give directive on what to do so he s hould withdraw that ; 
you cannot be amongst the best debaters and when it comes to your time to give us a concrete 
report you are just joking reading us a letter that w ill not  help us.  Secondly I can see Hon. Bomoa  
want to respond or react on that…  
 
(Interr uption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Do we have Hon. Bomoa ? Who is Hon. Bomoa ? 
 
 Hon. Aran:  Hon. Bomoa  is the person who was being bomoad  by the President sorry for 
that... 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Bomoa  is a nickname of Hon. Ibrahim .  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon.  Mwalimu) : So use the name . 
 
 Hon. Aran:  I can see Hon. Ibrahim Omondi is just about to react Hon. Speaker . I want to 
request this Hon. House he should be banned from responding until that day he will give us a 
concrete report in regards to bursarie s... 
 
(Applause and laughter)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim just half a minute . 
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  It is okay, thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I just do  not want to react towards 
what  Hon. Member has said because most of the times you have b een in this House he has not 
been there Mr. Speaker Sir, he has not been following the proceedings and therefore it is very 
unne cessary for me to react to his S tatement but I want to go back to a very important point 
which concerns my Airport  Ward which  the Statement that we are discussing which has been 
responded by my good friend Hon. Shebe who happens to be the Chairman of that particular 
docket.   Mr. Speaker Sir by coincidence you ha ppen to be a neighbour of this W ard am speaking 
about and you happen to  know the state and what am talking about?  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Point of order . 
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : What is your point of order? Use your 
microphone , yes proceed . 
 
 Hon. Aran:  Standing Order 84 ..., Hon. Member should withdraw and apologize to me 
because even if he go to the Hansard record  i have been attending session s and  there  is no day i 
have mis sed any session in this House but  what Hon. Omondi has said I  think he should 
withdraw that S tatement ... 
  
(Consultations)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you.  Hon. Bomoa  you can proceed , 
Hon. Aran Moses as you have said it is evident from the Hansard that you are always attending 
and you are attentive so whoever is suspicious shall go to the Hansard and find out whether the 
Hon. Member is  misleading the House or not because i have seen the Standing O rder that you 
have stated it is more of whatever that you wanted us to react on.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for that wisdom that you have in ruling and 
maybe I just want also to i nform him a bit t hat he used the same word also when he said that I 
should be banned from responding in this House until I provide bursaries so I also want him to 
do the same if he want me to apologize . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you H on. Ibrahim and I think I had 
given you half a minute and the half a minute is over.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Athman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker like I have said this is not a 
Statement and you remember the very beginning I asked for your indulge nce if you may allow 
me to read this letter and you said go on, I was trying just to tell the Hon. Members in this House 
even the CECs and the Chief Officers know the significan ce of this issue and they promised 
themselves because a ttending a United Nation Environmental Program  (UNEP)  is a very 
important and a significant event and they are attending there not at their personal capacity but 
on the behalf of the Mombasa County Assembly . Hon. Speak er so I related before this 
Honourable  House through Hon. Member of Airport and Kongowea and they have agreed Mr. 
Speaker and have also want ed the S tatement number 14 of course with your indulge nce to be 
adjourned ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : We are yet to get to O rder numb er 14 . 
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : I was just requesting Hon. Speaker . 
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : It is a House of O rder so let us wait if we reach 
to Order 14 you can stand and ask whatever that you want . 
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : That was it Hon. Speaker , thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone ! 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  The able Chairman to let us know if the Members have gone for 
that important meeting and the Chair is left behind with no answers ... 
  
(Applause)  
 
 Is it fair?  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Membe r, in coming future 
please as a C ommittee you have to sit because the respon se as you have seen the Hon. Members 
are reacting it was  not satisfactory enough and I think you had a Member saying that it is like  as 
if it is a Churchill show ; this is not a Churchill show  when we asked by Hon. Members so 
Committees have to take charge to bri ng back reports that will be good reports that the County of 
Mombasa will be moving forward from whatever the report that you are bringing, just bringing a 
letter from an Executive Member that is not away and you are placing it in front of this House as 
a response .  
 Hon. Members in future we shall not allow and we will  also like Hon. Members or the 
Committees before you bring reports ; first you have to sit down with your C ommitt ees and 
secondly report to the Liaison C ommittee then w e bring the reports to thi s Honourable  House so 
whenever you are asked for rep orts try to sit down with your C ommittee Members first because 
am sure if you had sat with the Committee M embers that is not  a response that you  could have 
brought in this Honourable  House. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Committee on Environment C hair?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Yes thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker I would like this 
Honourable  House of course through your indulge nce to give me up to after 29th March . Hon. 
Speaker of course it will be very suit able for me to give a proper response concerning this matter 
Hon. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : So Hon. Abrari you will stay with the pile up at 
Kongowea until 29th of March ... 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23 (Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika . Mimi ningependa kutia 
mkazo kwa suala hili nililolileta Bungeni ; hii ni mara ya tano mimi kusimama na kuelezea juu ya 
Taarifa  hii hii na hatujapata jibu mpaka sasa, Afisa Mkuu ama W aziri kuondoka haimaanishi 
taka za Kongowea zisiondolewe , wao wanaweza kuwa wako wapi kule alikotoka au wanaenda 
lakini wakapeana maamrisho yao ama directives  zao kusafisha jaa la Kongowea.  
Kwa hivyo hi o sio sababu kubwa ya kuwa wao hawako ndio jaa la Kongowea bado lijae 
ama lisisafishwe , hivyo basi  namuomba Mweny ekiti atuambie haswa ni lini jaa la Kongowea 
litamalizwa , sisi hatutaki kujua kuwa W aziri yuko ama Afisa Mkuu  hayuko? Suala kubwa ni 
taka; taka za Kongowea zimejaa, zimekuwa nyingi mlima kila siku unarundika na hautolewi 
naregelea tena hii ni mara ya tano nimeregea kwenye Bunge hili na  Taarifa  hii hii mtueleze kama 
ni hujma ambayo mnanihujumu mi mi kama MCA wa Kongowea nielewe.  
Mimi nina W odi ya Kongowea lakini zile ni W odi mbili nda ni ya moja, soko pekee yake 
ni W odi kivyake na taka taka zinazotoka ndani y a soko ndugu yangu hakuna Wodi inayotoa taka 
nyingi kama W odi ya Kongowea . Ndani ya soko pekee yake na nje jaa la Kongowea ndio 
limebeba takataka zote za Nyali zinatupwa Kongowea lakini la  kutamausha ni kuwa hizi taka 
hizi haziondolewi lakini kuchukua ushu ru kila siku Kongowea inatoa ushuru mbona hawasahau 
kwenda kuchukua ushuru Kongowea? M bona hawasahau kwenda kuchukua ushuru Kongowea 
lakini kutoa taka Kongowea ndio hawawezi kutoa taka ? Naregelelea sio jambo la kuwa W aziri 
amesafiri wala nini sisi tunataka  Kongowea takataka zitolewe fullstop  na tunataka jaa la 
Kongowea K wa Karama lifungwe kwa sababu kuna vigezo ya kuweka disposal  ama dumping 
site. 
Jaa la Kongowea halina l eseni ; hicho ni kigezo cha kwanza, kigezo cha pili jaa la 
Kongowea halijakuwa gazetted  as a dump site, kwa hivyo kutupa takataka pale ni kinyume cha 
sheria, serikali Gatuzi  mpaka sasa halijaangalia hilo tumesema vizuri watupe tu ratiba yao , ni 
kuwa ni lini watasafisha jaa la Kongowea , ni tarehe 21 jaa litasafishwa hiyo nitaikubali nikijua 
kuwa kuna ahadi nimewekewa kufikia  tarehe 20 . Hiyo ikifika jaa la Kongowea itakuwa 
limefungwa ; hilo tu hiyo hai hitaji mpaka Afisa Mkuu  awe hapa nakuomba Mwenyekiti wa 
Mazingira nipe majibu ambayo nikienda chini nitaenda kueleza wananchi wangu, wananchi 
wangu kila siku wananipiga vita na jaa kila siku kwa mitandao  ni jaa. Kwa hivyo tukitoka hapa 
nataka jibu mimi nipeleke. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Abrari. Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Thank you  very much Mr. Speaker. T he floor is highly honoured. 
Mr. Speaker, I have r isen under Standing  Order 80. I have risen on a personal S tatement Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to  Article 35 on Access to Information…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Sorry! 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : We are still or we have not yet finished order 
number 14!  
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
24  Hon. Amriya Boy:  Ooh! Okay, thank you Mr. Speaker , I stand guided.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Are you reacting Yes Hon. Junior?  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. M imi nataka kuongezea maneno ya 
Mheshi miwa Abrari, m imi nimewa hi kuwa D iwani katika sehemu hiyo ya Kongowea na 
matatizo ambayo yanafanyika mahali pale ni makubwa sana. Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti  mwenza 
amezungumza amesoma barua ambayo ina  kurasa kubwa sana ambapo W aziri hapo Nairobi 
angeandikia Bwana Omari hapa aweze kumsaidia Bwana Abrari ambapo hatuoni umuhimu sana 
kwa barua ambayo imesomwa hapa.  
 Bwana Spika, matatizo ya Bwana Abrari saa hii ni wiki ya tatu aki lia na akisimama hapa 
kila siku, t unahitaji Bwana Mwenyekiti  mwenza aweze k uongea na W aziri wake huko huko 
Nairobi aliko amwambie kuanzia kesho aanze kusafisha Kongowea itakuwa imemsaidia sana 
Mheshimiwa Abrari ambayo shida ya pale Kongowea kwa siku moja takataka zinamwagika 
kama kitu nyengine na kila ma  Administrator  hapa wakienda huko w akizungumza hapa 
wanasema wapi M adiwani wenu au wapi ma MCAs  wenu wote wamekimbia na ili  hali hizo ni 
kazi zao wanastahili kuzifanya.  
 Lakini wote wanatulimbikizia matatizo ya takataka ka tika sehemu  zote,  mimi nikisema 
hapa Bwana Spika kule kwangu  Chaani zimemwagwa kila stage u kifika hapa zimemwagwa! 
Zimemwagwa! Tunataka tupate njia nzuri yatakataka hizi zitabebwa namna gani? Swala la 
kusema tungojee mpa ka tarehe 29, wakati waziri atatoka mahali amba po hatujui ameenda wapi? 
Na nasikia Amur ameuliza swali zuri tuelezewe anaenda wapi na amepata nini na kwa nini 
amemuacha Chairman  wake ambapo angeenda na ye akajua ni kitu gani wanaenda  
kuzungumzia? Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwa limu): Thank you Hon. Let Hon. Hamida  react then 
Hon. Renson Thoya and we will finish with Hon. Ibrahim. Yes ? 
 
 Hon. Amir ya Boy: Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. As I come from Kongowea myself, my 
fellow Hon. Member now is begging for services and as he s ays in Kongowea we collect the 
taxes, we are begging as Members from Kongowea if it is not going to be done the M embers 
who come from Kongowea Ward we are going to go their offices and beg for our services to be 
done  for us.  
 This is the fifth time  he is bringin g this S tatement to the House , with all due respect Mr. 
Speaker we want you to act for us now and the way that it seems that like the office does not go 
with th e Ministers and his assistant t here people in that o ffices that are working there s o wit h 
your due  respect we beg for the services in Kongowea to be done. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Proceed Hon. Thoya?  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Bwana Spika mimi nina vipengee viwili ; kwanza tumeweza kuchaguliwa 
na wananchi kuj a kuweza kuwakilisha tetesi zao, l akini ukiona zile tetesi unazisema mara ya 
kwanza, mara ya pili, mara ya tatu mpaka mara ya tano i nafika mahali ambapo tuweze 
kuambiwa na hili Jumba ya kwamba wale wananchi wenyewe wa Kongowea waje hapa chini 
waweze kujisemea wenyewe kw a sababu mumekataa ku msikiliza M wakilishi wao.  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
25  Hilo ni la kwanza k wa sababu yeye ndiye ametumwa kusema na ikiwa hawezi kusikizwa 
basi wale wana nchi watachuku a ile demokrasi ya moja kwa moja, j ambo jengine la pili 
nimeweza kuona kwamba kuna hii  ripoti ambayo imekuja hapa na K amati haijaikalia pia 
haieleweki uhakikisho wake na kuna nyengine pia imetoka upande wa mambo ya basari . 
 Nataka niweze kutoa hoja kwa Jumba hili kwamba ikiwa kutakuwa na mipangi lio ya 
mipango ya kando katika Waziri na M wenyekiti ambao watu ha wana habari W aziri na 
Mwenyekiti wa K amati Bwana Spika itakuwa ni vyema hatua za kinidhamu zichukuliwe. Si 
mambo ya kurudi tu nendeni mukakae kwa sababu ni  lazima M wenyekiti huyu afanyiwe 
uchunguzi kunaweza kuwa kuna mambo yameendelea. Nilikuwa natoa hilo pendekezo. .. 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I had already ruled it was Renson Thoya then 
Hon. Ibrahim and we move forward. So Hon. Ibrahim to close the reactions then we proceed.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, for the h onour. Mr. Speaker S ir I just wanted 
to react on that particular Statement based on what Hon. Wambua , the Member for  Chaani Ward 
said. Mr. Speaker S ir rather I heard some diff erent opinion from what he said , i just wanted to 
tell him that Hon. Wambua seems to be aspiring to be  the Member of Parliament in Changamwe 
and I am very surprised that I raise d a matter touching on Airport W ard which is in Changamwe 
but he did  not give the emphasis…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. s tick to this point Hon. Ibrahi m. 
 
 Hon.  Omondi : He only changed and gave the emphasis in Chaani that is in Kongowea, I 
am very surprised. Thank you . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Hon. Chairman Environment , Waste 
Management and Energy  the issue for Kongowea has come to this House  and you promised 
yesterday that you will respond to this House today but unfortunately i t was not a respon se that 
could be taken well by the Hon. Member from Kongowea.  
 So Hon. Member we would  like you and your C ommittee to act on this matter and make 
sure those trucks are taken to Kongowea…  
  
(Applause)  
 
 We want when you come to respond on this issue; you respond that trucks have gone to 
Kongowea to start up the clean -up in Kongowea. Liaise with CEC or whoever w ho is responsible 
in matters of garbage coll ection  and make sure that cars visit the Kongowea dumping site even if 
it is one car but we want to hear from your report that cars hav e gone to Kongowea dumping site 
because it is a matter that has been coming on day and day out but you and the people con cerned 
have not taken any charge. So please work on it.  
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
26  Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Hon. Speaker. It does  not mean that cars were not 
going to Kongowea but Hon. Member of Kongowea has some specific reservation s and 
question s that is why we have agreed t o act on that and the only person who can be afford ed to 
give that target was the Chief Officer or CEC but of  course Hon. Speaker I will make sure as 
from today I am going to talk to the relevant authorities so that as from tomorrow trucks will be 
flowing to Kongowea. Thank you.  
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Amriya ? 
 
ACCESS TO INFORMATION  ON PUBLIC  OFFICES  AT COUNT Y ASSEMBLY BUILDING  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Boy: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for according me this 
opportunity ,  the floor i s highly h onoured. Mr. Speaker earlier I had raised under Standing Order 
80 on a matter of personal nature and I was seeking your indulgence pursuant to Article  39 of the 
Constitution and also access to information Act No. 31 of 2016.  
 Mr. Speaker I like to bring to attention that on 13th March , 2019 there is one Mohamed 
Hamsini who walked in to the County Assembly and at the customer care desk enquire d about 
my attention; inquired about Hon. Amriya Boy Juma and to the information I have in hand is that 
the person who was at that time at the customer care desk answered that she/he did not know of 
one Hon. Am riya Boy Juma.  So, that is to my utter dismay that I wish to bring to the attention of 
this House tha t we liaise with the necessary Department on Publi c Relations to provide 
information on all public officers in this building , all public offic es in thi s building at the notice 
board.  
 We have several notice board s in this building and we shou ld make use Mr. Speaker of 
the notice boards b ecause it appears that when M embers of the public with who m are within their 
right have come to or coming in to seek audience with the Hon. Members or any employee they 
find it rough or difficult to get that necessary service and that is contrary to Chapter 13 on Public 
Service and contrary to Article 260 because as it is we are public servants and we are here to 
serve the people . So thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Amriya.  It is well  noted and the 
County Assembly S ervice B oard will take charge. Yes Hon. Chief Whip?  
 
ARREST OF PEDESTRIANS  NOT USING BUXTON AND  KONGOWEA FOOTBRIDGES  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Mheshimiwa nimesimama kulingana na kipengele 41 . 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ningependa kupata ripoti kutoka kwa Kamati y a Haki na Sheria ni vipi 
wakaazi wa Mombasa wamekuwa wakishikwa na ni sheria gani inatumika katika kuvuka  vivuko 
vya barabara ilio wekwa Buxton na Kongowe a na kulipishwa gharama katika K orti yetu na ilhali 
sheria hii haiko  katika Serikali yetu ya Kaunti ya Mombasa? Kwa hivyo sheria gani inatumika na 
ni kiwango kipi cha hukumu kulipia gharama hizo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ah sante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. the Chairperson Committee on Justice 
we need a respond?  
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
27 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAI RPERSON COMMITTEE ON  JUSTICE AND LEGAL AF FAIRS HON . 
AMRIYA BOY ON ARREST OF PEDESTRIANS NOT U SING BUXTON AND KONG OWEA FOOTBRIDGES  
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Mr. Speaker I wish Hon. K itula to pause the request for Statement 
once again p lease with your permission . 
 This is  because it is not clear which area specifically he wants the Justice and L egal 
Affairs Committee to embark; is it arrest, unlawful arrest  or is it a detention? It has not come out 
clear ly as it is. Which area specifically he wants the Committee to investigate on?  
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): The Chief W hip will write to the Committee in 
the areas he is concerned and we will need the response by next week. Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 
 Hon.  Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I requested a Stateme nt from the 
Committee on H ealth concerning the renovation of Magongo Cl inic. Mr. Speaker it is barely 
three  weeks from  the time I requested for that S tatement and the matter was treated as urgent and 
until now no response has been given. Mr. Speaker I need  your indulgence.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I think the matter is still with the House 
Business Committee, the House Business C ommittee will sit and accord a day for the respon se as 
you said you brought it three weeks ba ck but it still with the House Business C ommittee. Yes 
Hon. Ogutu?  
  
 Hon.  Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker the matter is so urgent!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): It is n oted and during the next House B usiness 
Committee it will be noted as an urgent matter for them to accord the time, da te and day for the 
issue to be responded in this House. Yes Hon. Faith Mwende . 
 
CLOSURE OF MCHELENI D UMP ING SITE 
 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama katika K anuni 41 (2)  (c). Mheshimiwa 
Spika nataka kujua kutoka kwa  Mwenyekiti wa M azingira ni lini wan apangia kufunga jaa la taka 
lililoko katika mtaa wa Mche leni ambalo liko katikati ya nyumba za watu na zile nyu mba ni za 
watu wa hali ya chini.  Pale magonjwa hayaachi kuwepo k wa hivyo hilo jaa twataka kujua 
litafungwa lini. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu ): Thank you and it is noted Hon. Chair 
Environment do you have a respond on the closure of Mcheleni Dumping site?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ENVIRONMENT HON. SHEBE ATHMAN 
ON THE CLOSURE OF MC HELENI DUMPING SITE  
 
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Thank you Hon. Speaker . As far as I am concern ed Hon. Speaker 
Mcheleni is not a dumping site , it is a station point where by all the villagers garbage is being 
collected and the trucks are coming and picking up the garbage . 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
28  Honorable , it is not a dumping site, i t is not a dumping sit e! There is only one gazetted 
dumping site in Mombasa C ounty  and that  is Mwakirunge sorry and Shonda, two. Thank you 
Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): So the concern of the Hon. M ember wanted it to 
be closed because it is in the residential area , so we will like you to respond hopeful ly by nex t 
week give us a respon se on if you are going to shift Mcheleni to another picking point.  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Most obliged Hon. Speaker. Than k you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Renson Thoya? We will finish with 
Hon. Ibrahim Omo ndi so that we proceed with the Order P aper.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to bring to your attention that yesterday 
there was an issue that  was raised by Hon. Omondi Ibrahim about issues of security and the 
signatures are being collected . This issue as much as we are just letting to be a small thing of 
public relation s exercise is going to bring issues of fighting and therefore compromising p eace 
within the W ards. It is to my advice that we need to raise up to the occasion because there those  
people who are supporting the M otion of this House and there  are those who are being pushed by 
the CSOs or some individuals from the County people are go ing to fight I am of the view that 
this thing should be done all those people doing it as criminals.  It must be ni lazima iharamishwe 
ama sivyo watu wetu mashinani hawatakubaliana na jambo kama hilo na tunataka 
pronouncement yako wewe Bwana S pika kwa sabab u hatutakubali mambo hayo yaendelee kule 
kuni undermine  nikiwa niko kule kule watu wangu nao wanasimama na si watu wangu sehemu 
nyingi hata kule kwa Kibwana  nimesikia wataandaa mkutano na kuna watu ambao pia 
wamejipanga ku hesabu  mambo kama hayo. Hayo mambo  ni lazima yazu ngumzwe kama matatizo 
ya Jumba hili kwa jumla.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya . On the same 
issue that you have raised, it was raised yesterday as you s aid and we directed accordingly, s o the 
issue is being f ollowed up and I think I said it yesterday as it is, us the Assembly we cannot stop 
whatever that is going on but I remember we shall communicate to Senate and the Hon. Member 
Ibrahim Omondi is following that matter as I ordered yester day. The issue that h as been raised  
by Hon. Renson Thoya actually we finished it yesterday. I know you have a burning issue it is 
concerning the signatures… it is not concerning signatures . 
  
 Hon.  Mwende : The event which is going on mashinani  for census  and it is colliding wi th 
the people who were collecting the signatures so the wana nchi do not know which is, w hich 
some of our residents are failing to give the right information thinking it is the Fagilia Bunge 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay those  are issues that we will add up when 
we communicate to Senate , those are some o f the issues that we will like S enate to stop whatever  
that is going on . So let me say, are they  enumerators or that who whatever or whoever that they 
are collecting data for census to have a free movem ent to the house holds , so Hon. Ibrahim please 
follow the matters as urgent . Yes Hon. Ibrahim was the last person to raise a S tatement for us s o 
proceed with the Order Paper. 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
29  Hon.  Omo ndi: Thank you Mr. Speaker to serv e of the hono ur given , I have a S tatement 
under Standing Order 41, (2) (c) but just  before I read that particular S tatement the matter that 
has been rai sed here on the security of this House…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Proceed with your S tatem ent.  
 
POOR STATE OF BOMU CA THOLIC CHURCH ROAD L EADING TO MWIDANI HA LL AND WAYANI ROAD 
LEADING TO ST . JUDY ACADEMY IN AIRP ORT WARD  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Okay Mr. S peaker  Sir. I stand pursuant to Standing order 4(2) (c) seekin g 
to know from the Chairperson Committe e on T ransport , Infrastructure and Public W orks if he is 
aware of t he poor state of Bomu Catholic Church Road leading to Mwidani Hall and Wayani 
Road leading to St. Judy Academy in Airport W ard which has inconvenience d both motorist s 
and pedestrians and wh at plans does the County government of Mombasa have to remedy the 
situation?  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Any Member from Committee on T ransport to 
respond? Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Boy: Mr. Speaker we request for three  weeks to look into that matter or 
request that because we are already t here are active matters in the C ommittee stage , probably we 
will send also this; a request for S tatement so t hat when the response from the Chief O fficer is 
coming after a week so  that can they can address this , so probably two weeks is sufficient with 
your indulgence.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Okay noted. So you ask for three weeks or two 
weeks?  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Boy: Mr. Speaker Sir the Chief O fficer was coming with a repo rt in a 
week 's time so I think the C lerk's will assist us to fast forward this so that when they come with 
the response this will be inclusive. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay. 
 
 Hon. Amriya  Boy: So in two weeks’ time.  
 
 The Deputy Spe aker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Okay noted.  Hon. Ibrahim you understand the 
Transport C ommittee it  is loaded so let us allow them two weeks time it is sufficient ... 
  
(Hon.  Omondi off microphone)  
 
 Hon. Ibrahim you are out of order you could rise before and bring; y ou have already 
given us your S tatement .  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
30  Hon. Ibrahim  I understand  security issues and there is a Hon. Member yesterday or the 
day before yesterday who talked about security issues , and  if I am not wrong it was Hon. 
Renson, it was Hon. Robert Nyiro so issue s concerning security was raised and we have directed 
so if you have anything to add on you can talk to the Honorable from Bamburi and add what you 
have so that when a repo rt is back the County Assembly S ervice Board that is supposed to bring 
the report to  this Honourable H ouse.  
 Yes Clerk we had said that Hon. Ibrahim will be the last person to give a personal 
statement for us to pro ceed with the order paper. Yes C lerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON  MOMBASA COUNTY FISCA L STRATEGY (CFSP), 2019  
 
 Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur : (Off microphone ). 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Use your microphone?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir; Procedural M otion , adoption of M ombasa County 
Fiscal Strategy P aper (CFSP ) 2019.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to move the following M otion;  
 
That pursuant to Standing Order 206 (5, 7, and 8) this County Assembly adopt the report  
on the Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy P aper (CFSP) , 2019 laid on the T able on 
Thursday, 14th March , 2019.  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir with your  permission if I am allowed each M ember has a copy and it is a 
long report , I woul d wish if you allow me and the M embers allow me I read the introduction 
part, the conclusion and recommendation sinc e all the M embers have copies.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir if you all ow me, if not  then I have to go through the whole document . 
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay y ou can proceed in building you M otion.  
 
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir, it is yet another auspicious occasion and I  feel honoured to 
present this A ugust Hou se the r eport on the Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy P aper, 2019 for 
consideration and approval.  This year’s document as ever before contains the revenue and 
expenditure perform ance over the last financial year and also strategic priorities, the sector 
ceilings while providing a brief fiscal outlook over the upcoming financial year and over the 
medium term.  
 My C ommitt ee as well as the other sector C ommittees have scrutinized the document and 
have come up with views and recommendations that are contained in this report. We hope the 
County T reasury will consider this and make the necessary amendments to the document.  I 
would like to thank M embers, stakeholders and the general public for various views and 
proposals that have served to enrich this report.   
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
31  Mr. Sp eaker S ir, in the conclusion that is three; having considered the Mombasa County 
Fiscal Strategy P aper, 2019 and  similarly considered views by M embers o f public and 
stakeholders, the Committee on Finance, B udget and Appropriations at its meeting on Thursda y 
14th March, 2019 at 1:30p .m recommended the document and its contents to the County 
Assembly for adoption with amendments contained in the findings.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir recommendations: - That the County Assembly hereby do agree with and 
adopt the contents o f the Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy P aper, 2019 on the total overall 
projected revenue, the ceilings recommended  for the County government and County A ssembly 
and the total sums for each vote and the allocations to individual programmes for the fiscal yea r 
in question pursuant to Standing Order 206(7) .  
 Mr. Speaker S ir, that the August House approves the Mombasa County Fiscal S trategy 
Paper,  2019 with amendments. I repeat with amendments.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir I beg to move o r I move that the  Honorable House o f this House 
Assembly do adopt this report. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Who is your seconder?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur : Hon. Charles K itula, Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.Mwalimu ): Yes Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): I second , Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): I now propose that the M otion on the Mombasa 
County Fiscal Strategy Paper be debated in this House. Yes Hon . Murfad?  
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir , when I st ood up I had requested to read the 
introduction , the findings , the conclusion and recommendations  before each  Member had a copy 
eventually yesterday we ha d a public participation and I believe M embers have no objection to it,  
so we adopt it so that we can continue with other matters in the House. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Abrari ? 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kitabu hichi tulichopewa ni 
kikubwa sana ambapo sisi tumepewa muda kuangalia makadirio ya bajeti yalivyo na matumizi 
ya K aunti ya mwaka uliopita 2018/2019,  kuna mambo me ngi ambayo mimi binafsi nimey apitia 
nikayaona yana makosa am bayo yanahitaji kurekebishwa .  
 Kwa hivyo kama tutapitisha Mswada huu basi mimi nina  uhakika hii itakuwa ni kama 
vile bajeti tu lipitisha na marekebisho  lakini baadaye hakuna kitu kimefanyika , hivyo basi  mimi 
ninasema kama kulikuwa kuna marekebisho katika kitabu hichi kwa sababu nina hakika  yako .  
 Tukiangalia kuna kurasa fulani amb ayo nimepitia kwenye kitabu hich i maana ni kubwa 
sana; k wenye  matumizi y etu nikaona  tumesha maliza na hakuna miradi kule chini  hakuna ambao 
umeshafanyika.  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
32  Kwa hivyo sisi tumekuwa t wada nganya wana nchi kuwa sisi. ..tumekuja kupitisha Fiscal 
Strategy Paper ilhali ukweli wa mambo ni kuwa hatujaipitia vizuri  hivyo basi tuz ungumze kitabu 
hichi kina zaidi ya kurasa 200 na ni nani ka tika sisi amekipitia chote akatu ambia hich i kitabu 
kiko sawa  na tulizungu mza mbeleni kuwa tupewe muda tu pate wakwasi waliobobea t wende 
wakatufunze vitu vingine ambavyo sisi ni wageni katika B unge hili.  
Nakuomba  Mheshimiwa Spika liangalie hili isije ikawa tunajitia kita nzi leo kesho ikawa 
tunalalamika ; kuna mambo mengi ambayo hayako sawa katika kitabu hichi tukubaliane mambo 
mengi hayako sawa , kwa  hivyo kwa mwelekeo wako pengine wewe ushap itia kitabu hiki 
nakuomba kama kuna uwezekano tutafutiwe watu waliobobea waje waketi chini t uwaelezee pale 
ambapo tu nataka parekeb ishwe . 
Pale ambapo pako sawa tukipitisha kitabu hichi kama kiko sawa Mheshimiwa Spika 
tumeona idadi ya W abunge wengi wametoka  na kutoka kwa  hio sio ati kwa sababu ya nini watu 
wengi hawakuwa kwenye mood ya kupit isha kitabu hichi. K wa hivyo nakuomba kwenye uamuzi 
wako Mheshimiwa Spika litazame hilo isije leo tunajitia kita nzi kwenye kitabu hichi kwa sababu 
watu wanachel ea kuongea  hapa lakini hawajui yali yomo kwenye kitabu kile . 
Sisi tulikatazwa public participation  kwenye mashinani na public participation  ya W odi 
zote 30 ikaletwa Tononoka na tulizungumza hili na tukasema siku itafika ya kuwa  tuje  tupitishe 
na leo ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa Amur amekuja na kitabu hichi tup itishe na hatujakipitia vizuri.  
Hivyo basi  nakuomba Mheshimiwa Spika hapa ndani kuna mambo mimi nimeyap itia nimeona 
huu ni mtego twategana alafu kesho mtakuja ku ambiwa nyinyi ndio mlikipitisha , angalieni vizuri 
matum izi yetu ya 2018/2019 tusipitishe tu hivi  hivi. Hatusemi hivi kwa sababu twapinga mtu 
fulani hapana lakini na waomba ndugu zanguni kitabu ni kikubwa kina kurasa zaidi ya 200 
kiangalieni vizuri huu ni mtego,  hichi ni kitendawili kitegueni . Ahsante sana Mhesh imiwa Spika . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Abrari . Yes Hon . Amriya ? 
 
 Hon.  Amriya  Boy: Thank y ou Mr. Speaker, the floor is highly honored . I wish to state 
that the budget process is a comprehensive one but it has a legal framework tha t is contained in 
the PFM Act, C ounty Government Act and Standing O rder 206, it has about six documents and 
all of them have timelines, the CFSP is not an exception by law it was supposed to have been 
committed to the Assembly by 28th February which was do ne accordingly and it was in the 
public domain and by law pursuant to the provisions that I had me ntioned earlier no need for 
repetition, 117 of the PFM Act and 206 of the Standing Order  requires that this document be 
passed by 15th March , so we had 14 day s if there were any deliberations they should have been 
done within those 14 days .  
 The concerns that my fellow coll eagues  are raising could be genuine but the niche  is that 
we miss out on the timelines,  information about what the law says  because at this  point our hands 
are tied Mr. Spe aker because I am aware  that yesterday there was  a validation process at the 
Tononoka hall , so this CFSP on the face of it has followed the law and as we speak our hands are 
tied because we are work ing under deadlines .  
 So I urge this Honorable H ouse that in the near future let us observe these laws that we 
have , let us embrace them  that pa ssed this law, we cannot be the H ouse that passed this law and 
then again break the same laws , so I stand guided but it is my submission  that though the concern 
is genuine the law is limited.  Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Chief W hip. 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
33  The Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ningependa kukubali ana na 
matamshi yal iotolewa na M wakilishi  wa K ongowea na vilevile M wenye kiti w a Kamati ya sheria 
na haki,  ni kweli sisi ni waakilishi wa wananchi na ikiwa kitabu kile tulipatiwa siku nne 
zilizopita ni vigumu sana sisi kama Wabunge kuweza kupata na kue lewa zaidi yaliyo mo kwenye 
kitabu kile . Hivyo basi sisi kama Wawakilishi ama M wakilishi wa Frere Town kusema kweli 
nilipitia binafsi kitabu kile na nikaona na kudhibitisha kweli kuna changamoto nyingi katika 
kitabu kile kulingana na matumizi ya fedha ya mwaka uliopita , mwaka huu amb ao tuko sisi na 
vilevile  ceilings  za ule mwaka am bao unakuja . 
 Lakini ningependa kumhaki kishia M wakilishi wa Kongowea  kwamb a hizi ni ceilings  
katika CFSP lakini sisi nataka niwe katika hii  kumbukumbu  kwamba , mimi nikiwa mmoja wao 
na mimi napenda kuzungumzia ukweli na haki kwamba mheshimiwa mwenyekiti mimi nitakuwa 
moja wao ikiwa executive hawatudhibitishia ikiwa mwaka wa 2017/2018 ,2018/2019 ni 
maendeleo gani walifanya katika kaunti yetu basi nitakuwa moja wapo wa kupinga bajeti ya 
2019/2020 mimi naomba niwe katika kumbukumbu B unge  hili ikiwa leo naunga mkono CFSP  
iweze kupita with amendments ambayo baada ya kuelimishwa zaidi nitaleta amendments katika 
county treasury lakini ik iwa baadaye katika bajeti kama Executive  hawatatoa ushahidi ambao 
utaniri dhisha mimi kama M wakilishi wa Wod i ya Frère T own basi itakuwa ngumu sana 
kupitisha bajeti ya 2019/2020.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Nzai , Hon . Amur you have already reacted on 
this issue.  
 
 Hon.  Nzai:  Ahsante s ana Mheshimwa Spika  kwa hii nafasi na mimi kuweza kuchangia 
mawili , matatu. Nataka nikubaliane na W aheshimiwa wen zangu , hasa yule mwenzangu wa 
Kongowea na pia tukizingatia sheria na yule mwenzang u pia M heshimiwa maalum Amriya.  
Mimi nataka nichangie namna hii Mheshimiwa  Spika ufahamu ni kama upepo na kila upepo ina 
wakati wak e kama vile sawia na mawimbi ya bahari; saa zingine wa weza rauka bahari ukakosa 
moja saa zingine ukarauka ukaenda pata hata huwezi kuyaoga .  
 Mimi nataka nishukuru W abunge wenzangu kwa sababu saa hii kama ni elimu tumeipata 
vya kutosha na sitasema tulichel ewa mahali , laiti elimu hii ingetuingia mwanzoni janga la macho 
hili halingetupata maana watu wetu wa mashinani wangekuwa wamepata maendeleo mahsusi 
kwa bajeti iliyopita la kini kwa sababu wanasema mbele yetu ni ile bajeti nzito ambayo 
tutaiangazia naona ha po hakuna atakaye weza kuruka  Mheshimiwa Spika bajeti hii ambayo ni ya 
fungafunga ili tupate i le bajeti tunaitaka nitakubalina na Mheshimiwa Amur tuipitishe na hizo 
amendments lakini saa hii macho iwe kila mtu ata kodolea kwa wale ambao tunawapitishia bajet i 
hii. Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Feddis Mbura?  
 
 Hon.  Mbura:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, ahsante kwa kunipa fursa hii. K wangu 
ninges ema kuwa hii baj eti kama vile wenzangu wamesema...kwa mtego sisi W aheshimiwa 
hatuja fundishwa lakini mashirika yamefanya mafunzo huko mashinani wanaielewa ni nini kiko 
ndani , nikiwa mimi mwenyewe nilitoka kwangu saa k umi na mbili , mashirika yamekuja kwangu 
kuweza kujua hii bajeti tuliyoipitia 2018/201 9 imefanya nini katika K aunti  ya Momba sa na 
wanaenda kwa kila idara imefanya nini,  imetumika wapi imefanywa nini Mwakirunge,  pesa 
iliyowekwa y a maji imefanya nini Mwakirunge , pesa ya barabara imefanya nini .  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
34  Ukiangalia ni mkaaji wa mashinani , la kusikitisha ni kwamba sisi Waheshimiwa hatujui 
hili jitabu na saa hii twalipitisha , ndio tulipi tisheni kwa sababu wakati wake umefika lakini je 
twajiwekea nini mashinani ikiwa saa hii kuna sahihi zinaendela mashinani ? Je Mwakilishi  wako 
ametengeneza barabara ? Hakutengeneza , ameleta basari ? Hakuleta,  watu wana weka sahihi 
hakuna mtetezi aliyejitokeza na ba do twapitisha hili buku ili tuzidi kujifunga mashinani , 
Mheshimiwa Spika tulipitisheni lakini kuna swali katikati  yetu. Ahsante.  
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Junior?   
 
 Hon.  Wambua : Mheshimiwa  Spika  unajua  hizi vitu zimejengwa kidogo sana,  sisi wale 
warefu kidogo tunapata shida sana  katika mas uala haya  inatutia wasiwasi sana ; sisi k ama 
Wabunge t umelaumiwa sana kwamba sisi ni Wabunge wa rubber st amp katika mitaa kama vile 
Mheshimiwa  wa Mwakirunge amesema , mashirika ya jamii imefunza wanan chi sana mambo ya 
bajeti na saa zingine tunakaa watu ambao hawajielewi wakati inakuja maswala kama haya , 
jambo kama hili Mheshimiwa wa Kongowea amezungumzia sana na sehemu zingine kama 
Kwale  na maj irani wetu wamesomeshwa mambo wameelewa zaidi na wana jua ni kitu gani lakini 
katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa kila wakati mambo yanaletwa leo na kesho tunaambiwa 
pitisheni hii  kama hamtapitisha mtakuwa mumeharibu , mtakuwa mumekwaza watu . 
 Ni jambo am balo limew eza kutuletea aibu kubwa sana na tunat aka tuanze kurekebisha 
mambo tu anze kuyapeleka katika njia ya kisawa , kama ni jambo linataka kuletwa katika  Bunge 
inajulikana kila mwaka linakuja , lisiletewe leo na kesho tuambiwe msipopitisha mtakosa pesa 
ama mtataka tuipitishe lakini juzi tuliambiwa pitisheni hii na marekebisho  na mtaletewa wakati 
mwingine muirekebishe  na shahidi wangu ni Bwana Kiranja wa Bunge  wakati ilikuja hapa 
iliambiwa hakuna kuirekebisha hii ni hivyo ishapita , hii ni kwenda inaenda . 
 Mambo kama haya yatak uja yatufanye sisi kuwa hatuwezi tena kukubali itakuja mtafanya 
marekebisho  mahali hapa , kwa hivyo kwa leo kwa vile tum echelewa kama tulivyoambiwa na 
Mheshimiwa Amur tunataka tupitishe na  marekebisho  alafu tuje tuirekebishe . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Amur to respond, what is it Hon.  
Abrari?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon.  Abrari you have used your time on this 
issue not unless you have another burni ng concern .  
 
 Hon.  Mohame d Abrari:  Nataka kuwakumbusha tena ama kutilia mkazo swala hili, 
Mheshimiwa Spika itakuwa kwenye kumbukumbu nataka leo niregelee niwe kwenye 
kumbukumbu nakumbuka vizuri bajeti ya 2018/2019…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : You have half a minute.  
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
35  Hon. Mohamed Abrari: ...Tulipitisha  na marekebisho , lakini wakati tulipofuatilia 
tukaambiwa hivyo ndio tushapitisha na saa hii tena tuna regelea palepale tukichelea muda , muda 
tulikuwa tuko nao wenzetu wa Kwale tulivyo kuwa Kirinyaga walivyomal iza tu walienda 
kukalia kitabu hichi , muda tulikuwa tuko nao kwa hivyo kufika sasa iki wa twachelea muda 
kuumiza mwana nchi…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Abrari your time is up, yes  I will call upon 
the mover of the Motion to respond on this.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I unde rstand the frustrati ons of the 
Members but again I want to emphasis that before we h ad this document it was on our Website 
for 21 days . I know what my coll eagues are saying an d I bear with them I am also a Member like 
them but Mr. Speaker for us as my Honorable Member has said when it comes to issues that the 
budget now is ready even me I will be the one on the forefront to be against it if the amendments 
are not captured and I can assure my brother if he has any amendments I want to be his witness 
when we are submitting those amendments I will take them and to see that they have been 
effected , so whoever has an amendment I will be his witness to submit that amendment together 
with him Mr. Speaker . I ask my  colleag ues to bear with me and adopt it so that if there are any 
amendments I am ready to shake hands with the m and take them to the concern Committee. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Members, under  our own 
Standing Orders, 206 (3) it clearly states that once the Fiscal Strategy Paper has been brought to 
this Hono urable House it is deemed to be committed to the sectral Committees of which on the 
28th of February or before or before it was submitted to this House on the s ame day it was 
deemed that it w as in the hands on the sectral Committee , the 14 days to go through and if we 
had any recommendations we were supposed to t ake the recommendations to the Finance , 
Budget and Appropriation Committee . 
 Hon. Members today b efore us is a report on the Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy Paper , 
a report that has recommendations in it , that the report shall be adopted with amendments  in the 
reports that y ou have  has clearly stated that we are passing the CFSP with amendments, some  are 
already with the Committee on Finance , Budget and Appropriation and there are other pending 
amendments that are yet t o be taken to the  Finance Committee . We have given a window for the 
amendments to go to the Finance, Budget and Appropriation Committee to comply with the 
report th at we are seeing today in this Honourable House because I am sure what we have today, 
so I stand to put a question that the report on Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy Paper from the 
Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation be adopted in this Hono urable House ? 
 
(Question put and  agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
  
ADJOURNMENT  
 
March 14, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
36  Hon. Members , the House stands adjourned until 19th March , 2019 at 2 :30p.m on a 
Tuesday.  
 
The House  rose at  5:10p.m. 