October 18 , 2017               MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                             16  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY   
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednes day, 18th October, 2017  
The House met at 2:42p.m. 
 (Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS   
 
            Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members  you may be s eated. Yes Clerk?  
MESSAGES  
 Hon.  Members , pursuant to Section 35 of the County Government A ct I have received a 
letter dated 22nd September , 2017 and I hereby proceed to read the message from his Excellency , 
the Governor Hon.  Hassan Joho on the six nominees.  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatr i) read the Message)  
 Re: Nomination Of County Executive Committee Members   
 According to the powers conferred to me by the County Government Act , 2012 S ection 
35, I hereby forward the names of the n ominated Executive Members  for vetting and approval 
befor e appointment to the position of County Executive Committee Members  as follows: - 
1.  Mr. Tawfiq  Mohamed Balala    - Department of Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works.  
2.  Mr. Kevin Munyoki Kyalo - Depa rtment of Youth Gender , Sports and Cultural Affa irs. 
3. Dr. Godfrey Nyongesa Nato - Department of Environment, Waste Management and Energy.  
4. Mr. Edward Dzilla Nyale -Department of Lands, Planning and Housing.  
5. Mrs.  Hazel Koitaba - Department of Health . 
6. Ms. Fatma Awale  - Department of Water,  Sanitation and Natural Resources.  
Hon.  Members  pursuant t o Standing order 39 S ub sections 3C; I hereby refer the message 
from His Excellency the Governor to the Committee on Appointment/ Rules and Procedures for 
consideration. Yes Clerk?  
MESSAGES  
 Hon.  Member s, pursuant to section 35 of the County Government s Act, I have received a 
letter dated 22nd September , 2017 on nomination of Mary am Abdillahi Mbaruk as County 
Executive Committee Member , Finance  and Economic Planning . I hereby proceed to read the 
message from his Excellency  the G overnor Hon.  Hassan Ali Joho on the nomination of M aryam 
Mbaruk.  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) read the Message)  
 Re: Nomination as County Executive Committee Member Ms. Maryam   Abdil lahi 
Mbaruk . 
  According  to the powers conferred t o me by the County Government Act , 2012 S ection 
35, I hereby  forward the name of the above Executive M ember for vetting and approval before 
appo intment to the position of the County Executive Committee Member , Department of 
Finance and Economic planning.  
 Hon.  Members  pursuant to the Standing Orders 39 Sub Section 3(c) I hereby refer the 
message from his Excellency  the Governor  to C ommittee on Appointments /Rules and 
Procedures for consideration.  
MESSAGES  
 Hon.  Members  pursuant  to Section  4 (3) of the Mombasa County Attorney Act , 2017 I 
have received a letter dated 4th October , 2017 nomination of Mr. Joseph Mwashimba Mtalaki as 
the County Attorney . 
October 18 , 2017               MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                             16  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  I hereby proceed to bring the message from his Excellency the Governor Hon. Hassan Ali 
Joho  on the nomination of Mr.  Joseph Mwashimba Mtalaki . 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri)  read the Message)  
 Re: Nomination of Mombasa County Attorney Mr. Joseph Mwashimba Mtalaki  
 According  to the powers conferred to me by the Mombasa County Attorney Act , 2017 
Section 4(3) I hereby f orward the name of the above for vetting and approval befo re appointment 
to the position County Attorney Mombasa.  
Hon.  Members  pursuant to Standing Order 39(3)  (c) I hereby refer the m essage from his 
Excellency the Governor to the Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs for consideration . Hon.  
Members  please note that the Committee that has been tasked to consider me ssages from his 
Excellency the Governor must adhere to the timelines provided by the Public Appointments 
County Assemblies Act , 2017 . Clerk ? 
MESSAGE  
 Hon.  Members  pursuant to Sub section 46(6)  c of the County Assemblies Act I hereby 
proceed to read the message Majority Party Whip . 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri)  read the Message)  
 Re: Party Appointee to the County Assembly Service Board  
 Followin g communication from the majority party Orange Democratic Party Mombasa , 
this is to hereby convey the parties’ decision which  appointed Hon.  Murfad Amur Abdalla MCA 
Mji Wa Kale /Makadara  Ward and Hon.  Maimuna Salim Mwawasi MCA Shanzu W ard as 
appointees of t he party to the County Assembly Service Board . This is pursuant to Section 12 of 
the County Governments Act 3(c), as amended by Section 46(a) of the County Assemblies Act , 
2017.  
 Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon.  Members  the Assembly stands adjourned until Thu rsday 19th October , 2017 at 
2:30p.m. 
The House r ose at 2:54p.m. 
 