March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 11th March , 2020.  
The House met at 2:49p .m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members have your  seats. 
Serjeant-At-Arms, please ring the quorum  bell.  
(Quorum bell rung ) 
 Yes Clerk , please ascertain if there is quorum . 
(The Clerk confirmed quorum)  
 Yes Clerk , proceed . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
ENFORCEMENT OF THE TO BACCO CONTROL ACT  
 
 Yes Hon. Aran Moses?  
 
 Hon. Aran : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I will read a Notice of M otion on 
behalf of Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu , the MCA of Port  Reitz. 
Mr. Speaker S ir I beg to give the following Notice of M otion ;  
 
THAT AWARE THAT cigarette s smoking is harmful to one’s health and the 
environment;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT the N ational Assembly pa ssed the Tobacco C ontrol A ct, 
2007, but there is laxity in enforcement;  
 
NOTING THAT new scientific information on cigarettes smocking in outdoor areas, 
leads to health hazard to the members of t he public;  
 
CONCERNED THAT people do not smoke at designated areas pose health hazard to 
other members of the public;  

March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 I therefore URGE this A ssembly to RESOLVE that: 
 
The County g overnment of Mombasa should enforce laws for smocking zones that 
protect outd oor public places that includes, outdoor workplace , restaurants , bars, 
service lines , park and beaches as well as restricted areas by reviving places that were 
earlier designated by the defunct Municipal C ouncil.  
 
  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk?  
MOTION   
ESTABLISHMENT OF INT ER-WARDS TALENT COMPETI TION  
 
 Yes Hon. Aran?  
 Hon. Aran : Mr. Speaker S ir, I beg to move the following M otion  on behalf of Hon. 
Fadhili Makarani MCA , Port Reitz  Ward . 
Mr. Speaker S ir I beg to move the following M otion ; 
THAT AWARE THAT thousands of youth s in Mombasa County  have different 
talents and skills , for instance sports;  
FURTHER AWARE THAT unemployment rate continues to rise leading to many 
anti-social criminal activities , idleness and  frustration that undermine the s tability of 
economy of Mombasa C ounty;  
NOTING THAT talents are source of income to the individuals as well as revenue to 
the country;  
CONCERNED THAT , talented youths within the County have no well -structured 
avenues where t hey can exercise their talents and skills in order to earn  a living;  
I therefore urge this A ssembly to RESOLVE  that: 
The C ounty  government to establish inter -Wards talent  competition for youths in the 
County which can act as a source of revenue to the you ths while at the same time act 
as an avenue to scout for talented youth s. 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I request  Hon. Chief Whip to second the M otion. 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Chief Whip?  
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Wambua ): Mr. Speaker. I  second.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Member I propose that the 
Motion read by Hon. M oses on establishment of inter -Wards talent competition , be debated 
in this House.  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 Yes Hon. Moses Aran?  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Hon. Aran: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru sana 
kwa kuleta hoja hii kwa niaba ya Mheshimiwa Fadhili Makarani. Hoja yenyewe ni nzuri 
Mheshimiwa Spika na vile imesemekana tumeona kwamba sasa hivi vile tunaishi dunia ya 
saa hii wan aoishi maisha  mazuri ama wenye wanafanya kazi nzuri ni wenye wanaishi na 
talanta zao na tukiwa na mahali kwamba angalau tutaweza kukuza talanta za vijana wetu kwa 
michezo na tala nta naona kwamba Mombasa itaimarika sana .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika  ukiangalia hata vijana wetu wa mejaribu k uendeleza nchi yetu saa 
hii ukia ngalia tuko na kijana alijaribu pia kuwa  Mbunge  japo kuwa alishindwa lakini alijaribu 
kama kijana mwenzetu na watu wali sherehekea  kwa sababu alikuwa kwa michezo an aitwa 
Mariga . Ukiangalia ndugu  yake W anyama pia amekuwa kwa michezo  na ni  mwenye  
amesaidia saa hii ako na mpaka wakfu wake inakuza talanta.  
 Ukija hapa Mombasa Mheshimiwa S pika tunajua vizuri tulikuwa na Robert Mambo 
mwenye alikuwa mpaka na shule yake ya kukuza talanta za vijana . Kwa hivyo tukiweza 
kuwa n a hizi sehemu za kukuza talanta ukienda kwa mashinani haswa kwa Wodi  tuseme  
tuwe na hizi sehemu kila W odi  zote 30 tuko nazo hapa Mombasa naona kama Mombasa 
tutaendelea.  
Ya pili Mheshimiwa Spika pia tukiongelea mas uala ya uhalifu yamezidi sana k wa 
sababu h ii inafanyika vijana wetu wako  vibarazani; u napata vijana wako hata ukiangalia 
vijana wenye wameshikwa wame shtakiwa  lakini utapata vijana kama mtu si msanii ama 
utapata mtu anacheza mpira lakini hakuna mahali  pa kukuza talanta.  Kwa hiyo mimi naomba 
Waheshi miwa wenzangu hii hoja imeletwa, nimesoma kwa niab a ya Mheshimiwa Fadhili iko 
wazi  sana ni tushikane tuungane tuipitishe ili vijana wetu wa weze kusaidika na Mombasa 
iendelee. Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you. Yes Hon. Chief W hip? 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Wambua ): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa fu rsa hii . 
Hoja iliopo mbele yetu Bwana S pika ni nz uri sana kwa sababu inatusaidia ...(Technical 
hitch )...nilikuwa natatizika na hii ...inasaidia vijana kukuza talan ta zao . Mheshimiwa Spika 
sisi kama W aheshimiwa katika mitaa yetu tu napambana na vijana kila mahali; v ijana hawa 
hatuwezi kuwapatia kazi hakuna njia ya kuwasaidia kupata kazi lakini wak o na talanta 
wanaweza kujisaidia na kujiajiri wenyewe . Inakuw a ni jambo la busara kama K aunti yetu 
itasaidia vijana ili waweze kukuza talanta zao na waweze kujisaidia wenyewe kwa sababu 
nafasi za kazi ni nadra ama hakuna na matatizo ni mengi kwa vijana.   
 Ukiangalia uhalifu mwingi vijana kama wana  jambo la  kufanya hawawezi kus hika 
watu ngeta , hawawezi ku umiza watu lakini wakipata jambo la  kufanya watakuwa na  wakati 
mzuri wa kujisaidia katika hali hii , ningetaka nifik ie hapo Bwana S pika. Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Ramla?  
 Hon. Ramla Said : Ahsa nte sana Bwana Spika . Nina simama kuunga mkono huu 
Mswada kwa sababu ni M swada mzuri na pia kama t unavyojua walemavu wengi 
hawakumaliza kusoma ama wamefika darasa la nane  ama kidato cha nne na  
hawakujiendeleza lakini huwa wengi wana talanta au vipaji aina nyingi na kama h uu M swada 
utapita na walemavu pia w azingatiwe basi tutakuwa tumewai nua kwa hali nyengine kwa 
sababu watapata nafasi ya kutambulika vipaji vyao na kujiendeleza kimaisha. Kuna 
walemavu wengi wenye vipaji vya michezo , vipaji vya kuimba , vipaji  vya kila aina na  huu 
Mswa da ni mzuri sana ukipita nauungwe mkono . Ahsante.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I can see you are in hurry to end the discussion 
but it is good  for M embers to have enough time to give their input because the larger 
population of this House is youthful and indeed we are talking matters on youth s and 
therefore I request that we  have enough time to deliberate about the youth s of this C ounty.  
Mr. Speaker indeed the M otion before us is good and timely and anything that 
touches  on the improvement of the status of the youth s must be something that everybod y 
should be touched and embrace. Mr. S peaker we have a whole department here in the C ounty 
and this the same department  that is also entitle d to a very large sum of budgeting and 
therefore it is only good for us to come up with legal activities so that we can be able to also 
monitor the flow o f funds because once we have the se activities enacted it will be also be 
easy for t he department to fund these activities.   
Mr. Speaker most of the time we have been always looking at sports as football but 
there is so much talent  on the ground such that when we are able to harness the same and give 
proper funding and proper monitoring a  lot of income is going to come in the long term . 
Hon. Speaker , having been born and raised in the  suburb s of Mombasa C ounty in 
Maja oni speci fically, I have a  number talented youth s who use a rt where they make beads 
like the one that I am putting on . Mr. Speaker,  this is a work of a rt and it is talent and many 
people ... many youth s are getting their source  of livelihood through such art . 
So Mr. Speaker when we started this secon d chapter of devolution our Hon. Speaker 
sponsored an inter -Wards tournament and  as we speak Shanzu was crowned and they went 
home with shs 300,000 . Now that one  was sponsored by an individual,  the Hon. Speaker of 
this Assembly ; what if the d epartment will be able to fund or do such a mo ve? 
Mr. Speaker the departmen t has also been doi ng some Jers ey and balls distribution to 
the teams but again with proper monitorin g and management ; may be these Jers eys are used 
by the youth s when they ride boda  boda  as you can see them wearing the jers eys because 
after we have given them the  Jerseys what else!   
So with such a move in place Mr. Speaker we will be utilizing them properly through  
proper management and follow up of the team s that will be giving the jers eys and the balls , 
plus we have also s een the department ha s also been moving in to make s ure that the grou nds 
are level and something is being done. We have a number of playground s that h ave been 
levelled , we have heard well be dug so that also can get some water and all that .  
Therefore  Mr. Speaker  the whole thing should be brought on board s o that as we 
continue to improve talents we improve everything so that there is a general improvement in 
sporting activities as a whole.  
Otherwise Mr. Speaker  this M otion is timely and it’s only good for us to make sur e 
that we touch on every detail  of ch allenge so that we don’t leave any talent out side as we 
continue to realize the different capabilities of our youth s in this County .  
Mr. Speaker this M otion is timely ; I really support it and I will also gi ve m y best 
being a Member who  sits in the I mpleme ntation C ommittee  and these are Motions  that I will 
always put my eye on  so that I realize the ir implementation . Mr. Speaker, i thank you and this 
Motion is timely.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Milka?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Sp eaker f or the cha nce to also contribute to this M otion . 
I rise to support the Motion putting in mind that the youth s form a larger part of the 
population. The youth s have a lot of energy which should be tapped in  useful activities; t hey 
have new ideas w hich they are willing to exploit  and if don’t do that for sure as some Hon. 
Members has said it is a ticking bomb waiting to explod e.  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Through development of talent when the youth s engage in these activities through 
sports;  one it will keep them physically f it, two they may be able to earn a living just as Hon. 
Nyiro has rightly put it . So it i s good to implement this inter -Ward competitions putting in 
mind also that our Gover nor has put in concerted effort s to do stadiums  within Mombasa 
town for the benefit of the youth s.  
 As we know the English men say , "An idle mind is a workshop of sin " and when most 
of these  youth s are left idle they end up committing a lot of crime , so I do support this M otion 
so that we can reduce the number of youth s engaged in crime and then they can also develop 
themselves economically to sustain themselves and therefore avoid engaging themselves in  
activities that are not legal.  
 With that I urge t he Hon. Members to support the M otion and as Hon. Nyir o who is a 
Member of I mplement ation has said we need to pass M otions which are implemented so 
Hon. Ny iro we are going to keep an eye on you also as you have promis ed so that we ensure 
that this M otion is bein g implemented on the ground. T hank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for have given me this chance also to 
air my views. Mr. Speaker it is unless we remind each other when did the rain start beating 
us? Of cour se or indeed it is in the indul gence mind for the people for not implementing what 
is good practice. Mr. Speaker as  far as I stand to support the M otion a lot need s to be done 
because it is also in the G overnors ’ manifesto in the implementation of development of this 
County agenda that youth were given priority to be sensitised in all activities. Recently Mr. 
Speaker we have seen the merry go round for all fields being prepared to make sure our 
youth s are really engaged fully but we don’t know where that exercise ended and who 
stopped it .  
 Mr. Speaker the M otion is as good as the one which came yesterday but I kindly 
request the offices concerned to work tireless ly so that this agenda which goes directly to our 
Hon. Governor to be realised. It is a pity actually to see our youth s just li ngering around 
without nothing much to be done, thank you Mr. Speaker for this M otion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Renson  Thoya ? 
 Hon. Thoya : Bwana Spika nasimama kuunga mkono Hoja hii  ambayo inatetea sisi 
wawakilishi hususan tuki wa kule nyanjani . Kwa sababu ikiwa tutapitisha M swada kama huu 
ambapo serikali yetu itakuwa inatenga pesa ya kuweza kuboresha talanta inakuwa ya msaada 
mkubwa kwetu. Kwa sababu nyingi y a tournament  ama vipaji am bavyo tunaboresha kule 
nyanjani huwa tunatumi a pesa zetu za mfukoni.  Kwa hivyo inakuwa ni vyema kwamba 
tunapitisha kwamba pesa za umma ziweze kutumika katika swala zima la vijana ambao ni 
ajenda ya um ma vile vile. Zaidi ya yote Mombasa ina kabiliwa na changamoto ya ajira,  
inakuwa ni vyema tuangalie nj ia mbadala ya vile vijana wanaweza kupata ajira kupitia talanta 
zao.  
 Kwa hivyo tukisema kwamba kutatengwa pesa ama serik ali hii itenge pesa ya 
kuboresha talanta nafikiri talanta hizi zitakuja kubadilika na kuwa ajira siku hizo za usoni. 
Talant a ni moja wapo ya njia ambayo tunaleta vijana mahali pamoja wakiweza kushiriki 
maswala muhimu ya kijamii. Swala ni kwamba kama vij ana hawa hawajajumuika katika 
mchezo wa kandanda , masumbwi na v ipaji vinginevyo huwa wako wapi?  Mara nyingi vijana 
hawa wanapatikana katik a kile amba cho siku hizi kinaitwa maeneo ama sehemu ambazo 
wanaweza kutumia vileo na mihadarati.   
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  Kwa hivyo tutakuwa tunawas aidia vijana hawa kutoka kwa lile janga la matumizi ya 
mihadharati. Zaidi na mwisho kabisa pale ilipofikia ni vijana tumalizane na o ama vijana 
wamalizane na sisi; hivyo basi  tukiwa viongozi ni maamuzi tuyafanye kwamba hawa vijana 
tumalizane na wao katika kuboresha vipaji vyao ama sivyo vijana hao watakapo malizan a na 
sisi sijui itakuwa ni vipi!  Mimi hupenda kusema msemo kwamba vijana ni uwa sort au waku 
sort; Tatizo ni kwamba vile watakavyo tu sort hatujui ni mbele ama ni kwa nyuma. Kwa 
hivyo ni bora t ufanye maamuzi ya kuunga mkono M swada huu tutokamane na hali ya 
taharuki ambayo usoni vijana watatuletea aibu kubwa. Ahsante.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mary Onsongo?  
Hon. Onsongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity so that I 
support the Motion. The Motio n that we have in front of us  is a very important Motion and 
we sh ould not make any delays on it. I think a ll the Hon. Members in the House know very 
well t hat I have sportsmanship in me ; i am a lady …  
(Applause)  
So it is very important when somebody is talen ted let the person be motivated. I l ike 
our youth s; if you motivate them by putting the int er - Wards talent competition they will be 
exposed by going for tournaments not only in Mombas a County  but they will also get 
employed b ut there are so many organizations th at need people who are talented. I  like 
myself  we  used to  have those inter….  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok proceed Hon. Onsongo . 
Hon. Onsongo:  Mr. Speaker as you know the Hon. Member also accuses everyone 
every time , that is his character . I am not afraid of that s o to me I was selected by the Po sta 
peop le, the Awendo people because of my talent that I had…  
(Applause)  
So if our youth s can be given this opportunity they will be practicing everyday…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mwamwiri , what is it?  
Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri : Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kufahamishwa na 
Mheshimiwa tunazungumzia kukuza vipaji vya wale vijana kule nyanjani ama tuendelee 
kukuza chake kwa sababu anang 'ang'ania ya kwamba mimi , mimi…  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Onsongo:  No, Mr. Speaker I am giving an example.   
(Applause)  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 He is jealous because I had that in me and it can be seen even right now. Protect me 
please Mr. Speaker.  
(Laughter)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu ): What is it Hon. Amur? Use your 
microphone  please ? 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker I just  want to know whether the Hon ourable  is 
representing the youth s; because we have a youth representative in this As sembly who is 
Hon. Moses Aran. I f he is representing youth s because the Motion is about we develop talent 
to the youth s, she is no longer a yo uth she is over 35 years. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Order! Order Members! Ok Hon. 
Milka what is it?  
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have noticed with a lot of concern that 
whenever a lady legislature…  
(Applause)  
Stands up t o contribute they are particular Members in this House who are always out 
to kind of intimidate the female legislatures a nd as the Chair of Women Caucus  we are not 
going to sit and watch that. I am requesting that Hon. Mary Everlyne  Onsongo be given time 
to present her ideas on the Motion because it is her right and if she is talking about herself as 
a role model there is nothing wrong. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok we have heard you Hon. Milka, 
let Hon. Onsongo procee d. 
Hon. Onsongo:  Mr. Speaker  Sir, as you know men are ever jealous with women…  
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
 
     The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Order! Order! Order Hon. Members!  
 Hon. Onsongo:  I was giving an example so that the Hon. Member s can  support this 
Motion because I was talking when I was a youth in a secondary school not now. So even the 
youths we have some who have finished form four... ,  
(Interruption)  
Let me finish, protect me Hon. Speaker…  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members let Hon. Onsongo 
proceed…  
(Interruption)  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 Hon. Onsongo:  Protect me Hon. Speaker…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Proceed Hon. Onsongo . 
 Hon. Onsongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for protecting me.  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Order Members! 
Order!  
Hon. Onsongo:  Mr. Speaker Sir, let me finish by saying  i support the Motion and the 
Department of Youth let it spare some money for inter - Ward talent competition. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Onsongo. Yes Hon. 
Prischilla from Tudor ? 
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nasimama hapa kuunga huu M swada 
mkono kwa ukamilifu na pia nikishukuru Mwenyekiti wangu wa Caucus  kwa kuhama mahali 
ametoka aweze kuthi biti mahali ambapo panaharibika k wa sababu Mheshimiwa  Spika kando 
na sisi kuzungumza. .. 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Amur Murfad:  Hon. Chair a point of information !! 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon…  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Mumba:  Sitaki kuamrish wa wala kuambiwa chochote, mimi sitaki kuambiwa 
chochote wala kufahamishwa.. . 
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Amur have your seat. H ave 
your seat Hon. Amur!  Yes proceed Hon. Prischilla h. 
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spi ka kwa kazi yako nzuri , naendelea kuunga 
mkono huu Mswada nikasema...  
(Interruption ) 
 Mheshimiwa Spika hata sijazungumza, hata sijachangia nashindwa mtu anainuka 
kuniamrisha nini, kuniambia nini…  
(Interruption)  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya just let Hon. Prischilla to 
proceed.  
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nauunga mkono haya maendeleo 
ambayo yanaletwa ya  kusaidia vijana wetu na hata sisi tulioko ndani ya hili Jumba nasisitiza 
sote hapa tumepitia upande wa ujana ndio tuka fika hapa tulipo wengine. Kwa hivyo tunayo  
yazu ngumza sio kuwa sisi hatukupitia ; hii michezo inayotaka kuwekwa katika inter zone  
kabla ya kila W odi hata sisi tulipokuwa hatujaingia hili Jumba wengine tulikuwa tukicheza 
kule nyanjani.   
Kwa hivyo twaelewa um uhimu wa hili suala ambalo limeletwa hapa na ndio maana 
linazidi kusisitizwa ili liwekwe ndio liwe ze kusaidia vijana wetu katika W odi. Kwa sababu 
michezo ni kipaji tofauti ambacho hata sisi tutakapokuwa tuko hapa sisi pia tutaenda 
kuangalia wale ambao ni v ijana wana cheza na kuweza kuchagua huyu tunaona ni bora kuliko 
huyu kwa sababu hata sisi wakati tulienda michezo yetu ya Mabunge, hapa kuna watu 
walituzwa kwa sababu wana vipaji bora kama Mheshimiwa Mary Onsong o. Sisi tunajua huyu 
ametuzwa tuzo kubwa sana halafu watu hapa wanamkejeli kumkejeli hapa kumuona kama ni 
mtu anazungu mza hajielewi. Nataka Nyumba hii tukae tukiheshimu kuwa huyu Mama 
ametuwekea sifa kubwa sana katika hii Nyumba na Katika Bunge la Mombasa. ...  
(Applause)  
Tulichaguliwa katika michezo k ila tukienda kila mwaka anatuletea hapa sifa katika 
Kaunti ya Mombasa , wacheni kuzungumza kama ambae hamuelewi hapa tunazungumza nini. 
Kwa hivyo tukiuunga hapo tunaunga tukisema hawa vijana waendelezwe na ndio kesho 
watakuja kuingia hili Jumba nao watet ee wenzao wengine ambao watakuwa wak o nyuma 
yao. Sisi tunaunga huu M swada na tukiunga mkono kama kina mama si kuambiwa ati 
tumepita umri ndio maana hatuwezi kuunga mkono; m likuwa munataka nani hapa auunge 
mkono kama sisi hatuwezi ku unga? Ama mlikuwa munataka tuubwage ndio m jue hatuungi?  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Member address the Speaker.  
Hon. Mumba:  Mimi  nataarifu Mwenyekiti wala sija taarifu mtu. Nafikiri 
Mheshimiwa Amur ananiingilia hapa kama ambae anataka kunirukia juu kwa juu na hali 
nazungumza na wewe Mheshimiwa Spika. Na kwa sababu yuko mbele yangu anaona kama 
ambaye namutaarifu yeye. Mimi nakuheshimu wewe nakueleza wewe Mheshimiwa Spika na 
nasema tuiu nge mkono kwa sababu tunajua umuhimu wa hili jambo n a ikiwa wao wan asema 
kuwa sisi hatufai hapa, tukisema sasa hivi twat oka nje hili jambo halitapita n i lazima 
tusaidiane ndio hili jambo lipite Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Interruption)  
Mheshimiwa Spika nilinde ! Mheshimiwa Spika maana naona h apa kuna cheche 
ambazo hazifai,  unaona sasa sisi tukiwa tuko katika meza ya kuzungumza, sisi tunapatiana 
heshima…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order!  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 (Hon. Murfad Amur off microphone)  
Hon. Mumba:  Sijatishia mtu Mheshimiwa Spika pengine ….  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Sp eaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Murfad it is ok. Hon. Prischilla 
wind up…  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Mumba:  Sijatishia mtu nimesema umuhimu wa sisi kuunga mkono hili jambo 
na ninataka tueleweke kuwa tuna  mchango w a kuweka hapa ndio hili jambo liweze kupita. 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Prischilla. Yes Hon. 
Ibrahim as we wind up?  
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. This one is a very important Motion but it  is 
turning out to be a contest between th e men caucus and women caucus in this House and I am 
very sorry to say that. Mr. Speaker Sir first of all as I stand to support this Motion,  we all 
know that the  youth constitutes a very large population in our Country and even in our 
County. Mr. Speaker when we are talking about youth empowerment or talent search from 
the youth I think this is an issue that we need to give it a lot of time and concern. J ust to give 
an example, having been a victim of the same system which ignored the youth at the time 
when I was a youth this Country los t a very talented footballer who is me and by that time if 
given a chance to express my talent, what I mean is that I could be one of the best footballer s 
in this Country . But unfortunately  Mr. Speaker, they just missed it and that is why I do not 
want the same to repeat now that God has given me an opportunity to be a legislator  in this 
Honourable  House I do not want to see the same happening again to the youth who are 
coming up and that is why I strongly support this parti cular Motion.  
 Mr. Speaker you realize the youth s have got a lot of potential which need to be tap ped 
from them, it is only that we are not actually introducing th ese various activities so we are 
unable to single ou t these  talents from them and I am very sure if this particular Motion goes 
through and then implemented we are going to see very many talented men  and women 
coming out from our W ards and even from our County.  
 Mr. Speaker you realize when you are talking  about the talent search in the  youth we  
are not only killing one bird with one stone, we are also killing more than two or three birds 
with one stone ! Just to elaborate Mr. Speaker Sir you will real ize that when people are 
involved ; you know an idle mind is the devils w orkshop as it says,  you find that if these 
youth s are involved in activities, these healthy activities you will find that most of them will 
not get involved in this unhealthy and unethical activities like crimes, drug abuse, joining the 
Al Shabab  and so and so forth.  
 Mr. Speaker as I finish, being the Chairman of Education in this wonderful County I 
want to say that the current curriculum which is CBC it is going to be concurrent because the 
present curriculum emp hasizes  on practical activities a nd therefore if we involve our yout hs 
in these  activities and talent search even our young ones will be able to imitate the same and 
by that e ven the CBC will be doing well . Therefore, I support this particular Motion , thank 
you very much Mr. Speaker.  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalim u): Yes Hon. Lei la? 
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Nashukuru pia saa hizi umeniona 
Mheshimiwa Spika , nimesimama kama nafanya zoezi lakini nakushukuru umeniona. 
Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii y a vijana tuwainu e kupitia vipaj i 
vyao; kama unavyojua vijana wako na shida ya kazi na wanakaa mas kani wengi sana . Mimi 
natoka eneo l a vijana wengi sana wa kukaa maskani; Mheshimiwa Spika ukienda pale 
maskani unakuta kijana anajua kucheza mpira wa miguu v izuri sana, pale pale unapata 
muogeleaji mpaka anavuka bahari, unapata wasichana wanacheza mpira wa kikapu vizuri 
sana.  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika swala hili ni zuri sana na tujaribu tuunge mkono hii 
inter wards talent competition  kwa sababu tukianzisha kusema la kweli itachangamsha vij ana 
ile kukaa bure pia wataona si kazi, kazi ni kujich angamsha na hivyo vipaji vyao , na pia 
Mheshimiwa Spika zitaweza kuwafikisha mbali ; tukianza na mfumo huu wa ukuzaji vipaji 
ndani wa Wodi. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nauunga mkono na naomba wenzangu  
katika Jumba hili waweze kuunga mkono vijana wetu waweze kufika mbali na vipaji vyao. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama 
nikiupinga vikali k abisa na sababu za kupinga ziko wazi kabisa dha hiri shahir. Sababu ya 
kwanza, M swada huu au lengo lina dhamira nzuri wakati li mekuja si wakati ambao si mzuri, 
sisi kama Kaunti  tunakuwa na makadirio ya pesa ya kila matumizi ya mwaka, fikra na 
dhamira ni nje ma lakini ilipitwa na wakati. Kwa sababu haijat engewa kitita cha pesa na tuna 
Wodi 30: ikiwa mchezo mmoja kwa W odi moja hau tochuku a chini ya laki moja ina maanisha 
tuwe na milioni tatu za kusimamia mchezo mmoja tu , hio ikiwa ni kandanda peke yak e. Tuna 
michezo mingapi katika n yanja za michezo?   
 Kwa hivyo dhamira ni nzuri lakini wakati sio , kwa sab abu mpaka tutengeze bajeti 
tujue ni pesa ngapi zitahitajika ili tusia nze kuanza michezo ikifika kati kati ya mwaka Wodi 
zingine zimefanyiwa na W odi zingine hazija fanyiwa itakuw a tumedhulumu watu wa eneo 
lingine.  
 Hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika lengo na dhamira ni nzuri lakini wakati imekuja 
wakati sio, wakati pesa hazijatengwa kwa mradi huu kwa sababu ni mradi ambao unahitaji 
pesa. Sio kwamba napinga vijana wasifanyi we, lakini uwekaji wa pesa katika bajeti yetu ya 
mwaka huu haikuwekwa Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Robert Nyiro . 
Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker  indeed it is a shame for a very senior Member of this House 
to insinu ate that we should not be passing Motions that are of substance to our people 
because there is no money. I wonder t he time that he goes to Treasury  of this County so that 
he can have good information  that we should not pass this Motion because there is no money. 
 Mr. Speaker our job is to tell the Executive what is good for our people, so that they 
can go find money and implement what we pass in this House. ..   
(Applause ) 
And again we are informed that this thing was not bud geted for but again fortunately  
we are in the last quarter of this financial y ear 2019/ 2020.  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 In June  we will be getting into a new financial y ear. If we have a Mot ion like this 
ready Mr. Speaker  it will be good and easy for the d epartment  and treasury to allocate funds 
for the Department because they have issues to implement.  
So Mr. Speaker indeed I want him to revoke and swallow back the information that 
this Motion is not timely because indeed it is very timely because we are going for another 
sequence of b udget. So the Motion is timely and the senior most Member of House must be 
informed that the youthful Members of this House who are new are very much enlightened, 
informed, educated and ready to learn, be informed senior.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amur I think  you are 
through, please use you mic rophone . 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  This Honourable  Assembly has done so many Motions and 
passed  but the implementation stage  is the weakest point Mr. Speaker because even if we do 
it today it will not be implemented ! I can guara ntee Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Are you reacting on what Hon. Amur 
said or you want ..., ok let Hon. Hamida and then Hon. Bwire. The two of you then Hon. 
Feddis you will…  
Hon. Noor:  Mr. Speaker I need your protection from Hon. Amur . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok proceed.  Hon. Amur you are out 
of order?  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Noor:  And I want to inform him that I am part and parcel of the Mombasa 
County and I have been studying him since I have been seated here and I want to inform him 
that I am a Membe r of Youth, Gender and Sports . This is an interesting Motion for us that we 
want to implement  it for the next financial y ear, Mr. Amur I am informing you, we are taking 
this thing head on and we have to implem ent it . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : You are informing the House . 
 Hon. Noor:  I am informing the House including Hon. Amur and we  want to take this 
one head on so that we can implement it. I t is the M otion that is going to pass this afternoo n 
and am happy that this is coming up this afternoon and we are all vibrant about it, thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I can see you  have 
exhausted not unless ... Hon. Feddis yes?  Hon. Feddis?  
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsa nte sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. Kwanza 
naomba kumpa ujumbe senior kwamba hili jambo tunalipitisha,  ni la  vizazi vinavyoku ja sio 
letu sisi, na kuchangia M swada  ni kwamba naunga mkono. Kwanza ... 
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhi li Mwalimu) : Hon. Ibrahim , the Hon. Member ... 
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 (Interruption)  
 Hon. Mbura:  Naomba unilinde tafadhali . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The Hon. Member has just started . 
 Hon. Mbura:  Naomba unilinde Mhe shimiwa  Spika, sitaki kuambiwa lolote! N aomba  
unilinde . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Ibrahim . Yes, 
Hon. Feddis?  
 Hon. Mbura: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kunilinda . Jambo la kwanza ni  
kusema  naunga mkono M swada huu. Kwanza ni k wamba vijana wetu watapata kazi. .. 
(Interruption ) 
 Sitaki taarifa yo yote Mheshimiwa  Spika!  Sitaki taarifa yoyote Mheshimiwa  Spika!  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Imekuwa desturi ya baadhi ya Wahesh imiwa kuitaja hoja 
hii kama ni M swada Mhe shimiwa  Spika , ni kwa minajili ya kumbukumbu ifahamike ya 
kwamba hii ni hoja na wala si M swada kwa heshima ya Kiswahili . Ahsante Mheshimiwa  
Spika.  
 Hon. Mbura: Ahsante sana kwa kunirekebisha . 
(Laughter ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, proceed Hon. Feddis ? 
 Hon. Mbura: Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika ; ni kwamba napenda kuunga mkono na 
kusema kwamba  kwanza kabisa vijana watapata kazi na talanta za vijana zitajulikana na 
zitaonekana. Pili tuta weza kutoa magenge ama maskani za vijana, kwa sababu vijana 
wakikosa kazi za kufanya, ndiposa unapata vijana wanafanya  uhalifu mashinani.  Kwa hivyo 
mimi nau nga mkono na nashukuru wenzangu; y ule ameweza kuunga mkono, ombi langu ni 
kwa wale watekelezaji, wakati tunapopitisha Mswada kama huu ama hoja kama hii, lazima 
waifuatilizie na iweze kutekelezwa . Ahsante sana Mheshimi wa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon ourable  because the 
microphone  is with you Hon. Hatimy , then Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi 
niko na  mawazo mengine na tukiangalia kwenye tar ehe ya hapa ndani ya N yumba hii  tutaona 
kuwa mara nyingi sana tunaweza kuzungumza juu ya vijana , namna gani tunaweza 
kuwasaidia na pia hoja kama hii si mara ya kwanza kuja.  
 Nafikiri kidogo sisi tumepitiwa, kwa sababu Mheshimiwa  Spika  tukitengeza hoja, 
inaweza kukubaliwa ama kukataliwa lakini nau liza N yumba hii kwa nini sisi hatutengenezi 
sheria y a kuwa kwa kila mwaka kuwe kutakuwa na vitu kama hivi?  Sheria ya kusema kuwa 
tutapig ania kama kupigania viwanja, she ria ya kusema kuwa watoto wetu wa shule 
wasaid iwa n a vitu ambavyo vitakuwa ni bure , vitu ambavyo ni kama football , netball  ama 
kitu chochote kwa sababu tukitengeneza she ria itakuwa iko pale . Itakuwa iko pale itakuwa 
hakuna mtu anayeweza kusema hii haiwezakani, vi le haiwezekani, lakini ikiwa she ria iko  
itakuwa yawezekana kufanyika kila kitu.  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  Kwa hi vyo ilikuwa naomba hii hoja Mheshimiwa  Spika umeleta, iwe ndio foundation  
ya kutengeza she ria ya kuleta sheria ndani ya Nyumba hii, kama Madam  pale amesimama na 
kusema yeye ni M wanachama wa K amati ya michezo , ni kuchukua na kuzungumza na 
wanachama wenu na k usema kuwa ni lazima tulete she ria ya kuweza kusaidia watoto w etu 
iwe itadumu . Hii ni  kwa sababu Mheshimiwa  Spika kin achohifadhiwa hupotea lakini  
kinachoandikwa hudumu milele ; tukiwa na she ria ya kusema kil a mwaka tutakuwa na Sports 
day, ambayo ile itakuwa imewekwa kwenye calendar  watu wanacheza, kwa s ababu kuna 
mambo mengi sana Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Tukiangalia watoto wetu wa zuri wachezaji mpira kwa sababu  football tumekuwa 
kwenye football  miaka mingi Mheshimiw a, watoto tuwapatie ufadhili  wale wanaocheza 
vizuri, wapewe ufadhili  kwa sababu mpira huwezi kuucheza ukiwa na njaa, lakini tuweka 
sheria kusema shule moja iwe itachuku a wachezaji bora  ndani ya Mombasa, wawe watakuwa 
wapatiwa ufadhili  na wanawekwa pahali p amoja na she ria tuki tengeneza itakuwa hapo sisi 
tume  score . Kwa hivyo yangu mimi naomba kuwa hii iwe ni nguzo ya kutengeneza she ria hii 
ili na sisi watoto wetu wapa te kufaidika kwenye Kaunti yetu . Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu) : Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsant e Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika ni 
dhahiri sha hiri ya kwamba kinaga watu hupata ; kwa mantiki hio s io mara ya kwanza kwa 
hoja sawia na hii katika J umba hili, kuashiria ya kwamba ni mapenzi n a hamu na bidii ya 
Waheshimiw a ya awamu ya pili ya serikali G atuzi ya Mombasa kutaka kuona vijana na wa 
Mwa mbao wakitaka  kuona wakinufaika kwa hayo Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Mheshimiwa  Spika naungana na wengi kushabiki hoja hii, ila wasiwasi wangu mbali 
na uteke lezaji, tuombe Mungu ajalie fedha zipatikane na swala hili litekele zwe. Mheshimiwa  
Spika wasi wasi wangu hivi karibuni im ekuwa ni utamaduni wa serikali G atuzi katika 
kutekeleza maswala ya k imaendeleo kwa jamii ya Mombasa ; kuna baadhi ya K ata kama 
hesabu yang u iko sahihi , Kata tano ama Wo di ta no zimekuwa zikihuj umiwa na kuwekwa 
kando katika utekelezaji wa maswala hayo.    
Mheshimiwa  Spika K ata hizi zinalipa kodi, zilipiga kura na kila sababu, w asi wasi 
wangu ilikuwa naomba uhakikishe kutoka kwako katika K iti hi cho ya kwamba baada ya hoja 
hii kupita na nina imani ishapita, na fedha zitapatikana za utekelezaji, japo baadhi ya 
makas hablasha tumeweza kushuhudia baj eti sawia ya maswala kama haya yakitend eka 
mashinani na hatujui.   
Ombi  langu ni hakikisho kutoka kwa Ki ti hicho ndani ya J umba hili,  kwa ajili ya 
kumbukumbu ya kwamba usawa na  haki itatekelezeka katika kutekeleza swala zitakazopita 
katika hoja hii ya kwamba, kata zote 30 hakuna K ata itakayo hujumiwa  au kuachwa nyuma 
katika kunufaika kwa hilo. Zenginezo Mh eshimiwa Spika na hii si vitisho ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes there is, are you up on a point of 
order or? Use your mic rophone  Hon. Ibrahim , use that one.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker S ir, the Hon. Member i ndeed talked of  something with a 
lot of concern ; I wanted to know about it  and I don’t understand because he said, if am not 
wrong, ‘W hen the implementation is taking place of such like activities Mr. Speaker Sir, to 
find that some five Wards are left out. Mr. Speaker, s o I don’t understand why he was saying 
that there are some five W ards being left ; I don’t understand that, so I just wanted to tell him 
to try and clarify so that I can understand . Thank you, only that.   
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Ib rahim in as much as the 
debate is concern ed, you are out of order and Hon. Mwamwiri come back to the M otion and 
stop debating or d iverting issues other than the M otion.  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Mheshimiwa  Spika maongezi yangu na kuchangia 
kwangu kuko wazi;  yangu ilikuwa ni ombi ya kwamba itakap ofika awamu ya utekelezaji, 
kuwe na usawa na haki katika Kata zote 30 ili vijana wote wa Mombasa waweze kunufaika 
kijumla na wala sijatoka nje ya hoja hii . Kwa kutaja ; kwa sababu usha hidi upo , kumbukumbu 
zipo na hata Mh eshimiwa  aliyesimama pia labda alikuwa na  kinaya, lakini hata yeye usha hidi 
anao. Kwa zoezi lake la juzi, ambalo alilotekeleza pia ana  taarifa ya kwamba kunazo Kata 
tano, yeye akiwa M wenyekiti alishuhudia zikiwekwa katika fun gu la tano. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiw a Spika langu ni ombi na uhakikisho kupitia kwa K iti chako ya kwamba ili 
tutakalo  jaliwa kulipitisha usa wa utatekelezeka na utapatikana. A hsante Mhe. Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Now I call the mover of the M otion 
to respond.  
 Hon. A ran: Thank you Mr. Speaker. M ine is just to congratulate the Hon. Members 
and appreciate them fo r consciously debating on this Motion and I hope the C ommittee on 
Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural affairs in which am also a Member we will work hand in 
hand  with also implementation ; my good friend here being the Vice -Chair. I know he will be 
active in making sure that whatever we  have discussed or the M otion we  have passed be 
implemented . Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you Hon. Member s. 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Members . I now 
stand to put a question that the M otion on Establishment of Inter -Wards Talent Competitions 
moved by Hon. Aran Moses be approved in this Hon ourable  House . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes, C lerk?  
STATE MENT  
DEMOLITIONS AT CHANGAMWE NEW FLATS  
 
 Yes Hon. Robert Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker allow me to read a S tatement on 
behalf of Hon. Bernard Ogutu from Changamwe.  
Mr. Speaker S ir, I seek to request from the Chairperson , Committee  on Lands, 
Planning and Housing, if he  is aware of ongoing demolitions at Changamwe new flats 
area.  
Mr. Speaker S ir in his Statements the Chairperson should inquire and report on;  
a. The legality of the demolitions  
b. Whether notice of demolition was served to the residents  
c. Measures the County g overnment has put in place, as far as safety of the  
  residents is concern ed. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chair , Lands? Or Vice -
Chair? Hon. Leila are  you the Vice -Chair or a Member from Lands?  
 Hon. Nyache:  I am a Member , Hon. Speaker . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes proceed.  
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika tena kwa kunipa fursa hii ya kuweza 
kujibu swala l a ubomoaji wa Changamwe New F lats. Mhe shimiwa  Spika ningeomba utupatie 
muda wa wiki mbili kwa sababu maswala ya ardhi n a kubomolewa ni maswala nyeti n a kama 
hivi vigezo nilivyosoma vya a, b na c, mpaka tuchunguze ndio tuweze kuja na hivi vigezo . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro: Mr. Speaker am getting concerned because  the issue is urgent, remember 
we are almost getting to the rainy season and if we have residents whose houses have been 
demolished  there is a danger that some vulnerable w omen and children are going to spend 
their days and nights in the cold. So Mr. Speaker I am not sure whether it’s wise enough for 
the Member to ask for two week s just to go and request those people who are to bring them 
demolition to the House to serve the  members with demolition orders and whether the 
process is legal .  
 Mr. Speaker S ir it’s a matter of the C ommittee moving on the ground, seeking for 
demolition notices so that they can be sure that whatever is happening there is legal. So two 
weeks Mr. Spe aker is too long and the situation is very wanting, so kindly let the Members be 
kind to the people of Changamwe . Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. C ommittee 
on lands, due to the urgency of the S tatement as the C hair I request that you respond back in a 
weeks’ time . 
 Hon. Nyache:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?   
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON HEALTH SER VICES HON . KIBWANA 
SWALEH ON TRANSFERS OF HEAL TH WORKERS  AT SUB COUNTY LEVEL  
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya?  
 Hon. Swaleh Kibwana: Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker I wish to give a 
Statement response in regards the statement raised by Hon. Shebe Athman MCA Jomvu Kuu 
Ward, on Transfers of Health Off icers at Sub -County Level on Wednesday 4th December , 
2019 during 118th  Sitting.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir, the department of Public Health is committed towards ensuring that 
excellent service delivery to the residents of Mombasa. Mr. Speaker Medical Officer of 
Health works  directly with the community and we need to appreciate the sensitiveness that 
come with time during the continuous engagement with them.  
 Hon. Speaker the Medical Health O fficers were deployed o n different dates; some as 
late as  December , 2019; t he department is in the process of doing a reshuffle. The list is yet to 
be discussed at the Human Resource Management Committee and be finalized on 31st March , 
2020 . Hon. Speaker thank you . 
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAI RPERSON COMMITTEE ON  EDUCATION HON . IBRAHIM OMONDI 
ON OPENING OF DIGIRIKANI ECDE  
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. Mr. Speaker I rise to give a response on 
the Digirikani ECDE report. Mr. Speaker in resp onse, the request is referring to 
CAN/CAC/CO/CO/VOLUME 11/42 dated on 27th February , 2020 regarding Digirikani 
ECDE.  The ECDE Mr. Speaker is not ready for opening because the contractor has not 
completed the final works due to a pending debt.  
 The Deputy S peaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  What is it H on. Aran ? Hon. Ibrahim 
there is a Member who is up . 
 Hon.  Aran : Hon. Speaker, we don’t know where  he is reading from (??)? We don’t 
have the forms, so kindly Hon. Speaker we need to be inf ormed about  the copy of  the report 
that he  is reading  from.    
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you.  Hon. Ibrahim you can 
proceed with the response.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. The ECDE is not ready for opening, 
because the contractor has not complet ed the final works due to a pending payment and so we 
are unable to give a confirmed date of the opening .  
 The department is working with all parties, to receive or to resolve the issue; t he 
department , Mwakirunge MCA, the local c ommunity and  the contract or met on 24th 
February , 2020 to discuss the issue and resolve to finish the process as soon as possible.  
The department has approved this pending payment and is following up with the 
department of finance to make the payment as soon as possible.  Mr. Speak er the contractor 
has promised to complete the project as soon as he receives the pending payment.  Thank you 
Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Feddis?  
 Hon. Mbura: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na ningependa kuju a hio soon  ni lini? 
Time  frame  ni lini kwa sababu iko na miaka mitano na sa a hii mvua iko karibu kunyesha, 
watoto watapata shida na hio soon  ya contractor  ama ya department  ni lini? Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Proceed.  
 Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think that question is thrown to 
me Mr. Speaker Sir; I have just read and said and I repeat that , “The contractor has promised 
to complete the project as soon as he receives the pending payment” ! That means the dat e...? 
We are not able to give the exact date  because it  is also going to depend on the finance 
department on when they will release these funds Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So Hon. Feddis for your 
supplementary question, you  will make a point of requesting on another statement.  
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18  This will be as to when they are going to finish the project or open the ECDE ; so 
make another statement in this Hon ourable  House for the Hon. Chair to have a response on 
the other question.  
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa sababu imechukua m uda na kila 
wakati kila tukiuliza ni soon and soon  lakini hatujui ni nini, kwa hivyo nitaleta hio statement . 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes, C lerk? 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON HEALTH SER VICES HON . KIBWANA 
SWALEH ON OPERATIONA LIZATION /OFFICIAL OPENING OF MWAKIRUNGE HEALTH FA CILITY  
 Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker I stand here to say  
that we  have no t yet receive the reply on the S tatement that was raised o n 
“Operationalization/Official o pening of Mwakirunge Health facility. S o I urge this 
Honourable  House to give me one week more so that we can get the feedback from the 
department , thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay granted . Yes, C lerk?  
RESPONSE ON STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON HEA LTH SERVICES HON . KIBWANA 
SWALEH ON THE LEVEL OF PREPAREDNESS TO T ACKLE CORONA VIRUS O UTBREAK  
 Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 Hon. Swale h Kibwana:  Again thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker the statement 
was on ’Level of Preparedness to tackle Corona Virus o utbreak’ that was raised here by my 
colleague from Tudor. Hon. Speaker up to now  I have not yet received the reply and I know 
they are  still doing the report because this is a detailed report on this issue which is very 
sensitive , so again Hon. Speaker we wish you give me another week so that we can follow it 
up, thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Okay Hon . Chair; on the i ssue on 
preparedness to tackle C orona virus outbreak, act on it as the people in Mombasa and Kenya 
at large would like to know how the C ounty is prepared so hopefully we are giving you one 
week and in that coming week we will have the detailed report.  
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Most obliged . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes C lerk? 
STATEMENT  
 Yes Hon. Mwamwiri . 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. M tumwa hauwawi ; kwa 
niaba  ya M heshimiwa Kitula angeomba k ufahamu kwa M wenyekiti wa Ka mati ya fedha na 
mipango ya kiuchumi ya serikali G atuzi ya Mombasa kwa mujibu ya matumizi ya makadirio 
ya mwaka 2017 / 2018 na mwaka 2018/  2019 wa kifedha  kama ilivyo  onyeshwa kwa ripoti ya 
msimamizi wa makadirio  kutoka kwa hazina ya serikali G atuzi ya Momb asa. 
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19  Kutokana na ripoti hiyo M heshimiwa Spika msimamizi wa makadirio ameon yesha 
kwa miaka miw ili ya kifedha kwamba serikali G atuzi ya Mombasa ilitumia Ksh s. 
24,476,424,273 . Mheshimiwa Spika katika jedwali kutoka kwa msimamizi wa bajeti 
inaon yesha hapo chi ni mwaka wa kifedha matumizi na kiwango cha pesa . 
 Mheshimiwa S pika mwaka wa kifedha wa 2017/2018  matumizi ya fidia ya wafanyi  
kazi zilitumika Kshs. 4.5 Bilioni;  chini yake kuna matumizi ya bidhaa na huduma  Kshs. 
2Bilioni , kuna malipo mengine Kshs.1.5 Bilioni na maendeleo  Kshs.3.9 Bilioni.  
 Mwaka wa kifedha wa 2018/ 2019 katika matumizi tunaona  wafanyi  kazi ikisi mama 
katika  Ksh.5.1 B ilioni, chini yake kuna shu ghuli ya marekebisho na matengenezo kwa bajeti 
ya  Kshs.5 Bilioni. K una maendeleo chini yake Kshs.3.1 Bilioni . Kwa  jumla  
Kshs.24,476,424,273 B ilioni;  Mheshimiwa S pika uniruhusu nipeane pass kwa M heshimiwa 
wa Junda asome maswala yaliosali a. 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwamwiri I think it  is not the 
practise of this Honourable  House.  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Sawa Mheshimiwa Spika. W ale wana sheria wanasema 
tungetaka ku set precedence  lakini nitahesh imu kauli yako Mheshimiwa Spika ili M wenyekiti 
aweze kufahamu zaidi maswala haya nitamsomea kwa lugha ya kingenge . 
 I request the C ounty treasury to give detailed report on the following;  
1. Names of development projects that were implemented in t he finan cial year by the 
department of Finance and E conomic planning  amounting to Kshs.1.3 billion.  
2. Names of developmental projects that were impl emented in  the department of 
Transport , Infrastructure and P ublic works amounting to  Kshs. 3 billion . 
3. Name or names of development projects a nd services to other remaining C ounty 
departments that were impleme nted during these financial years.  
4. The expenditu re incurred on each development project and services .  
5. Location of each project .  
6. Bills and quantities of certificate payments of each project . 
7. The date and amount of each payment made . 
8. The person to whom the payment was made .  
9. The purpose to which the pay ment was made . 
10. Whether the person to whom the payment was made has spent the money for that 
purpose and the statement made to that effect.  
11. If the person to whom the payment was made has not yet spent the money for that 
purpose a statement specifying the r eason for not doing so.  
 
Yours faithfully , Hon. Kitula . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes C hair Finance and B udget , any 
response?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N aona hapa maswala 
yamekuja maswala kumi lakini mimi nataka ku jibu kwa mistari miwili ya Kanuni za Bunge;  
kwanza n itaenda kwa nambari  81(3).  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Proceed ? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nambari  2 nataka kutumia Kanuni nambari  82. 
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 20  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : First read 81  (3). 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: 81(3) ‘In determining whether a debate is out of order on 
the grounds of anticipation , regards shall be heard to the probability on the matter 
antici pated being brought before the County Assembly within a reasonable time'.  Standing 
order number 82, ‘No Member shall refer to the su bstance of the proceeding of a select 
Committee before the Committ ee has made its report to this County Assembly ’. So all these 
matters are under a Select Committee ; I want to ask the Member for Frère Town to wait until 
he gets the report then he can come and r aise those questions . Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So Hon . Chair when will you bring a 
report to the House?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Well am not a Chair of that Committee , that if anybody 
wants to come up with a  question we will reply to that.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Bwire ? 
 Hon. Bwire: Hon. Speaker I just wish to ask Hon . Hatimy has just r ead out Standing 
order n umber 81( 3 )that in determination of whether debate is out of order on the grounds of 
participation my first question is who ruled that the debate was out of order? Then two , he 
said tha t no Member shall refer to the substance in the proceedings of a Select  Committee 
before the Committ ee has made its report to this County Assembly .  
 The questions raised by the Hon . Member is from the financial year 2017/2018, 
2018/2019 and we are on 2020/2021 ; Hon. Speaker just to be enlightened when was the 
Committee planni ng to bring those reports because we are discussing budgets that have 
already been exhausted and they have never brought a  report to this House till the Member 
came up with questions  and that  is when the Member o r Chairman concerned is telling us that 
the report is  before the Committee ! For how long will they take Hon. Speaker to bring this 
report to this C ounty Assembly ? 
 So through your Chair Hon. Spea ker I would wish to compel the Committee to bring 
questions raised by the Hon. Members . We are the representatives ; all of us are 
representatives of the people and we want to know the budgets that we have passed here , how 
it was utilised Hon . Speaker , more so the development expenditure . We should not take more 
time for the Committee s that are reluctant ; we wil l never give  a room for those Committees 
and through your Chair Hon . Speaker I ask you to compel the Committee or the Chairperson 
concerned to bring these responses to this House.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Hatimy . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika nitaregele a na sitosimama kuregelea 
kuwa Nyumba hii haifuati sheria ; Nyumba hii kuna sheria ya statement  na Mheshimiwa 
aliotoka kuzungumza han a nguvu  ya kuu liza jambo lolote baada  ya Mheshimiwa amesoma . 
Kwa hio  nasema kama una jambo lolote hatuz ungumzi i habari ya Kamati kuleta ripoti , 
twazungumza habari ya finance imeulizwa maswali na mimi nimesema jambo hili liko chini 
ya PAC mimi sio mzungumzaji wa Kamati  wa PAC ! Kwa hivyo ni PAC ndio ina uwezo  wa 
kujibu jambo hili, ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Sp eaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Mwamwiri . 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Naona kuna watu hapa 
wanadanganywa na kiza na mwisho wataenda haja mahali peupe ! 
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 21  Mheshimiwa Spika swali lililoko mbele yetu limeelekezwa moja kw a moja kwa 
Kamati ya Fedha na Mheshimiwa hajajenga hoja ama kuweka dhana ya matumizi mabaya ya 
fedha katika kitengo chochote isipokuwa tu kwa sababu mwisho utekelezaji wa kila idara 
ripoti zote hurudi katika idara ya fedha . Akataka tu kuelezwa ama kufahamis hwa yaliojiri 
kutokana na bajeti hii ya bilioni 24 kwa mujibu ya ripoti ya ms imamizi wa bajeti na sio ripoti 
ya ukaguzi wa bajeti ama Auditor General  Mheshimiwa Spika. 
 Kwa hivyo hili swala sioni kuelekezwa katika Kamati ya uhasibu wakati 
Mheshimiwa ombi lake alitaka kufaham u utekelezaji ulipo kutoka kwa Kamati ya fedha kwa 
sababu mwisho wa siku hiyo ndio idara mama kwa maswala yote kwa utekelezaji wa 
mipango  yote na maendeleo wa serikali Gatuzi na wala hana hoja ya kutaka kujua ama kutia 
dosari  ama kuhoji utumizi kutoka kwa Kamati ya uhasibu . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika 
naomba swala hilo libakie  kwa Kamati ya Fedha  na lisithu butu kwenda kwa Kamati ya 
Uhasibu . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Mwamwiri . Yes 
Hon. Hatimy as the Hon . Member  directed his stat ement to the Committee of Finance and 
Budget ; as a practise it is better the Committee to respond on this issue . If he will respond as 
per the Standing order you have raised then the Committee co ncerned will take charge on 
where you will have left the response.  
 Hon. Mohamed ` Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kuna sheria ndani ya hii 
Nyumba na kusema kuwa mimi kujibu jambo hili itakuwa nimekiuka sheria ambayo sasa hivi 
tumeisoma . Juzi Seneti  walikuwa wako h apa na haya ali yozungumza ndio walikuwa 
wakizun gumza wakasema watawaita Kaunti tena kwenda kuzungumza . Kwa hivyo itakuwa 
mimi ni mefanya makosa kuweza kujibu swala hili itakuwa nimevun ja sheria ya Kanuni za 
Bunge nambari  82. 
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika sijui watak a nijibu kwa vipi niseme kuwa mimi sasa 
nivunje ile sheria , nijibu jambo hili alafu itakuja kunishika mi mi kuwa mimi nimeenda 
kinyume cha  sheria . Hivyo basi  mwe nyewe alieleta hili swala asubi ri ripoti ije ataweza 
kuuliza undani wake zaidi  Mheshimiwa Spika, kwa hivy o mimi siwezi kujibu hilo swali . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Mwamwiri ? 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshim iwa Spika sioni kwa  nini Mheshimiwa 
anachelea kuchuku a dhamana ya kujibu ; kwa sababu tukiangalia mfano kwa nambari ya 
kwanza katika yale yalioulizwa Mheshimiwa ametaka kujua tu orodha ya mirad i ya 
maendeleo iliyotekelezwa . Hajahoji kwa  nini mradi huo haukufanyika ama kwa  nini mradi 
huo umetumia kima cha pesa zaidi ya zile ziliokadir iwa.  
 Hapa hakuna dhana wala hoja ya matumizi mabaya ya fedha katika miaka miwili ya 
kifedha iliyoashiriwa hapa Mheshimiwa Spika; ingekuwa ni hoja ya matumizi mabaya ama 
ya mradi ghushi ama mradi ambao haujakamilika na pesa zake zililipwa swala hilo 
Mheshi miwa Spika in gekuwa sahihi kwenda kwa Kamati ya Uhasibu lakini kuambiwa tu 
kwamb a miaka miwili hii ya serikali Gatuzi tumeweza kujenga viwanja saba vya mpira , 
tumeweza kujenga shule mbili  za chekechea , tumeweza tengeneza barabara 12 Mheshimiwa 
Spika sioni kwamba swala  hili linahitajika Kamati ya Uhasibu kulijibu tofauti na vile 
ilivyoele kezwa hapa ya kwamba iende kwa Kamati ya maswala ya Makadiri o ya  bajeti .  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa maswala ya Makadiri o ya Bajeti utakuwa 
haujavunja  sheria kujibu haya kwa  sababu ni kuulizwa tu mradi gani umefanyika wapi , kwa 
fedha gani , mwanakandarasi ni yupi na wala si kwa  nini amefanya huyu na kwa  nini hiki 
hakikufanyika na alilipwa . 
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 22 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika maswali haya hayajajenga nadharia ama hoja ya  
kutilia shaka ya matu mizi mab aya ya fedha ili ielekezwe kwa Kamati ya Uhasibu kwa 
kuchunguzwa zaidi isipokuwa tu yeye alete orodha kama iliv yoletwa hapa alafu mengine 
yataf uata hapo . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Murfad ? 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker the Hon. Member for Frère Town is a person who 
brought this Statement ; in this Statement it is clearly saying from the report of Controller of  
Budget in two financial years , the  County treasury spent  a total of this ... the Controller o f 
Budget is the one who showed us that those mon ies were utilized in those forms  as the 
breakdown is given here . The Hon.  Member  quoted from the report of the Controller of 
Budget  Mr. Speaker , so if there w as any issue to be queried then Controller of Budget should  
have raised that query . If the County did not utilize  the money in pro per way s Mr. Speaker ... 
unless the Hon. Member wants to question the Controller of Budget why he did not question 
on the projects ; we are responsible that t he County treasury reports t o the Controller of 
Budget Mr. Speaker unles s he is not satisfied with the Controller of Budget breakdown he 
should raise  it at the top stage . Mr. Speaker , thank you. 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Membe rs I think we a re now 
debating this statement.  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon Bwire:  Hon. Speaker ! A concern Hon. Speaker ! Just to give us a fair play we all 
came out with our views ; Hon. Amur , with due respect Hon. Speaker with  your permission 
Hon.  Amur is a senior Member of this House he knows which office gives queri es and it is 
not the office of Control ler of Budget . The  query comes from the Office of the Auditor 
General and we are not discussing queries  Hon. Speake r; the Controller of Budget do es write 
a report on the grounds as per report that he or she has received.  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Aran what is it?  
 Hon. Aran : Hon. Speaker I think we do not have a quorum.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Aran the issue at hand does not 
need voting so we are winding up . Yes Hon. Raphael in one minute.  
 Hon. Bwire : Mheshimi wa Spika vile niliv yokuwa nikiel eza nilikuwa naeleza ya 
kwamba Controller of Budget  huleta r ipoti kuling ana na ile r ipoti ambayo ameandikiwa 
kutoka hapa katika  Kaunti  ya matumizi ya kifedha . Kwa hio  yeye huleta r ipoti kulingana na 
vile alipokea  na yeye huwa haandiki maswala Mheshimiwa Spika, sisi tunajua ya kwamba 
idara ya pesa nd io hufuatilia pesa zi kienda kufanya ma endeleo na kwa hivyo wao wanafaa 
wajue kwamba pe sa hizi tumezitoa zimeenda kwa kujenga barabara ya Junda na wakilipa 
Mwanakandarasi  pesa yote wanafaa kujua kwamba barabara yote imetengenezwa na imeisha 
na ripoti zote zimetok a kwa idara  nyengine husika . Kwa hiv yo Mheshimiwa  Spika Kamati  ya 
Fedha ikiongozwa na Mheshimiwa...  
 Hon. Bwire:  Asiruke Mheshimiwa , hii ni lazima Kamati itujibu ... 
(Interruption ) 
March 11, 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 23  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Raphael . Hon. Nzai 
I think we have exhausted  this issue , this statement so I will not allow any more debates to 
continue . Hon. Members we understand that the reports to the C ontroller of Budget are being 
prepar ed by the CEC to the office of Controller of Budget and the Controller of Budget 
prepares what  has been submitted by the CEC Finance . So whatever that is in front of us was  
prepared by the office of CEC F inance, but Hon . Members as per the questions these are not 
audit queries but the queries from the Ho n. Members which I con cur some were  captured by 
the office of the Auditor General . 
 So the Committ ee on PAC will liaise with the Committee on Finance and when the 
reports are ready because I understand in two weeks time or three weeks time the reports 
from P AC will be tabled before this Hon ourable  House . So I will let the House wait for the 
reports from PAC and if the matters raised are not answered in those reports i will let the 
Hon. Member to give a supplementary statement on follow up on what he has raised . So Hon. 
Members the PAC reports will be in this House in two or three weeks time and it will capture 
the said years  that the Hon . Member has raised.  Yes Clerk . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. M embers there being no other business the House stands adjourned until 17th 
March , 2020 at 10 :00a.m. 
The House rose at 4:29p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 