February 9, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 9th February, 2017  
The House met at 2:45 pm. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Members let us sit down, Yes Clerk.  
PAPERS  
 Hon Mohamed Hati my. 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hati my: Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika I rise to 
move a Motion under S tanding order number 49 which states that a Motion may be moved 
without a notice, so I think Mr. Speaker, I don’t need... , I want to table the report so that w e 
can go ahead and pass the report , thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Thank you, c an you table the report Hon 
Hatimy. 
(Hon Mohamed Hatimy tabled the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2017/2018)   
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Jimmy Odari? Not in? Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
 Hon  Amir Thoya.  
 Hon Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa Spika   kwa ruhusa yako 
na ruhusa ya J umba hili tukufu ; napenda kutoa taarifa ifuatayo kutokana na hali halisi ya 
daraja lililoko katika maeneo ya Bamburi mka bala na duka la ju mla la Naivas.  
 Taarifa hii Mheshimiwa S pika inatokamana na swali ambalo liliulizwa na  Mwakilishi  
wa eneo lile Mheshimiwa Riziki Fundi Kitsao katika Bunge  hili.  
 Mheshimiwa S pika daraja la N aivas liko mkabala na duka la jumla la Naivas katika 
eneo la Ba mburi ; ukiwa katika barabara ya kuelekea Utange na daraja hili lilikuwa ni 
dhihiriko katika him aya ya serikali yetu ya Mombasa.  
 Mheshimiwa S pika kufuatia idara ya uchukuzi na miundo msingi iliweza kupatiana 
kandarasi kwa mwanakandarasi anajulikana kama Ze nith constructions Company Limited ili 
kuweza ku fanya ukarabati wa daraja lile.  
 Mheshimiwa S pika mwanakandarasi huyu hakuweza kumaliza ile kazi na akaweza 
kuiacha katikati bila ya kuweza kuikamilisha, kufuatilia hilo  serikali  hivi sasa iko mbioni 
kuhaki kisha  ya kwamba  inaweza kusimamisha kandarasi ambayo ilikuwa inafanywa na 
Zenith Constructions  na wakati huo huo kuweza kuitangaza tena upya ili  kuhakikisha ya 
kwamba tunapata mwanakandarasi mpya ambay e atamaliza kazi ya daraja lile.  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshim iwa S pika letu kama idara ni kuweza kuhakikishia wakaazi wa 
Mombasa haswa haswa wakaazi wa Bamburi kuhakikisha kwamba usalama wao ni muhimu  
na  serikali  inalizingatia hili na  kila jambo limeweza kufanywa  ili kuhakikisha ya  kwamba 
daraja  hilo  limewez a  kurekebishwa kwa wakati  ambao  unafaa . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Thank you Hon Amir Thoya.  Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
 Yes M ajority leader.  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ):  Thank you Mr. S peaker,  first  of  all  let  me  
thank  the  M embers for  being  very patient  in the  time  I  requested ,  so  today  I already 
have   the  reply from the statement.  
(Leader of Majority (Hon Mwidani read statement)  
February 9, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  Mr. S peaker sir,   
 Ref: M ombasa C ounty food situation repor t for the month of January 2017 ; our 
reference letter CGM/15/(39)  dated 31st January, 2017 on famine i n Mwakirunge.  Attached 
please find a report on the subject for your attention and action and I think Mr. Speaker I 
hope all the M embers have the report.  
 Mr. Speaker sir ,  
 INTRODUCTION  
 Farmers in Mombasa county do depend on a long rains from April to August each 
year for food and cash crop such as cereals and pulses , roots and tubers , few do grow 
horticultural crops for subsistence and a bit fo r sale an d commercials  purpose .  In 2016  Mr. 
Speaker the long a nd short rains received were in sufficient amounts and erratic which 
resulted to poor crop performance i.e  both long and short seasons. Average maize yields 
range from 0 -2 bags per acre . 
 Due to the d rought the li vestock also have been affected; t here are no pasture s and the 
animals are emaciated, f armers have to walk for an average of six kilometers  to search for 
water for their animals as the water pans have dried up.  
 During this reporting period f armers have to depend on other coping mechanism s in 
order to purchase maize which is the staple food.  
 Areas most affected include L ikoni – Dongo K undu, Mtongwe,  Viemani,  Timbwani 
and Mrongondoni/Kaya M tongwe.  
 Mr Speaker am very happy to say that I think   my colleague who wrote the statement 
he can see even in my area was affected , so I accept  it was something I am very serious . 
 When we go to  Kisauni  the affected  areas  are Mwakirunge,  Bamburi,  Colorado,  
Voroni, Kadzandani,  Maunguja,  Mwembe  Legeza an d Kashani. In Changamwe Mr. Speaker 
Jomvu Kuu, Miritini , Mikindani,  Chaani , Kipevu , Port Reitz. Mombasa  Island are Kaa 
Chonjo, M woroto , Mburu Kenge and T ononoka . 
 Mr. Speaker if I can move to the mitigation against f ood shortage the department of 
Agricultu re, livestock and fisheries has through its general extension services carried out 
campaigns on ; 
1. Desilting of water pans and water harvesting for crop production,  
2. Promoted growing of drought tolerant crops,  
3.Training farmers on soil water conversat ion,  
4.Promoted technologies like;  zai pits,  conservation agriculture,  drip irrigation for crops 
production,  
5.Promoted keeping of small stock s e.g poultry,  rabbits,  dairy goats which don’t need a lot of 
water  
6.Promoted deep sea fishing.  
 Mr. Speaker it is advisable  that t he C ounty  gover nment set aside some funds to 
purchase food stuffs for affected population as reflected in the table given above. Coping 
mechanism s include;  
1. Most member s seek for employment outside their farms ; either neighboring fa rms or in 
urban centres like EPZ companies , 
2. Number of meals get reduced from 3 to 1 per day,  
3. Changing of meals from the staple food maize to ones that use fruits like mangoes (local 
varieties) and wild fruits.   
 Thank you M r. Speaker, that is the re port  from the department of Agriculture, and 
thank  you as M embers and really  thanks again for giving me time so that you accepte d the 
delay which was brought, t hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon of  Mwakirunge.  
February 9, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3  Hon. Mwin ga: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker first I think I should 
congratula te the Leader of M ajority fo r bringing this report in this House , but unfortunately  I 
just want to report to this H ouse that the question or the statement which I had given for the 
people of Mwakirunge is not answered in this report . 
 I expected the M ajority leader to come with the report particularly with the famine 
which is going on in Mwakirunge but the Majority leader has a  report which includes all the 
County Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Spe aker I think am the M ember of ...,  am the M ember who represent Mwakirunge 
and I know how those people are undergoing at this time , so am wondering why should the 
Majority leader bring a report to other wards which do not bring this report . 
 Mr. Speaker  I think I should get a full report of what will happen or what will happ en 
for the people of Mwakirunge . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ):  Yes L eader of majority.  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, well to respond to my 
colleague what he has said, okay he is right but actually we as government we have to give 
out all the reports, it does not mean when you mention one area we concentrate on one area, 
but actually now we have shown that we have seen the proble m is not in one area.  
 And I agree with you so that now we can put  this issue again in the Committee now to 
bring Chief Officer in the C ommittee room within the department of agriculture to have all 
the details now,  but actually Mr. Speaker this is what we  have done as a government to show 
where the problem is but still this time we consider to C ommittee now, to have a very good 
report in detail, t o go in detail in whatever the M ember has asked. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes we go back to order number seven, 
Hon Jimmy Odari.  
 Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon Speaker, this is a requ est I wish to make before this 
House request is ... 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ):  You go ahead Hon Jimmy Odari . 
 Hon. Odar i: Mr. Speaker right now there is a very big project which is undergoing;  
construction of roads is undergo ing in my ward Changamwe , that is construction of highway 
the fly -overs in my ward.  
 Hon. Sp eaker as much as we appreciate the developments , as much as we appreciate 
the projects because we cannot oppose developments but my concern Hon Speaker is with 
regard to the impacts, the environmental impact of that project to my people of Changamwe 
Ward.  
 Mr. Speaker this project has come with a lot of adverse effec ts on the livelihood and 
the life  of my people of Changamwe Ward; f irst and foremost Hon  Speaker  a lot of dust has 
come out or is been emanated from the construction site to the residential areas of my Ward 
particularly the Changamwe Ward estate, Hamisi es tate and the Changamwe New flats.  
 The dust as you know Hon  Speaker  has got some hazardous effects on the health of 
my people and so many people have been affected as much as I do not have medical report or 
scientific report on this regards  but Hon Speake r the fact that the business is in public 
domain,  dust has really affected my people and despite their complain ts nobody has come 
forward to address this issue of dust . 
 Even the Chinese contractor who is undertaking the job has not been able to do 
anythin g or to take steps that would mitigate that problem ; for example in the sprinkling of 
water to help reduce the dust it has been a very difficult task to him maybe he finds it very 
expensive for him to buy water or to transport water and sprinkle . 
February 9, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  Therefor e he has left my people in a very bad situation and my people have been 
affected health wise , very extensively;  Hon Mr. Speaker it is important that we get a 
statement on the same.  
 Hon Speaker, this construction also affec ted the water supply in my area  because they 
had to relocate ; they had to disconnect the main water supply line from Mzima to my area 
and it has to be relocated despite claiming that they have relocated the pipe up to now my 
people are not receiving that water.  
 Before this construction  there was a lot of water but now as an effect or as result of 
that project my people are not receiving water and they have been suffering because of lack 
of supply of water  for quite some time now almost a year since the inception of that project.  
 Hon S peaker, even the streetlights which were removed so as to pave way for the 
extension of the road have not been restored up to now, some parts of my area are in darkness 
and nothing has taken place, nobody is concerned about restoring the streetlights.  
 Another thing Hon Speaker, our roads, many of our roads have been d amaged 
because of the diversion ; the roads have had to be diverted to allow for  the construction to 
take place ; someone had promised that he is going to repair those roads but nothing has tak en 
place the roads are almost over and the highway is almost over but our roads have been 
forgotten , the roads in the estates have been forgotten unless we raise concern in good time . 
 My fear Hon Speaker is that after the con struction is over completely t hese people 
might leave the site without repairing our roads , they might decide to leave the site even 
without informing us only to find that they have left and their job is over and our roads 
remain the same way.   
 Therefore H on. Speaker am re questing th e government of the C ounty government to 
take up this matter with whoever is concern ed; be it national, KEN HA the Kenya national 
Highways A uthority or whoever may be concern ed in regards to these constructions  to 
address th ese issues for the benefit of my people.  
 Because H on. Speaker am here for those people, am h ere to represent the people of 
Changamwe, and unless I raise their issues  then I will be failing with my duties as their 
representative.  Thank you H on. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rash id): Committee on E nvironment do you have 
answer to that or you need time.  
 Hon: (Ms) Zainab Mumba:  No i think I will report on Wednesday afternoon.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): I think that will be okay. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
 Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank yo u Mr. Speaker, I beg to move a M otion on 
adoption of the repor t on the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 2017/2018, on Thursday 9th  2017 
February with amendments Mr. Speaker, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker  I would like to second this it  be passed with amendment s, 
Mr. Speaker sir. Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Members I th ink I will propose the 
question , I would propose that this House adopt the  report on the County Fiscal S trategy 
Paper 2017/2018 with amendments.  
(Applause ) 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speak er I seek permission 
from this Honorable H ouse to pass the report with amendment;  anybody with any question 
(Inaudible)  because we had given out the report…. (Inaudible ) Speaker . 
 I think Mr. Speaker we don’t have power at the moment and the report has many 
pages so I seek the report to be passed and we g o on with our business , thank you.  
February 9, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Members I th ink I should put the question, 
Members as many as for the opinion that this House, adopts the report on County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper 201 7/2018 with amendments . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
 This H ouse stand s adjourned until next week.  
The House rose at 3: 04pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 