March 2 1, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Edito r 
Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednes day, 21st March , 2018  
The House met at 9:17a.m. 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Speaker:  Hon. Member s be seated.  Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
Yes Hon. Bwire . 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I wish to stand in for Hon. Milka 
Moraa , Nominated MCA who is not in the House. Mr. Speaker I wish  to give notice  of 
Motion  of the following Motion ; 
 
(Hon. B wire moved the Notice of Motion)  
 
THAT AWARE  that Mombasa is a tourist hub and the second largest cosmopolitan 
city in Kenya but most of all Mombasa is a home for many;   
 
FURTHER AWARE  that pursuant to Part 2 (g) of the Fourth Schedule of the 
Constitution of Kenya, garbage collection is a mandate of the County Government;  
 
CONCERNED THAT  there are no litter bins on the street s of Mombasa for waste 
disposal...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker I am up on a point of order 
under Standing Order Number 47 (2) .  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Bwire do you have any letter?  
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker I just r eceived a phone call from the Hon. Member  but if 
the Standing Order detects that it should be in written form then I beg to withdraw Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you.  
The Speaker:  Yes Clerk, we can continue . 
 
MOTION  
 
Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba ruhusa kupit ia kiti chako kuwa 
hii hoja ali okuwa anajaribu kusoma Mheshimiwa Raphael ni hoja nzuri na kwa mujibu wa 
sheria ikiwa hoja mwenye am eitwa na hayuko inakuwa ile hoja inapotea na nafikiri hapo 
tukiangalia hapo hapo kwa Kanuni za Bunge  nambari  47 (3) tutaiona kuwa hiyo hoja kuwa 
imekwenda na maji .  
March 2 1, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Edito r 
Page 2 Kwa hivyo naomba Mheshimiwa Spika apatiwe nafasi alete barua Mheshimiwa 
Raphael kupa ta kuisoma hii Mheshimiwa Spika kama ni saa nane aruhusiwe kuileta saa nane. 
Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker on 
the same note under Standing Order 47 (3) it has given the Speaker powers to  allot the time , 
so I think it is in order the Hon. Member  who has raised the Standing Order that you as the 
Speaker you can a llot another time for the Motion  to be debated in this  House. Thank you  
Hon. Speaker . 
The Speaker:  Clerk can you read Standing Order 47 (3) . 
 
(The Clerk read Standing order 47 (3))   
 
Where no Member s moves a Motion  at the time specified by or under these Standing 
Orders, such Motion  shall not again be published in the Orde r Paper during the same 
session except with the leave of the Speaker . 
 
Thank you . Yes Hon. Bwire you wanted to say something .  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the context of the Motion  itself is 
of more importance an d as cited up by Hon. Hatimy if allowed the Hon. Member  herself will 
be here at 2 :00p.m with your permission if allowed she will come at 2 :00p.m and proceed 
with the business if that is allowed . Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker:  Clerk so you will put the Motion  in the afternoon at 2 :30p.m. 
 
(Applause)  
 
Thank you. Yes Clerk you may continue . 
 
 TRANSFERENCE OF WAST E MANAGEMENT TO WARD  LEVEL  
 
Yes Hon. Samba?  
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speake r I gave out Notice of Motion  yesterday and we 
were to debate it today . I would seek leave of the House to withdraw with amendments under 
Standing Order 55  so that I may bring it later on with amendments.  
Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker it will be in order if the Hon. 
Member  first reads the Motion  so that it can be in possession of the House ; when you propo se 
the question that's when we can with draw it under Standing Order 55 . Standing Order 55 is 
very clear it is until the Motion  is in the possession of the House after proposing the question 
that's when it can be withdrawn.  
March 2 1, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Edito r 
Page 3 The Speaker:  Thank you. Hon. Samba I think you have quoted Standing Order 55 do 
you have the Standing Orders with you? Can you read for us Standing Order 55? Yes Hon. 
Samba what is Standing Order 55 saying?  
Hon. Samba:  Standing Order 55 says ,  
After a question has been propose d on a Motion , the Motion  shall be deemed to be in 
the possession of the County Assembly, and such Motion  shall not be withdrawn 
without the leave of the County Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker I beg to read the Motion  so that you may pose a question if you allow 
me. 
The Speaker:  Yes you can continue . 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you so much Hon. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to move the following Motion ; 
 
(Hon. Samba moved the Motion)  
 
THAT AWARE  that the County Government is mandated with the responsibility of 
County Health Services, including in particular refuse removal, refuse dumps and 
solid waste disposal under Part 2 (g) of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of 
Kenya , 2010;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that there have been challenges with waste management in the 
County for instance garbage collection;  
 
NOTING THAT  waste management that is garbage collection and general sanitation 
has always been coordinated from the County level;  
 
CONCERNED THAT  the current state of waste management in the County m ay 
pose a threat to both the residents and the environment in the County;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that: 
 
1. County Governmen t transfer waste management to Ward level.  
2. Count y Government to establish Ward Waste Management Committee to org anize 
and p lan how to manage waste at the Ward level.    
I beg to move Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker:  Yes are you asking for the leave?  
Hon. Samba:  Yes at the same time I would seek the leave of the House to withdraw 
with amendments Hon. Speaker .  
The Speaker:  So you are withdrawing or with amendments?  
Hon. Samba:  Yes, with amendments .  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
The Speaker:  Okay Hon. Member s I now propose the question, yes Hon. Bwire .  
Hon. Bwire:  I was just consulting with the Chairman Hon. Hatimy on the same but 
there's some clarifications am ready to go, it's okay I have no point to raise .  
The Speaker:  Hon. Member s I now propose the question that the Motion  by Hon. 
Tobias Samba be withdrawn with amendments as moved . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
March 2 1, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            16 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om the Hansard Edito r 
Page 4 (Motion withdrawn)  
 
...Next order ? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Member s this House stands adjourned until Wednesday 21st March, 2018 at 
2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 9:32 am  
  
             
  
 