March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 1st March , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Sixteenth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 2:40p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Hamisi Nyota ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Honourable  Memb ers, welcome to our 
morning session. Yes, Clerk  please ? 
 
STATEMENT   
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN ’S DAY  
 
 Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana, MCA Shanzu Ward  please give your statement.  
 
 Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Before giving the statement,  I want to 
congratulate for the chance to sit at that p articular seat today.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you.  
 
 Hon. Katana : Honourable Speaker, I stand pursuant to Standing Ord er No.41(2) to 
request for a statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Youth, Gender, Sports and Social 
Services.  Honourable Speaker, International Women’s Day is a global day celebrating the social, 
economic, cultural and political achievements of wom en. It is a day  that observed on 8th March  
of every year.  Honourable Speaker, International Women’s Day is an oc casion to celebrate the 
progress made and to recognize the work that still needs to be done in achieving full gender 
equality. It is a day to  recognize the achieve ments across the world and to raise awareness to the 
challenges still faced by women in many parts of the world. It is also a call to action to accelerate 
gender parity.  Honourable Speaker, I therefore seek to know what plans the Cou nty government 
of Momba sa has in celebrating women of Mombasa on the International Women’s Day on 8th 
March, 2023.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker .  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Allen Katana, 
MCA Shanzu. I now call upon Hon ourable  Ali Shari ff Chairper son, Committee on Youth, 
Gender, Sports and Social Services please to respond to the statement.  
 
[Silence ] 
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 2  ...if the Chairperson is not there, the Vice Chairperson to respond . 
 
[Silence ] 
 
 ...if the Vice Chairperson is absent, any Member of the Com mittee to respo nd, please.  
 
 Hon. Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am one of the Committee  Members of the 
Committee and I would like to say that our Chairman had a first meeting last week upon this 
issue and also we are wai ting as the Com mittee to be called by bot h the Chairman and the Vice 
so that we can deliberate more about it. And we wish m aybe to be given some few days so that 
we can answer or maybe our Chair when he will be present, so that he can deliver this message 
clear because h e is the one who has been in the first meeting so that he can clearly elaborate what 
is going on with the Co unty plans. Thank you . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Priscilla 
Mumba for the response . Honourable  Allen Katana, I  think you have be en respo nded to 
adequately.  
 
Hon. Katana : Thank you Speaker but I think the Hon ourable  Member should give us 
proper guidance considering the fact that today is first and we only have a few days to  go. If she 
alleges that we give her some days, I  am not so sure wh ether the Hon ourable  Member is  very 
serious with thi s matter because so ma ny incidents, it happens that we do  not get proper 
information then it happens that we get some vague invitations whereby it ends up the 
Honourable  Members are being mistreated to  such functions . So, I think if the Hon ourable  
Member is not informed , she has all the rights to confess in front of this Honorable House that 
she has nothing to comment pertaining this issue. Thank you, Speaker .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hami si Nyota ): Thank you Honourable  Allen Kata na. I 
think the matter has been responded to by one of the Committee Members  of the docket so I 
think let  us wait for the response from the Chairman because I think he will be informed 
adequately by the Member. Yes , Honourable  Allen Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana : Than k you Mr. Speaker. I stand to be reminded what ex actly she has said 
because I do  not want to say whatever she has said does not make sense because that may not be 
a parliamentary language, but kindly let me know wh at she has  responded on this issue. Thank 
you. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Honourable  Priscilla Mumba please?  
 
Hon. Mumba : Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker . My fellow Honourable  Members , I 
would like to  make it  clear to you, that the department is making  preparation t ogether with the 
Chair , the Committee and the Secretariat  of the County because this is an exercise which is done 
every year and we believe the preparations are ongoing. The only thing I will sa y in this 
Hono urable House is maybe the Chair ha s not given us any guidelines on what has been going 
on but I believe there are good plans being made so we have not to worry, in good time we will 
be given every information through the Chair so that we can g ive every Member the guideline on 
what to do. F or us who have been here for some time  we know there are ups and downs but at 
the end of the day everything is settled . 
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 3 So, we believe the department is doing something good on eighth  just be patient and wait 
for the Chair and the information through me as  the Chief Whi p of this Assembly I will d eliver 
and as a  Member of this Committee everything will be delivered to every Member so as to 
understand what is going on.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank y ou Hon ourable  Priscilla Mumba. 
Honourabl e Allen Katana, it has been cla rified  that preparatory meetings  for the event and 
Members of the Committee have MCA s interest at hand . So, I think the matter will be addressed 
accordingly by the Chairperson. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
FIRE OUTBREAK IN KONGOWEA  MARKET  
 
Yes, Honourable  Samuel Mwaura , MCA Kongowea?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): I have seen the Member is not around so 
the matter  will be referr ed back to the House  Business. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEM ENT  
 
SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL D EVELO PMENT PLAN (ADP), COUNTY INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT 
PLAN (CIDP) AND COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY PAPER (CFSP) TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana S waleh, Chairperson Committee on Finance , Budget and 
Appropr iations , please respond to the Statement ? 
 
[Silence] 
 
If he is not there the Vice Chairperson please respond to the Statement ? 
 
Hon. Noor:  [Off microphone]  [Inaudible ]. 
 
The Tem porary Speaker  (Hon. Ham isi Nyota ): Honourable  Hamida for the purpose  of 
Hansard please  switch o n your microphone . 
  
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , we have written to the Department of 
Finance so that w e can  follow up on this and yet we are supposed to get the response fro m them 
and we have not received  it. We were s upposed to get it by yesterday  but unfortunately,  we did 
not receive it ; I know this is an urgent matter we are supposed to get all the information about the 
ADP, CIDP and CFSP and I promise you by next week  everything will b e in place. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Sp eaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Ho nourable  Hamida Noor, 
please work very fast with your Committee  and bring this matter to the House. Yes Clerk?  
 
 
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 4 STATEMENT  
REPURPOSE OF MARIMANI HEALTH FACILITY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogu tu, Chairperson Committee on Health Services please 
respond to the St atement . 
  
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . We are requesting  for another one week so that 
we can bring an elaborate report.  
 
The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Honourable  Benard Ogutu  
please work hard next week we get the tentative  report. Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION S 
RENOVATION , REVAMPING , IMPROVEMENT AND EXPANSION OF COAST GENERAL HOSPITAL  
 
Yes, Honourable  Amriya Boy Juma MCA, Mjamb ere Ward please move the Motio n. 
Honourable  Hamida , the communication that was done  by Hon ourable  Amriya Boy was not 
communicated to my office, so  it cannot be moved so  the Moti on will be brought  to the n ext 
Business o f the House.  Yes Clerk?  
 
APPROVAL OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY CALENDAR SECOND SESSION  
 
Yes, Honourable  Hamida Noor , please move the Motion ? 
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker. Honourable  Speaker  I beg to move th e 
following Motion : 
 
THAT pursuant to the pro vision of Standing Order 2 5(1), this County Assembly approves 
the Calendar of the County Assembly (Regular Sessions) for the Second Session (2023) , 
 
IT IS NOT ED that the general informatio n that pursuant to Standing  Order 24 and 25 of 
the Mombasa County Assem bly Standing Orders, by a Resolution made on 27th February,  
2023, that the County Assembly approve  its Calendar (Regular Sessions) for the Second  
Session , 2023 as set out in the Schedule . 
 
I think each one of the Members  has got the calendar and each one of them can see when 
we are taking  our break and when it  is going to be opened . With that I …[Inaudible ]. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Seconder ? 
 
Hon. Noor: I want Hon ourable  Priscilla Mumb a to second me.  
 
The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Yes, Honourable  Priscilla Mumba?  
 
The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba ): Thank you Mr. Speaker , I second.  
 
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 5 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamis i Nyota ): I now propose the ques tion that the 
Motion by Hon ourable  Hamida No or on approval of the Count y Assembly Calendar Second 
Session , 2023 be considered in this H onourable  House in the same term s as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Hamida Noor , please make  your contribution t o the Motion.  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speake r Sir, as you know that , all of us need to 
go bac k to Mashinani  to be with our electorates  and get back to them to see what is going on . As 
you kn ow that sometimes last we ek we issued the burs ary forms to our electorates  and it is for us 
to go back now back  so that we can get conne cted and see where we can help because the 
schools are now opening and for us to know that there several matters at the mashinani , so that 
we can go  back to our elec torates and find  out what is going on , what we can bring back whe n 
we come back to this Ho use so that when we come back we are going to be vibrant and know 
that there is more business to be done into the House . With that Mr. Speaker , thank  you. 
 
The Temporary Sp eaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you H onourable  Hamida Noor for 
your co ntribution . I now open the floor for any Member to contribute . Yes, Hon ourable  Priscilla 
Mumba?  
 
The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba ): Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Nimesimama 
hapa kuunga mkono hoja hii  kwa sababu  katika Nyumb a hii ni lazima  sisi viongozi tuweze kujua  
ule mda tutakapo ku wa hapa na ule mda ambao tutakao  pewa  nafasi ya kuweza kwenda  
mapumziko na kuangalia waliotuleta katika Jumba hili. Hivyo basi  hii ratiba iliowek wa hapa 
Waheshimiwa  wenzangu i metuweka kwa kutukumbusha ili tuweze  kujua ni mda gani tutakuwa  
tuko hapa tukifa nya majukumu yetu na ni mda gani tutakao  kuwa tunapumzika  katika haya 
majukumu na kurudi mashinani na kuwez a kufanya kazi zengine. Kwa  sababu ninajua kuna 
Waheshimiwa  ambao tuko  nao katika Jumba hili ambao ni wage ni na haw ajajua ratiba za k azi za 
Jumba hili.  Kwa hivyo ilikua ni wakati mwafaka sisi kama Kamati tuweze kuhakikisha tumetoa 
hii ratiba mpya ya Kalend a ambayo itawezesha a ma itarahisisha kuwez a kujua ni mda gani 
utakuwa  hapa kazini na ni mda gani utaweza kuwa kwako katika Wadi amba yo ulio chaguliwa  
na kuweza kushughulikia  watu wako . Kwa hivyo tuko hapa tuiunge mkono kwa sababu inatupa 
kielelezo cha kazi  zetu na kutuon yesha njia ya jinsi tutakavyo fanya  kazi zetu kwa huu mda  
ambao tuko hapa kwa muhula wa pili,  kwa muhula wa tatu ya ani ma anake kimombo hapa 
imeandikwa second session, third session, fourth  and fifth session.  Kwa hivyo tukiwa hapa 
tusichangan yikiwe kwa nini i mekuja hivi hatuielewi, nimetupa tu  mwongozo wa kujua ni lini 
tutakuwa hapa na ni lini tuta weza ku break  na kwenda  kwa l ikizo. Ahsanteni.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamis i Nyota ): Yes, Honourable  Jacktone Madialo.  
Please make your con tribution.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand to seek clarification  from the mover of 
the Motion  from w hat she said to me mayb e if she explains because it appeared as if we are 
breaking from today  but looking  at the schedule of th e calendar, it sho ws that we will  not be 
breaking until 6th April  so, the tone of the present ation was suggestive that it’s like this is a 
session from toda y will be breaking. So , I just wanted that clarification . 
 
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 6 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamis i Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable Jackton 
Madialo. Hon ourable  Prischillah Mumba.  
 
The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba ): I stand on a point of inf ormation . I inform 
the House t hat Honourable  Hamida alikuwa amepatiwa kusoma na katika haraka ya kusoma 
labda ameteleza kidogo kutokueleza k uwa ni kufaf anua jinsi calendar itakavyo  tuelekeza, Kwa 
hivyo katika kufafan ua kwake na fikiri amefafanua kama ambae tunaenda l ikizo kesho. Lakini 
ndiposa  ukaona nikachukua mda wa kusimama kwa sa babu mimi ni mmoja  wa kamati amba ye 
nina husika  nikaweza kufaf anua kwa uzaidi kitu chenye Hamida ametusaidia ni kuwa kiongozi 
wa wengi hayuk o na ikiwa hayuko nafikiri Majority Chief Whip nikiwa hapa ninaweza kuvaa 
kofia yake na nikafafanua kwa kirefu ili muweze kuelewa. Tumetoka kwa likizo juzijuzi ninajua 
watu wanas hikwa na ile hofu kwa  nini tuambiwe  tena tuamb iwe tena tuondoke kesho  hapana 
tuko kat ika nyumba tutaendelea na majukumu mpak a kulingana na cal endar ili vyosema, maana 
msema kweli ni huyu , wa hivyo Mheshimiw a na Waheshimiwa  wengine musiwe na wasiwasi 
nafikir i tumee leza kwa kirefu na Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri umeweza kunielewa  ili tusiwe na 
mtafaruku kwa kuona kama tunaondoka kes ho Kwenda  tena likizo. Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamis i Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Prischillah 
Mumba , Honourable  Jacktone  Madialo I believe she has clarif ied. Y es, Honourable  Allen 
Katana . 
 
Hon. Katana:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, nataka nipo ngeze kamati hii kwa kazi 
walioifanya na pia Spika sijui kutakua kuna  hatari saa zengine  ya kutoa pendekezo, kwa kuwa 
Standing Order 25 imetoa maelezo fulani  kuhusiana na calenda r kama hii  nafikiri ikiwa sijakosea 
kuna m ahali labda nilisoma pengine nilisom a vibaya Mheshimiwa Spika y a kwamba iwe 
kutakuwa ma matangaz o pengine kwa magazeti kama mawili hivi nafikiri ikiwa kam a kuna 
ukweli kwa maneno ninayosema ili tusiwe ni watu wa k upitisha vitu ambavyo havina ukweli 
ama uha kika ingekuwa vizuri katika hi zi order paper tuweze  kuandikiwa, tuelezewe kwamba 
ilichapishwa  katika gazeti hili na hili hiyo nafikiri  ingeleta uhakika na  usahihi wa kazi yetu. Kitu 
chengine ambacho Mheshimiwa Spika naomba nisisitize ni kwamba, hili ni kwa W aheshi miwa 
wenzangu tunapo pitisha k itu kama hiki Mheshimiwa Sp ika ni kitu cha maana , maana wale 
wenzetu wa sehemu zile za mbali wanasema, if you don’t plan then you plan to fail . 
Kwa hivyo kitu kama hiki  ni kizuri  kinatupa sisi m welekeo  lakini mbali na kwa mba 
tumekipitisha Mheshimiw a Spika.  Uoga wangu ni kwamba tumep itisha kalenda hii na 
inaon yesha siku ambazo tutakuwa tumekuja Bunge lakini utakuta Mhesh imiwa Spika, 
Waheshimiwa wenza wengi, wameanza tabia ya kutopenda kuja hapa Bunge, sasa tunapitisha 
kitu ambac ho hatutakifanyia kazi na sipe ndi kutaja majina, Mheshimi wa Spika kwa sababu jana 
kiti hicho kilitaja Mheshimiwa m wenza hapa kwamba alikuwa an asinzia kumbe ni kidudu  
kimemuingilia kwa macho na akatangazwa hapa kuwa anasinzia na ikawa  balaa. Ombi  langu ni 
kwamba Waheshimiwa  wenzangu,  tunapopanga vitu hivi tusiw e na shida ya kutafutana mpaka 
inakuw a hatujui Bunge tuanze ama tusianze, kwa hayo mengi ya  ama changizo zangu  nataka 
niunge mkono Ripoti  hii Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Ha misi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Allen Katana 
for your contrib ution. Yes , Honourable  Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika namimi kuw eza kunipa nafasi ya 
kuchangia.  
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 7 Kwanza napongeza Kamati waliokuja na kalenda hii  kusema la kweli kama vile 
Mhes himiwa  Chief Whip alivyotueleza huu ni mwongozo na  ni kweli ni mwongozo kwa sababu 
likizo b ado hai jakaribia ni mpaka mwezi wanne huko na sisi ha pa tumechaguliwa na wananchi 
na pia wananchi wanatuhitaji kule mashinani . Kwa hivyo tukifanya kazi yetu hapa Bun geni n a 
kule kwa wananchi inatakikan a tuifanye na kuifanya hiyo  kazi ya wananchi kule mashinani ni 
kuonekana kule mashinani , tutembelee wananchi  wetu kule mashinani tuju e changamoto zetu 
ama changamoto zao ni nini  ndio tuweze  kuja na hoja zetu hapa za kuwez a kuwa kilisha 
wananchi wetu, kwa hiv yo huu ni m wongozo tu na ha kuna kazi isiyokuwa na mapumziko h ii ni 
kwenda likizo kupumzika na sisi kama vio ngozi tukienda likizo tuingie mashinani tushikane na 
wananchi wetu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, nasimama kuunga mko no. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hami si Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Leila Nyache . 
Yes, Honourable  Pamel a make some contribution please.  
 
Hon. Ojala : Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker for giving me this chance to contribute . I 
stand to support this Motion  because one ; it will give u s the ample time to meet our e lectorate, 
again it will al so give us that space of knowi ng the challenges that the elector ate are facing 
mashinani . I stand to support Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you so  much Hon ourable  Pamel la. 
Yes, Honourable  Sylvester  Kai from Junda  please make your contribut ion. 
 
Hon. Kai:  Ahsan te Mheshimiwa Spika k wa kunipatia fursa nikaweze kuchangia. Kwanza 
naunga mkono utaratibu huu ambao tumepangiliwa katika hali ya kuwa hapa kazini na vile vile 
pia kupata  fursa ya kutangamana na wanan chi wetu kule mashinani lak ini pia zaidi 
nimefurahishwa n a kuona kwamba kalend a hii imeweza kuheshim u zaidi ndugu zetu ambao 
wanaend a kuanza mfungo hivi karibuni  na hivyo basi ni kwamba watapata fursa nzuri ya  kuweza 
kufanya ib ada kwa sababu ni mengi ambayo  pia yanahitaji maombi na n iulize ndugu  zangu 
mkaweze kuc hukua fursa hii kuom bea Kaunti  yetu kwa sababu kuna mengi ambayo tunaona 
hatuwezi pia kuyatatua kisiasa tu , hivyo basi mkaweze kuchukua fursa hii  kwa yale ambayo 
tunayahi si ni mazito  hivyo nisem e kwamba  nimeunga mkono. Shukran.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Than k you, Hon ourable  Sylvester Kai. 
Yes, Honourable  Milka Ngare make  your contribution.  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr . Speaker . Before I make my contribution,  I think w e have a 
dress code for this House and I just noticed the Hon ourable  Member that just walked i n looking 
quite funny looking like a thug,  dressed like a thug.  I would like you to asses s and look at 
Honourable  Fatma Kushe if  she is dressed to be in this Hon ourable  House Mr. S peaker  before I 
make my contribution , maybe she can step forwar d and you loo k at her.   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Yes, Honourable  Fatma Kushe.  
 
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Mhes himiwa Sp ika! Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri siko uchi na 
ukiniangalia unaniona nimeva a miwani sio kwamba ni upambe jicho linaliuma . Mheshimiwa 
Spika nashanga a Mheshimiwa s ijui ana wivu na mimi ama kuna kitu k imemkereketa , nimepiga 
swaga nzuri sana , namshanga a Mheshimiwa  mwenzangu wa kike k ama mimi kuniambia 
sijapendeza  ama s ijavaa kiheshima ! 
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 8 Mheshimiwa Spika nimevaa miwani kwa  sababu jicho linaniuma ! Nilinde  Mheshi miwa 
Spika ! 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogutu . 
 
Hon. Ogutu: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mhesh imiwa Spika , sisi wanaume am bao 
tumeketi upande huu tunapata t abu sana kama tutaendelea namna hiyo afadhali sisi tutoke nje 
tukae manake hata sa a hii ukiangalia Mheshimiwa Kimari pale na jana nd io kesi yake imeninio 
ana hang over mbaya sana ha wezi haribu mambo y a Bunge  Mheshimiwa Spika kw a hiyo angalia 
hayo maneno kwa uzito kubwa.   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Yes, Honourable  Juma  Manuari . 
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Najua wao wako mbali na wana 
wasiwasi mimi hapa  nimek aa nae sako kwa bako na sis ikii hata kinyevu nyevu wala uc hechezi 
nashindwa watu namna gani hawa na n ikimuangalia huyu binti alivyo  vaa zao ni wiv u tu kila 
wakiona twapiga selfie  hapa. Mheshimiwa Spika pengine nichangie katika hoja yetu ya leo . 
 
 The S peaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Honourable  Juma Manuari before you proceed,  I 
think the concern addressed by Hon ourable  Milka N gare is of concern.  Yes, Honourable  Hamida 
Noor. 
 
Hon. Noor: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir, I want to deliberate on what 
Mheshimiwa Ngar e just  said; if Honourable  Ngare is  not aware of what Hon ourable  Fatma 
Kushe is wearing it is called a kimono  and it  is the same thing I  am wearing ! So if you think she 
is dressed inapp ropriate ly even  I am dressed inappropriate ly; so I think she has already explained 
herself she said that her eye is p aining that is why she has worn  glasses and wherever she is 
wearing on top is called a kimon o and you can wear anything under but th e kimono is the one 
that makes you decent.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
  The Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyo ta): Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity  and Mr . Speaker I am so sa d 
that I have to crucify my most beloved fellow here but I want to stand with what I believe in. I 
also want to support Honourable  Milka that the Honourable  is not dressed well and Hon ourable 
Hami da has spoken about kimono and some of us are  visitors from  Jerusalem if given a chance  
we can peruse the Standing orders . I think there must be type of shoes  that we are supposed  to 
put on ... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
...if also you are dr essing that ki thing that has been mentioned, we can also  see from her if 
we can compare to Hon ourable  Hamida we are not seeing the t rack that Hon ourable  Hamida has 
hidden inside a kimono  but one can clearly see a t-shirt and a track ! So, I think Mr. Speaker I do 
not wa nt to guide you because it is within your jurisdiction but I think you can as well make a 
ruling o n this matter so  that we can proceed. Thank you.  
 
[Applause ] 
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 9 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ):  Yes, Honourable  Sylvester Kai from 
Junda W ard? 
 
Hon. Kai:  Thank you M r. Speaker for giving me th is opportunity  to have my say 
concerning the matter that has been rais ed by Hon ourable  Milka Ngare ; to my observation this 
House for so long it has been so bias ed to the male Hon ourabl e Members when it com es to 
dressing code for so long . You will see that or you will note that  the male M embers of this 
House , they have  really tried to go  as the per description  of how we are supposed to dress but our 
fellow Members in a bigger percentage they have really fail ed us down , so I really feel we 
shoul d rule...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Honourable  Sylvester Kai , the Majori ty 
Chief Whip is up ! Yes... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Kai:  ...sorry allow me to finish , you should rule on the favor  of Honourable ... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): ...No ! No!  Honourable  Sylvester Kai, the 
Majority Chief Whip is up. Yes , Honourable  Prischillah Mumba?  
 
The Majority Chief  Whip (Hon. Mumba ): Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante sana . Nataka 
kujulisha Nyum ba kwanza ningependa tutoe heshima M heshimiw a Spika wakati anap otoa amri 
yake kwa sababu Spika ndio mkubwa wa Nyumba hii na pili nim esema nataka kujulisha Bunge 
kwanza kama Ki ranja wa Bunge  kuwa hapa sasa ninaona tuna  mchezo unaendelea katika Jumba 
hili na  nitac hukua jukumu hili mimi pia kama Kiranj a wa Bunge kuhakiki sha anayeingia katika 
Jumba hili yuko kisawa sawa katika mavazi katik a kila hali ambayo anatakikana kuingia.  Kitu 
cha pili ningesema tusiseme eti tumekuwa tukionea Waheshimiwa wa kiume hapa ; ningekoso a 
Mheshimiwa ambaye ana sema ha pa maana  sasa hivi huyu ni Mheshimiwa mwanamke ambaye ni 
mwanamke ambaye ame raise  hiyo alarm  si kuwa hapa tumekuja kuoneana tu bali tunapeana 
mafun zo.  
Mheshim iwa Spika kwa heshima  sisi ni rafiki yetu Mheshimiwa Fatuma  Swaleh  Mote , ni 
rafiki yetu mkubwa sa na lakin i kwa sababu leo am ekuja amevaa vile sivyo ndani ya hili Bunge, 
sisi tuna unga mkono  atolewe nje hili aende akabadilishe avae vizuri ndio arudi k atika hili Bunge 
kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Hamida alivyosema akisimama ndani  ya hi li Bunge na asimame 
Mheshimiwa  Fatuma Kushe kuna tofauti kubwa sana . Mheshimiwa Spika ninaomba utoe uam uzi 
kuwa Mheshimiwa Fatuma Sw aleh Mote atoke nje aende akabadilishe ndio aingie a kiwa sawa...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Hapa tuko katika Jumba la sheria na he shima  lazima iweko . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spik a. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Majority Whip Mheshimiwa 
Prischillah Mum ba.  
March  1, 202 3                              COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                        16 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansa rd Editor  Page 10 I would now like to evoke Standing Order 1 which says , “In all cases where matters are 
not expressly  provided  for by the se Standing Orders or by other Orders  of the County Assembly , 
any procedural que stion shall be decided by the Speaker ’. Honourable  Fatuma Swaleh you are 
not properly dressed...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
So, I order you to leave the Chambers and be properly dressed...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
[Hon. Fatuma Swaleh exited the cha mbers ] 
[Loud consultations ] 
 
Order Members ! Order! Ho nourable  Hamida Noor , please reply to the Motion . 
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Thank you, my fellow Members  as you know you 
have the Calendars with you and each one of you has gone t hrough and I am g lad that you have 
all supported.  Mr. Speaker , if this  goes through the gazette ment is going to be done once the 
House has approve this Calendar on Standing Order 25 (2) so with t hat Mr . Speaker. Thank you 
very much . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Hamida Noor . I 
now put a question  that the Motion moved by Hon ourable  Hamida Noor on Approval of County 
Assembly Calendar Second Session , 2023 be approved by this Hon ourable  House  in the same 
terms as debated . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
The Motion by Hon ourable  Hamida Noor on approval of the County Assembly Calendar 
Second Session , 2023 adopted by this Hon ourable  House. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
This House stands adjo urned until Tuesday 7th March, 2023 at 10 :00a.m.  
 
The House rose at 3 :30p.m  
                  