March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 19th March, 2019  
The House met at 2:48p.m.  
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS   
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable Members you may be seated . Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
IMPEACHMENT OF  C OUNTY EEXECUTIVE COMMITTEE (CEC)  MEMBER FOR  TRANSPORT , 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS HON . TAWFIQ BALALA  
 
 Honourable M embers , I confirm that the Motion  before this House has complied w ith 
Section 62 (4) of the Standing Orders together wit h Section 40 (2) of the County Government Act 
which requires that before the Motion  is moved the S peaker must be satisfied that the Motion  is  
suppor ted by at least a third of the M embers, which is at le ast 14 , the N otice of the Motion  dated 
March  8th  2019 was deli vered to the Clerk pursuant to Standing Order 44 (2) and the C lerk then  
submitted the said notice to  me on the 11th March , 2019 for the approved Motion  accompanie d 
with the list of signatures  for removal of Mr. T awfiq Balala , Member Executive Com mittee f or 
Transport , Infrastructure a nd Public Works . 
 Honourable M embers  i approved the said notice of Motion  on 11th March , 2019 , the 
County Assembly Business Committee then sloted the Motion  for Tuesday M arch 12th at 
2:30p.m and the Motion  is due to be  moved today . Yes Honourable Athumani Shebe,  please 
move the Motion . 
 
(Hon. Shebe  Athman  moved Motion ) 
  
 Hon. Shebe Athman:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to move the following Motion  as 
amended;  
 

March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 2 That this House RESOLVES THAT  Hon. Ta wfiq Balala be removed from  the office of 
the Mombasa County Executive Committee Member for the Department of Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works pursuant to Section 40  of the County Government  Act, 
2012 and the Mombasa County Standing Orders in so far as the St anding Orders are in 
line with national l egislations.  Grounds thereof:  
 
A) INCOMPETENCE  
  
 Mr. Speaker Sir,  Hon. Tawfiq Balala is incompetent and therefore unsuitable to  serve as 
Member of the Mombasa County Executive Committee for Transport, Infrastructure and Public 
Works as:  
 
a. The CEC  Mr. Speaker Sir,  has failed to ensure that there is  sufficient street lighting 
in the County despite the Department having been allocated monies in the  financial 
year 2017/ 2018 for street lighting and in the current financial year;  
b. Failu re to properly manage collection of revenue generated from billboards and 
other advertisement activities and parking fees. Mr. Speaker Sir, There was a 0.3 
percent decline in revenue collection from the aforementioned activities in the year 
2017/2018 as co mpared to previous financial year; the towing fee collected was 
Kshs 0 out of a target of Ksh s 72,504 in FY 2017/2018 under the leadership of Hon. 
Tawfiq Balala...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
c. He has failed to formulate departmental policies and conceive legislative propo sals 
for enactment by the County Assembly;  
d. Mr. Speaker Sir, f ailure to implement projects and programmes as required by the 
Annual Deve lopment Plan  (ADP) . Mr. Speaker Sir, t here are incomplete projects 
that have overlapped financial years; the budgetary al location for development in 
the department in the FY 2017/2018 was Ksh s. 891,205 663 which was increased to 
Kshs. 1,733,031,277 by a S upplementary budget and yet most projects including 
roads have stalled and yet the recorded absorption rates for most of t he stalled 
projected are very high. This can be attributed to his lack of providing leadership 
which has led to stalled projects.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
B. GROSS VIOLATION OF CONSTITUTION OR  ANY OTHER LAW  
 
a. Mr. Speaker Sir, the County Assembly is mandated by Article  185(3)  to exercise  
oversight authority and in so doing, it may require any person to appear before the 
County Assembly to provide information as stipulated in Article 195   of the Constitution; 
Section 39(2)  of the County Government Act , 2012 provides that  a Committee of a  
County Assembly may require a Member of the Executive C ommittee to attend or appear 
before the C ommittee and answer any question relating to the M ember 's responsibilities ;  
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 3 Mr. Speaker Sir , Hon.T awfiq Balal a has failed to honor invitati on(s) by Committee on 
Transport , Infrastrucure and Public W orks on occasions without any justifiable cause ;  
 
b. He has also failed Mr. Speaker Sir, to submit quarterly reports to the  County Assembly to 
enable the C ounty Assembly dischar ge its oversight role ov er the E xecutive as required 
by the  County Goverment Act Section 40(f) , Article  183(3) of the Constitution of  the 
Republic of  Kenya.  
 
 I urge my fellow M ember Mr. Ahmed Salama to second the Motion . Thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Hon.  Ahmed Salama:  Mr. Speaker S ir, I second.  
 
(Motion proposed)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable Shebe.  Honorable Members I now 
propose the question that this H ouse adopts the Motion  on the impeachment of CEC Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works, Hon. Tau fiq Balal a pursuant to S tanding Order 62 and County 
Government Act Section 40. 
 Hon. Members , the floor is open now for debat e. Yes Honorab le Kassim Fahad.  
 
 Hon. Fahad  Kassim : Ahsan te sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Sorry Honourable  Fahad  Kassi m let the mover of the 
Motion  please address the House. Yes H onourable Shebe Athmani?  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante Sana Mh eshimiwa M weny ekiti kwa fursa , vile vile 
kongole kwa uongozi wa  wenza kwa sababu ya kuniunga mkono hoja hii . Mimi sitakuwa na 
mengi Mh eshimiwa M wenyekiti bali tu ni kuonyesha kuwa wameingia ka tika kumbukumbu ya 
historia ya B unge la pili na kwa sababu nzuri M heshimiwa M wenyekiti wamesimama na ukweli 
na wak o tayari kutetea haki na ukweli . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti  kwa kunipatia 
fursa hii.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon . Khatri) : Thank you Honourable Shebe.  Yes Hono urable... 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante.  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , mimi nimesimama 
kama M wakilishi wa kata ndogo ya Frère Town kuweza kuunga mkono hoja ya leo ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Kwanza kabisa nitaenda katika mwaka wa fedha 2016/2017 ; idara hii ya uchukuzi jinsi 
ilivyo tumia hela,  2016/2017 Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti mwaka huo wot e idara ya Uchukuzi na 
Miundo M singi ilitumia kitita cha Sh.1,298,45 0,000Bilioni kwa maendeleo,  narudia ten a 
1,298,450,000B ilioni   kwa mae ndeleo mwaka wa fedha 2016/2017.  
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Twende kwa mwaka wa fedha  2017/2018 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti B unge lilipitisha 
bajeti katika idara hiyo Sh s.500,807,858M ilioni  kwa recurrent,  supplementary  ikafanyika 
wakatumia kitita cha Shs.554,004,718 Milioni  total expenditure  wakatumia 
Shs.462, 102,898 Milioni  kwa maendeleo . Niko katika mwaka wa fedha 2017/2018 bajeti yake ya 
awali  ilikuwa ni shilingi 691, 205,663Milioni Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ; cha kushangaza  bajeti 
ya supplementary  ikafanywa  Shs. 1,703,031,271B ilioni , supplem entary  imezidi bajeti ya awali  
zaidi ya mara tano ! Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti total expenditure  2017/2018 kwa maendeleo  
walitumia shs1,471,432,134 Bilioni,  hivyo ni kusem a kwamba kuanzia mwaka 2016 -2017 I dara 
ya Uchukuzi  ilitu mia shs1,2,988,450,000 Bilioni  mwaka wa fedha  2016/2017, 2017/2018 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti idara hio ilitumia shs1,9,333,582,102 this current financial year  
2018/2019 imetumia S hs. 513,589,000,092 . Kwa kifupi kwa mba kuanzia mwaka wa 2016 -2019 
idara  hii imet umia  shs 3,4,445,624,194 kwa miaka mitatu kwa maendeleo pek ee, Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kwa maendeleo pekee . 
 Mheshi miwa Mwenyekiti cha kushangaza z aidi maendeleo ambayo wanasema walifanya 
katika 2017/2018 twende katika eneo n inalotoka mimi eneo la Nyali 2017 /2018 Idara  iliweza 
kujenga kutoka barabara ya S aga to Pride I nn Nyali ilitumia shs41,183,940 Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti , barabara hii kwenda S aga mpaka P ride Inn tayari ilikuwa ina lami lakini lami 
ikaweza kuvunjwa ikawekwa cabro  na si priority  kwa wananchi .  
Twende eneo la Nyali  ninako toka mimi kukakuwa na expansion of a section of   barabara 
ya Nyali , barabara mpya ya N yali Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni barabara inayotokea kutoka pale 
Lights inakwenda moja kwa moja mpaka BP . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi naishi katik a eneo 
hilo lakini hakuna expansion  yoyote imefanyika isipokuwa ni alama tu y a barabara inaweza 
kufanyika lakini inasema kwamba idara ilitumia shs 34,727,973 .  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti jambo hili barabara hizi sio priorities kwa wakaazi wa Nyali,  
Nyali kuna Kadzandani,  Nyali  kuna Frère  Town  na Nyali vile vile na kuna Ziwa La Ng 'ombe 
pamoja na Mkomani , kwa nini barabara hizi zimewekwa katika sehemu ambazo  ni za matajiri 
ambao wakati wananchi maskini ambao mara kwa mara wanajitokeza kupiga kura hawafikiwi na 
miradi  kama hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti .... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ninapoonge a serikali ya kitaifa imeweza kutupatia sisi Road 
Maint enance Levy grant  kwamba pesa hatulipi idadi ya 132, 073,057 lakini hii grant  hatuoni 
imefanya nini , haijulikani ime fanya mradi gani katika serikali yetu ya  Kaunti ya  Mombasa  
kupitia uongozi wa Idara ya Uchukuzi na U safiri katika jumbo letu .  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti jambo lengine ambalo lanishangaza juzi tuliweza kumwita 
Afisa Mkuu wa Idara hio ya Uchukuzi na Usafiri ak aweza kutuambia mwaka huu wa fedha  
tumeweka kitita cha shs 181M ilioni  bajeti ya mataa lakini jambo la kushangaza kati ya pe sa hizo 
yeye mwenyewe akakiri na kauli yake kwamba kati ya pesa hizo shs10M ilioni  ni ya  malipo  ya 
stima  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ! Akatud anganya development budget  shs 10 Milioni  iko katika 
recurrent budget  sio katika development budget ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
  
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimesimama kadri ninavyozidi kuongea ningewahi miza 
Wabunge wenzangu kwamba jambo hili (??) ushahidi wa kutosha na kw amba tunaposimama 
tuzungumza na usha hidi ambao uko na kulingana na desturi yetu sisi tuliweza kula kiapo 
kuwahudumia wananchi wetu , kuweza ku towa bagua kuwahudumia wananchi wetu , kuhakikisha 
wanapata haki mashinani . Leo hii ikiwa mimi M bunge siku ya tarehe sita mwezi wa Septemb a 
nilikula kiapo kuweza kuhudumia wananchi mtu mmoja yuko katika ofisi ambaye ametumia 
kitita cha sh s 3.7Bi lioni  sijaona maendeleo yoyote katika eneo langu , sijaona maendeleo yoyote 
Kaunti ya Mombasa ndio maana leo nina uchungu wa kuh akikisha kwamba kuunga mkono 
Mswada u lioletwa na ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa Athman Shebe kuhakikisha kwamba mtu huyu  
ameweza kutoa nafasi ili mwingine z aidi aweze kufanya kazi . Ahsa nte s ana Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon . Kitula, the Chief W hip. Yes, 
Hon. Fahad Kassim ? 
 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii na ningependa 
kumuunga mkono ndugu Mheshimiwa Athman Shebe M ukono kwa Mswada alioleta leo 
Bungeni . Mheshimiwa Spika  tumekuwa  tukijadili W izara hio kwa mda mrefu sana mwaka 
mzima ndani ya Bunge la Kaunti ya Mombasa tuko na vilio vingi kushauriana na idara hio , 
tumekuwa na matatizo mengi na inaonekana dha hiri sha hiri ya kw amba W izara hio imeshindwa 
kuwajibika na basi kwa leo n itaongea kwa upande wangu mimi yale  matatizo tunapata kutokana 
na W izara hio . Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ndani ya W odi yangu ya M jambere ni mwaka m moja 
na nusu hapajawahi kuletwa hata taa na ningependa kukumbusha  viongozi wenzangu tulipoingia 
Bunge hili mwezi wa n ane mwaka elfu mb ili kumi na saba kulikuwa na baj eti ilikuwa imetoka , 
kupitishwa tuu Mhe shimiwa Kitula ametuambia ni bi lioni moja na kitu ya kuleta maendeleo 
mashinani , Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ndani ya mwaka moja na nusu hakuna taa hata  moja 
imewahi kuletwa ndani ya M jambere mpaka leo ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti juzi tulipitisha baj eti ambayo itakuwa inaisha hivi karibuni 
mwezi wa si ta tuliweka pesa maalumu kila W odi tukianza na M jambere yangu niliweka mimi 
mwenyewe katika allocation  pesa t aslimu za kuleta taa ndani ya W odi hio na mabarabara . 
Mheshimiwa Mwen yekiti mpaka leo wacha kuwekwa cabro  hata moja hapajawekwa hata tinga 
halijawahi kufika kuchonga hio barabara wakati tunalipa mtu Mheshimiwa Sp ika ametumia 
mabi lioni ya pesa ya wakaazi wa Mombas a wakati hawajibiki .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika wakati kunanyesha ndani ya Kaunti ya Mombasa kuna pesa hi o 
Wizara inatenga kando z aidi ya millioni mia moja Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  na hizo pesa 
tulijaribu kuita M awaziri na Ma Afisa Wakuu  waje wawajibike lakini hawaku ja Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti , hizo pesa zilienda kwa akaunti y a mtu binafsi ndani ya Mombasa K aunti ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Hio ni aibu na ni laana kwa viongozi kama sisi kama tutanyamaza hio pesa ; kimimi  
ufahamu nilio nao ilienda kwa akaunti ya mtu anaitwa Vipul  Shah na ningependa wakati unatoa 
mwelekeo Mheshimiwa Spika iwe utafiti na uchunguzi uweze kufanywa .  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ju zi Mombasa nzima imebadilishwa cabro nyekundu Mombasa 
nzima tuli badilisha na cabro  zile tuliweka miaka mitano iliyopita na unfortuna tely zile cabro  
zilizotoka katika zile baj eti tulipitisha mwaka jana cabro  hizo hizo zilitumika kwenda  
kupelekwa mashinani wakaweka hizo cabro  na hizo pesa zikaliwa na mabwenyenye f ulani ndani 
ya Kaunti ya Mombasa .... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Juzi tulipomwita Afisa Mkuu  wa barabara aje awajibike tulimu uliza hilo swali kuwa 
cabro  ulizotoa ndani ya Kaunti ya Mombasa nzima ziko wapi , alisema zile cabro  ni za watu 
binafsi kila mwenye duka aliweka cabro yake sijui ni nani aliweka cabro  ndani Mombasa hii 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i kuna matatizo kama parking cla mps; kuna watu wamewekwa 
magari yalik uwa yakiwekwa clamp  na W izara hio baadaye jioni yanafunguliwa bila kulipa 
official  kwa K aunti ya Mombasa ! Pesa zikie nda kwa mifuko ya watu binafsi na hizo namba 
tutaz itoa ili M pesa yao iweze kuangaliwa na utafiti na ukarabati uweze kufanyika kwa upande 
huo...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti kuna advertisement  na billboards  ndani ya Kaunti ya Mombasa 
ambazo zinafaa kuleta mamillioni ya pesa ambayo iweze kunufaisha wananchi wetu ama 
wakaazi wa Mombasa . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nafikiri Mombasa nzima inajua na wale 
viongozi sote tuko hapa hio pesa inaenda kwa mfuko wa mtu , kuna wakati nilifanya utafiti na  
nikaweza kuripoti hi lo jambo kwa W izara ya Biashara kuna Inspector ate ambay o inafaa iwe kwa 
Idara ya Ugatuzi lakini Wizara hio ama W aziri huyu ameweza kuikalia ngumu kitengo hicho 
kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa siku kunaingia takriban millioni mbili ambayo 
inaenda kwa mfuko wake , hizo gari zinalipa hio pesa kwa askari wake na wanampeleka yeye ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuna ma  quarries  na mines ambazo zina angaliwa chini ya 
Wizara ya M aji ndani ya Mombasa na ndani ya Kenya nzima kulingana na sheria za ugatuzi. 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti W aziri huyo amechukua Idara hio kunatolewa saruji kila siku   
Bamburi , Kashani kule na kwengineko na hakuna pesa ha ta shillingi moja inaingia kwa K aunti 
ya Mombasa ikienda kwa  mfuko wa mt u mmoja ama W izara hio ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sina mengi lakini ningeomba na  hawa W aheshimiwa ambao 
tuko hapa ningewakumbusha si si ni watumishi tulitumwa tuje tuwajibi ke na yeyote yule 
atakayepinga M swada huyo basi kesho mbele ya Mungu utakuwa masuula , uongozi ni cheo 
unapewa na Mwenyezi Mungu kesho utakwenda wajibika . 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Kwa hivyo naomba Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti uweke hatua kabambe na ukarabati uweze 
kufanyika ili hawa wananchi wa Mombasa waweze kunufaika la sivyo miaka mitano itaisha hivi 
hivi na hakuna chochote Mombasa tutaweza kunufaika . Ahsante s ana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Fahad. Yes, Hon . Bwire . 
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I rise to also support the Motion  of 
the day ; in my understanding the devolution was made to do away with the marginalization that 
is my knowledge , before the devolution so many areas in this count ry have  been marginalized so 
the presence of devolution was to do away with such like things . It is  very unfortunate Mr. 
Speaker that seven years down the line after the devolution system of governance still  other areas 
like Junda are still under  the same  margi nalization system of governance . 
Mr. Speaker my first budget or the first budget under my leadership as the M CA 
representing Junda W ard I approved a budget of seven million ( Shs 7 Million ) to rehabilitat e the 
Junda W ard from Safari  - Ngombeni - Safari - Junda M ission , as we speak I wrote so many 
letters , I presented so ma ny Statements in this Asse mbly to the D epartment concern ed or rather 
the C ommittee co ncern ed but Mr. Speaker so far  little had been done .  
The other day last year November after threatening to demonstrate with my people I was 
given a contractor who lasted less than one week Mr. Speaker on the site doing nothing , 
thereafter the contractor told me that he has not been paid so he will not cont inue with the work . 
Mr. Speaker the very month last year November I happen ed to lose eight people in one week due 
to insecurity , I came with the same st atement asking the Committee o f Transport and 
Infrastructure , I requested them to have a si te visit in m y Ward which they never did . 
Mr. Speaker I allocated or rather I approved a budget of two point  two five million ( Shs 
2.25 Million ) to ca ter for the street light in my area , as we speak I have so far received less than 
50 bulbs or rather I wonder whether tho se 50 bulbs with 10 igniters can cost two point two five 
million ( Shs 2.25 Million ). Mr. Speaker, we have two months down the line ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 We have two months down the line Mr. Speaker to go for another financial year 
2019/2020 , now my question rema ins how would I approve a budget and yet the one that I 
approved before has done nothing and this shows how incompetent  the CEC Member of 
Transport and Infrastructure  is. I will therefore join my fellow colle agues in calling upon the 
removal of this incomp etent fellow to the office ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Sp eaker to pave way to a very competent  Kenyan with knowledge, with interest of 
people at his heart to do work for this County. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you v ery m uch Hon. Bwire. Y es Hon. Amur?  
 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Hon. Murfad Amur : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika na mchana utabakia kuwa mchana , 
usiku utabakia usiku Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika wakati tukianza siasa za Uhuru na  kura mimi ni mmoja niliyeumia 
zaidi kwa sa babu tulileta taa zinaitwa LED  na mimi nikang 'olewa taa zote zile ambazo n ilikuwa 
nimeweka wakati nikiwa D iwani kutoka miaka ile ili zika badilishwa  na zile ambazo zinatoka 
kwa serikali kuu…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Mumba:  Point of order ! 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  …Utanijuza baadae kaa chini, utakaa chini niko kwenye order , 
tukabadilisha mataa haya Mheshimiwa ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Prischillah , under what Standing Order are you 
standing?  
 
 Hon.  Mumba:  Am standing up on Standing Orde r 82. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : What is Standing Order 82  saying? Can you tell us what  
Standing Order 82 say s? 
 
 Hon.  Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Standing Order 82 says , ‘No Member shall refer 
to the substance of the proceedings of a Select Committee  before the Committee has made its 
report to the County Assembly .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you, you can sit down now. Yes continue Hon. 
Amur?  
 
 (Applause)  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  I respect my learned friend, how many reports have been brought 
here M r. Speaker including this one here? This is also a report that was brought here , 
incompetent report ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Please sit down and let the Hon. Member continue . 
 
  
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon. Murfad Amur:  Let us call a spade a spade tod ay Mr. Speaker . Hon. Uhuru Muigai 
Kenyatta with Kenya Power and Lighting came into p artnership with Mombasa County 
government and LED lights were installed in this County of Mombasa in partn ership with the 
government ; the big question is where those lights  which were removed were taken to and at 
what cost? Mr. Speaker we want to know that ?  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir we can say until tomorrow the department of electrical is not to be 
blame d, I want to repeat it is not to be blame d as they have not been g iven the tools to do their 
work . Mr. Speaker if the car does  not have fuel how will the driver drive it Mr. Speaker?  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker if they do  not have spares how will they replace the spares? Mr. Speaker if 
the cars do  not have insurance cover how will the driver drive that vehicle? Yet during the 
budget each and every item is itemized and budgeted for but unfortunately it is a shame, big 
shame for me being here today and seeing that we are crying for lights and am told we are not 
the provider o f LED ... 
 
(Applause and Laughter)  
 
 If you can no t provide LED you have money go and purchase streetlights for my people, 
you do  not give 10 bulbs . I start from Nyali bridge to Kizingo to Liko ni and you give me 10 
bulbs , who are you fooling? Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Thank you very much Hon. Amur. Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker at least you have recognized my presence.  Hon. 
Speaker I would  wish to take Members through t he matter in place; it  is a ma tter that has got 
several interests in it like for instance each and every business d ay we have a request or rather 
Statement that is directed to the Department of Transport and I nfrastructure.  
Hon. Speak er I will take Members to take Order P aper for 8th Sitting on Thursday 25th of 
October, 2018;  we have about six S tatement requests from the Hon. Members , six per day and at 
times they even go up to 10 and there  is no even a single day this House has been convinced with 
even a S tatement, with even a report .  
 Every day since the inception of the C ommittee led by  the C hairman who was 
fired un ceremoniously Hon. Fahad Kassim and later on it was given  this mandate to Hon. 
Prischillah , either of them has never provided a convincing report to this Honourable  House ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Speaker w hen we were sworn in under the Code of C onduct , Paper number 4 of 
2003.  
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Code of conduct of all public officers; we are all public officers here and at the same time 
people have to know and differentiate the roles that we pla y outside . There we are blame d for 
each and every bad thing that is taking place, every activity Honourable Members , every bad 
activity Honourable Members,  at a times it reach ed a point where everyone knows that Hon. 
Members of Mombasa County are rubber st amps, now we tried and we said since we are rubber  
stamp s we want to rubber stamp authoritatively that from today...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 We will no longer be rubber stamp s... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Speaker a noble thing , a responsible officer can do when call ed upon  to appear 
before the Committee the best and simple thing is to appear come and convince M embers that 
the budget that I have is less what do we do, a dd me other funds so that at least I can complete 
the project s. As I speak the said department,  I have vis ited that D epartment  more than 10 times 
to CEC, to Chief O fficer and to the Director and Hon. Speaker it is not something that is 
secretive they have powers I do  not know where they are d eriving  their powers from but am 
assuming they are having powers from  the above.  
Hon. Speaker I h ave a road in my estate, Tudor E state that was started one year ago until 
now it is unfinished, I have another road from Kiziwi roundabout going to Hamisi High School 
on your way to Polytechnic it is impassable and when you make  enquiries the issue is that they 
will be done and now just recently before we br oke for recess a group of people came to my 
place they wanted to attack me reason being that they gave me the mandate and they feel that am 
not representing them responsibly . Hon. Speaker I can take a liability of my own, I can take my 
own  blames and my own yolk but I cannot take somebody’s yolk. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 These offices are designed by these wananchi , these wananchi  are the ones who have the 
powers and since they cannot all represent us here, they have selected us to represent them here 
so whenever  an issue that they have that is  their own issue  it is not personal , this thing even if I 
die today  or tomorrow they will be an elected Member of Tudor Ward and before me there was a 
Member and after me they will be a Member even if I will come for another term again as I 
know I will come but business has to go on ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Speaker as I wind up my contribution  the duty of a public officer, Public O fficer 
Procurement A ct states very wel l every act we are lead by the C onstitution and I support. Hon. 
Speaker before I sit down I thi nk you can see I sit between this was former and this is the 
current ; hopeful maybe the seat of the transport docket was designed for this row ...  
 
(Laughter)  
 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Maybe next time  i am the one ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 But if you give me that C hair Hon. Speaker I will bring reports and the reports that is 
require d this Motion  is in good timing  and I request Hon. Members to support the Motion  I beg 
to support  the impeachment Motion . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much, yes Hon. Lucy Chizi?  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwako naona ukipofu kumbe 
umeniona ahsante sana. Mheshimiwa Spika hoja ilioletwa mbele yetu mimi k ama Lucy Chizi 
Mheshimiwa wa Mtopanga Wodi naipinga hoja hii vikali sana ... 
 
Interruption  
(Loud Consultations)  
  
 Na sababu zake ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order! Order! Order!  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Kila mtu aheshimiwe na maoni yake, haya ni maoni yangu . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order! Order! Order Hon. Members ! 
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Haya ni maoni yangu Mheshimiwa Spika nataka niheshimiwe na maoni 
yangu , haya ni maoni yangu na ningependa nisikizwe . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Continue Hon. Lucy Chizi please . 
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika hoja ilioletwa 
mbele yetu kwanza nitasema haikufuata kanuni za Bunge. Mheshimiwa Spika Waziri ambaye 
tunamuongea hapa hakuletwa mbele yetu akajibu maswali yale ambayo yuko nayo na ona 
aliyeitwa ni Afisa Mkuu  ndio aliyeitwa na ripoti hiyo bado iko na  Bi Mwenyekiti , ripoti hii 
ilikuwa  itufikie mbele yetu tarehe 25 lakini kulingana na hamasa zetu ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba? Please sit down Hon. Lucy . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I fail  to understand where the Member is opposing but I am 
very clear she was part of me when we signed the impeachment register ... 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 (Laughter)  
 
 I do not know when she refuted the claim.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members  please give back the mic rophone  to Hon. 
Lucy Chizi . 
 
 Hon.  Chirer i: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon . Khatri) : Hon. Lucy just hold on.  Hon. Members we are debating the 
Motion , she has all the rights to either support the  Motion  or not to support . So please Hon. 
Members let us give her time and let her talk. Yes continue Hon. Lucy?  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Mheshimiwa Spika naona yalikuwako mbele yetu ni…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Ho n. Ogutu are you standing on  a Point of O rder?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Point of I nformation ! 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes just pass the mic rophone  please to Hon. Og utu. 
 
 Hon. Ogutu: Mr. Speaker when introducing this Motion  you read all the possible 
procedures and you yourself under your s eat you declare d that it has passed through all the 
procedures ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 That is why it was brought in the House ; Hon. Chizi is misleading the House by saying 
that the Motion  did not pass through all the procedures Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ogutu, let her talk maybe she has some 
point where she will refer us to why this thing is not in order so please give her some time let her 
talk. 
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Mheshimiwa Spika chini ya Standing Order  63 I have a right to be heard  
kwa hivyo naomba msikize maoni yangu , yale ni yao na yangu ni haya , kama nilivyoeleza 
Bunge hili na sitaweza kuregelea tena naona wamesikia wal iosikia wamesikia na ambao 
hawajasikia waendelee ... 
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Nimesema munisikize kulingana na mao ni yangu. Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza 
ningependa kumshukuru Gavana wetu 001 ni mara yangu ya pili ...Mheshimiwa Spika 2013 
mpaka saa hii…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khari) : Honourable! Honourable!  
 
 Hon. Chi reri: Mheshimiwa Spika sitaki kusikia tena wa cha nisikizwe Mheshimiwa 
Spika nikae.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable, Just sit down.  
 
(Interruption)  
(Hon. Murfad Amur off microphone)  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur : The name of the Governor has n ot been mentioned in this House!  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Thank you Hon. Amur. Hon. Lucy, please not 
unless you are not understanding English or you want us to speak in Swahili?  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Mheshimiwa Spika kuna kitu ambacho nataka nieleze sina budi 
kuzungumza hayo.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ndio nakuuliza Mheshimiw a unaelewa kizungu ama ni 
shida?  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Kila kitu naelewa kama vile unavyoelewa wewe Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sawa, uko na procedure  umesoma Standing Order 62?  
 
 Hon. Chireri: Nimeisoma.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Umeona makosa gani ambayo tumefanya?  
 
 Hon. Chireri: Makosa amba yo…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ambayo W aheshimiwa wamefanya!  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Mimi ninajieleza lakini hao ni kama ambaye hawataki niji eleze ... 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 (Laughter)  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So please quote for us the Standin g Order whereby the 
Honourable M embers are wro ng, please? Don’t mislead the House Honourable please?  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Ni sawa Mheshimiwa Sp ika. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
 Hon. Chireri: Ndio ninasema Mheshimiwa Spika ninasema hivyo nimetaja Gavana na 
sababu zake. Mheshimiwa Balala…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Shomari:  Mheshimiwa aondoe  hiyo Taarifa,  we as are not discussing 
the Governor ...(Off microphone) . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable! Hon. Lucy, please let us give the chance to the 
Majority Leader, Please? Yes Majority Leader?  
  
 The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
 I want to put some order of the House. I would like Members to concentrate on the 
Motion , they should not mention the name of the Governor. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 We are not here t o mention name of the Governor w e are here to contribute on the issue 
of the Motion  which is in the floor. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members. P lease let us give the Hon. Lucy 
Chizi time so that she can finish whatever she is saying, please! Yes Hon. Lucy?  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ningesema M gala muuwe na haki 
yake umpe. Mheshimiwa Balala amefanya mengi Mheshimiwa Spika, nazungumza Wodi ya 
Mtopanga hata kama sijamaliziwa…  
 
(Inter ruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Lucy you are addressing me, so please just continue.  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Sawa Mheshimiwa wacha ni.. . 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 (Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Usikae ukasikiza watu wewe ni address  mimi uendelee, 
tafadhali!  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Ni sawa Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa .  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Ukiangalia W odi ya Mtopanga Mheshimiwa Spika vile ilivyo kuwa sivyo. 
Ardhi ile ni mbay a lakini Mheshimiwa Spika kuna cabro  imeanza  Turkey Bai se mpaka 
Vikwatani,  Anwarali  - Vikwatani. .. 
  
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Amur please ?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
(Hon. Murfad Amur off microphone ) 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Because she has been favoured in her a rea… 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members she still has the right to give her opinion. So 
please! Let her talk please Hon. Members. Yes Just make it short please Honourable.  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Kwa ufupi Mheshimiwa Spika nimesema hivyo kwa sababu anayeingia 
Mtopanga sasa hivi ukiangalia baraba bra tumetengenezewa , kwa kusema ukweli hata juzi 
Mheshimiwa Gavana ameenda kuzindua ile barabara nyengine  kwa hivyo kazi imefanyika hata 
kama, waambiwa M gala muuwe na haki uumpe. Hata kama kazi haijaisha lakini n i matumaini 
yangu ya kuwa hawa M awaziri tuki washika vizuri kazi zetu zitafanyika Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Lucy Chizi. Thank you very much. Yes 
Hon. Abrari?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimesimama kuunga mkono h oja hii.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba.  
 
 Hon. Samba : The Hon. Member who just spoken from the floor, she has just said that 
'Hawa M awaziri tukiwashika vizuri ...'’ we do  not know by kuwa shika vizuri  maybe she explain s!  
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 (Laughter ) 
 
 We do not understand what she meant. That is un -Parliamentary language Hon. Speaker. 
We do  not know. What means by Tuwashike vizuri ? 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi , can you please clarify .  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Nimesema tukiwashika vizuri ni laz ima... 
 
(Loud consultatio ) 
 
 Ni lazima tushirikiane nao.  
 
(Interruption ) 
  
 Nyinyi munasema hivyo si kuwa eti muko sawa katika Wodi zenu muko na lawama 
ndogo  ndogo, binadamu si  kamili  aliye mkamilifu  ni Mwenyezi  Mungu. Leo tuko hapa kwa 
Waziri wa Uchukuzi,  kesho tutaenda kwengine. Hawa Mawaziri tutakuwa tunawato a kwa 
sababu wanafanya makosa? Tutawamaliza ...  
 
(Loud consultation ) 
 
 Ni lazima tukae nao tujue shida iko wapi? Tushirikiane nao ndio ninasema hivyo.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much  Hon. Lucy Chizi, yes Hon. Kitula?  
  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Point of Order Mheshimiwa Spika katika 104(f). 104(f) 
inasema ,  'conduct is grossly disorderly if the Member concerned; deliberately gives false 
information to the County Assembly’ . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sisi kulingana na Katiba, 
kulingana na sheria ya County G overnm ent Act tumepatiwa nguvu ikiwa W aziri hatendi kazi 
lazima sisi kulingana na Katiba yetu aweze kutoa nafasi kwa mwengine ambaye ana  uwezo zaidi 
ili kuweza kufanya kazi hizo. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Halafu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kazi hizi si za  kuoneana imani Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti hili si Kanisa. .. 
  
(Laughter)  
 
 Hili ni Bunge t unastahili utenda kazi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Kwa  hivyo imani ni 
Kanisani Bungeni ni utimizaji na utenda  kazi wa kaz i. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes Hon. Abrari?  
 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  Hon. Mohamed Abrari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nimesimama na 
uchungu sana lakini nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii. ..  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ninasi kitika sana kuona ugatuzi uliletwa kw enye Mombasa 
kufaidi kila mtu, u meletwa Kenya nzima kufaidi ; vile nazungumzia  kuhusu Mombasa hususan 
Mombasa ls eo hii tunaona hak una ugavi sawa kwenye W odi zote, k una W odi nyengine ni bora 
zaidi kushinda zengine. Nataka  kutoa mfano tu katika pesa tuliotoa katika migao ya ku maintain  
barabara na shangaa mimi kama mkaazi wa Ko ngowea ndugu yangu hakuna kitu nilichopata 
pale. Barabara nilizoekewa  ndani  zote haziko Kongowea; naanza, nime wekewa barabara inaitwa 
Neem Avenue ndan i ya Kongowea, Kongowea mimi  sina barabara hiyo inayoitwa Neem 
Avenue. Nee m Avenue ni barabara inayoshikanisha Mon na paitwajee ?….(Finger clicking)  
inatoka barabara ya Links inashikana na…iko kwenye Nyali A. Inashikana Koroga. Imetoka 
Koroga imeshikana mbele ambayo hiyo sio Kongowea, n aregelea tena barabara inayoitwa 
Bandari road ime wekwa ndani ya Kon gowea , barabara ya Bandari h ii pesa iliyotengwa kwenye 
barabara ya Bandari  hii si Kongowea! Barabara hii ime wekwa kwa mabwenyen ye Kongowea 
sisi hatukupata mgao  wowote kwa hivyo kiufupi Waziri hajazingatia usawa  wa ugavi wa 
rasilimali katika W odi zote sawa. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Katika pesa tuliotenga shs. 89,625,000 ya kutamausha ni kuwa Wodi  moja imepawa 
Ksh.37, 000,000 ambayo ni takriban asilimia 50  ya pesa zile ku maintain  Wodi moja kwa s ababu 
kuna mabwenyenye. Nikirege lea tena kuna barabara hapa ya Beach road; B each road iko kwenye 
hesabu lakini B each road hii ina  angaliwa na KURA (Kenya Urban Roads) . Tukiregelea tena 
tunaenda kuangalia kuna pesa zimetengwa kuteng eneza drainage system  ya Kongowea , pesa zile 
waliopewa pesa w ashamaliza kutumia pesa lakini m radi haujafika hata nusu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ya  kutamausha kabisa leo hii mimi nina  uchungu kama Mwakilishi 
wa Kongowea katika bajeti ya 2018/2 019 hakuna chochote n ilichopata; b arabara zote 
zime wekwa zikiwa zaitwa za Kongowea lakini zote si  za Kongowea z ote ni  za mabwenyenye 
isipokuwa Ratna peke e yake. Sasa hii twenda wapi? Twaenda wapi na ugatuzi umetufikisha wapi 
leo?  
Mheshimiwa kama hakuna ugavi sawa wa rasilmali  katika kila Wodi, ugatuzi 
umetufikisha wapi kwa hivyo nakuomba Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kama Abrari Mwakilishi wa 
Kongowea, na niliapa na kitabu kitakatifu Quran na leo mimi kwa dhati kwa haki naunga mkono 
Mswada huu Mheshimia Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speake r (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Abrari.  Hon. Members I now 
put the question that this House, oh! Sorry, Hon. Members I now give the mover which is Hon. 
Shebe to give the reply.  
 
March 19, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            17 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor Page 
18  Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kunipatia na fasi hii ya 
kurudi sha shukran zangu za dhati kwa W aheshimiwa wenza , kwa kuona mwangaza na 
kusimama na haki na kutetea ukweli . 
 Mimi nasema W allah i kwa kijina la Mwenyezi  Mungu mwingi wa rehma ku bwa kubwa 
na rehema ndogo ndogo,  Waheshimiwa wenza mumeingia k wa kumbukumbu ya historia hata 
bila nyinyi kujua. Kwa hivyo mimi nasema ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na natumai 
Bunge hili litazidi kusimama na kutekeleza majukumu yak e ya kikatiba kuhakikisha kuwa 
Mawaziri wanawaj ibikia majukumu yao na wanatumi kia w akaazi wa Mombasa kwa haki  bila 
ubaguzi wa maeneo wa dini na  wa ukabila . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti t unataka ugatuzi uonekane 
kuwa umefika mashinani bila mtu kubaguliwa. Ahsante san a na nawashukuru kwa dhati mno 
Waheshimiwa Wenyekiti na W aheshimiwa wenza kwa ku niunga mkono. Ahsanteni sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 
(Question put)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Shebe. Hon Members as earlier 
said I had let the House to debate the Motion ; Hon. Members now as the procedure I move to put 
the question again.  Hon. Members I now put the question that this House adopt s the Motion  on 
the impeachment of CEC Transport, Infrastr ucture And Public Works Hon. Taw fiq Balala in the 
same term as moved . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
Hon.  Members pursuant to S ection 40( 3) of the County Government  Act, 2012 and 
Standing Order 62( 6), the County Assembly having passed the Motion  on impeachment of the 
CEC Transport Infrastructure a nd Public Works the Assembly has seven days within which to 
appoint a Select Committee c omprising of five M embers to look into the issues raised in the 
Motion  and avail a report within 10  days of the appointment of the Committee and  the mandate 
to determine when the P rocedural Motion  to form selective C ommittee will be moved l ays with 
the Co unty Assembly Business Committee . Thank you Hon. Members.  
 
(Applause)  
 Yes Clerk next Order please . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Honourable  Members this House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 20th March, 2019 at 
9:00a .m. 
 
The House rose at 3:50p.m.  
 
    
 
 
 