November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 29th November , 2022  
Third Assemb ly – Seventeenth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 10:20a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
  
[The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
                                                         PRAY ERS  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Have your seats Hono urable  Members . 
[Long Consultations ] 
Order ! Order Members ! Order!  Yes Clerk?  
                                        MESSAGES  
NOMINATION OF RECRUITMENT PANEL FOR MOMBASA COUNTY SECRETARY  AND 
THE SECRET ARY TO THE COUNT Y PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD  
 
Honourable Members , the County Assembly h as received a message from his Excellency 
the Governor of Mombasa on the no mination of rec ruitment panel for Mombasa County  
Secretary and the Secretary to the County Public Se rvice Board date d on Wednesday 16th 
Novembe r, 2022. The letter reads ,  
According t o the powers conferred to me pursuant to Section 15 (2) c as read with Section 
18(A) (1) o f the County Government Amendment Act , 2020, I hereby forward the names of 
Selection Panel for the po sition of the County Secreta ry and Secretary to the County 
Public Service Board for vetting and approval.   
Names of the recruit ment panel:  
1. Dr. Wi nfred Kithinji, the Chairperson  
2. Ms. Jacqueline Wahenya , from private sector  
3. Mr. Oscar Ojuma , from The Institute  of Certified Public Accou ntants of Kenya        
     (ICPAK)  
4. Mr. Mwinyi Bwika , from  law society of Kenya (LSK)  
5. Mr. Hamid Abubakar , from workers  union repre sentative.  
 
Please ex pedite the process . 
Yours faithfully , His Excellency Governor Ab dulswamad Sharif f Nassir . 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 2 Honourable Members , I have directed th at the issue be dealt today during this Sitting so as 
to enable the recruitment panel to start its work expeditiously . Yes Clerk?  
                          NOTICE OF MOTION  
NOMINATION OF RECRUITMENT PANEL FOR MOMBASA C OUNTY SECRETARY AND SECRETARY 
TO THE COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD BY THE GOVERNOR  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri?  
 The Leader  of M ajority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to give 
Notice of the follow ing Motion ; 
THAT this  County Assembly approves the nomination of rec ruitm ent panel for Mombasa 
County  Secreta ry and Secretary to the County Public Service Board made by his 
Excellency , the Governor of Mombasa as follows;  
Names of the recruitment pane l: 
1. Dr. Winfred Kithinji , the Chairperson  
2. Ms. Jacqueline Wahenya , from private secto r 
3. Mr. Oscar Ojuma , from The Institute  of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya  
               (ICPAK)  
4. Mr. M winyi Bwika , from Law Society of Kenya (LSK)  
5. Mr. Hamid Abubakar , from workers uni on representative . 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
RESOLUTION TO PETITION THE NATIONAL ASS EMBLY ON THE COUNTY WARDS EQUITABLE 
DEVELOPMENT FUND  
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana , MCA Shanzu Ward? 
Hon. Katana : Thank you Ho nourable  Speaker . I stand  to give a Notice of Motion on 
resolution to petition the National Assemb ly on the County Wards Equitable Development Fund. 
Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to give Notice of the following Motion;  
THAT , pursuant to Ar ticle 37 and 119 of t he Constitu tion of Kenya, thi s County A ssembly 
resolves to petition the National Assembly individually  and collectively as Members of 
County Assemblies and the County Assemblies Forum  (CAF) vide the annexed draft 
petiti on for the Natio nal A ssembly to intervene and en sure;  
THAT, the Co unty Wards Equitable Development Fund be incorporated in the proposed 
Constitution al Amendment Bill befor e the National Assembly by the Hon ourable  Stephen 
Mule , MP and the Hon ourable  Gichimu  Githinji MP , alongside other proposed funds 
namely the National Government Co nstituencies Development fund (NGCDF), National 
Government Affirmative Action Fund (NGA AF), t he Senate Oversight Fund and the 
economic stimulus and empower ment fund ; either prior  to publication of the said Bill or 
before it is referred  to the Senate , in accor dance with rules of procedure of Parliament;  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 3 THAT  the proposed Constituti onal Amendment Bi ll, in amending Article 204 of the 
Constitution should provide fo r the following with  respect to County Wards Equitable 
Development Fund; 
1. THAT each C ounty government s hall allocate funds comprising of a certain percentage  
of the respective total County’ s annual budget estimates or as shall be advised by the 
Commission o n Revenue Allocation  (CRA) during th e enactment of the County  Allocation 
of Revenue Act to cater for County Wards Equitable Development Fund; 
2. That all monies allocated to County Wards Equitab le Fund shall be considered as funds 
allocated to Wards pursuant t o Article 206 (2) ( c) to be adminis tered in accor dance with 
the provision of an A ct of Parliament and , 
3. That Parliament shall enact a legislation to provide for the administrati on of the County 
Ward Equitable Development Fund. 
I, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
MOTION  
NOMINATION OF RE CRUITMENT PANEL FOR MOMBASA COUNTY SECRETARY AND SECRETARY TO THE 
COUNTY PUBLIC  SERVICE BOARD  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Mwamwiri , the Leader 
of Majo rity Party. 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you Mr. Speake r. Mr. Speaker S ir, I 
beg to move the f ollowing Motion ; 
 
THAT , this County Assembly approve the nomination of the recruitment panel for the 
Mombasa County Secretary and Se cretary to the County  Publi c Service Board m ade by 
His Ex cellency , the Governor of Mo mbasa as follows : 
 
Names of the recruitment  panel; 
1. Dr. Winfred Kithinji  – Chairperson  
2. Ms. Jacqueline Waihenya  -Private Sector  
3. Mr. Oscar Ojuma – ICPAK  
4. Mr. Mwinyi Bwika –LSK 
5. Mr. Hamid Abubakar – Workers  Union Representa tive 
 
May I ask the Majority Chief Whip  to second the Motion.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Chief Whip ? 
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Mumba ): I second.  
 
[Question proposed]  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Thank  you Hon ourable  Members .  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 4 I now propose the question that the  Motion on , nomi natio n of recruitment panel for 
Mombasa County Secretary and Secretary to the County Public Service Board made by the 
Governor and as moved by the Majority  Leader be debated in this Ho use. 
 
[Question Proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Leader of Majority?  
 
The L eader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , may I 
ask this House to approve the n ames  brought forward  by His Excellency,  the Gov ernor t o the 
process  of vetting and interviewing  County Secre tary and the Se cretary t o the County Pub lic 
Service B oard. Mr. Speaker, it is a re quirement under the amended  version of the County 
Government Act that the pane l consist of the follow ing, under section 15, 2 (c) Mr. Speaker ; That 
the Chairman of that panel ; 
 
1. Must not be a public o fficer  
2. Must have  a representative from the private sector  
3. It is a req uirement that we must have an advocate in that selection pan el 
4. We must  have a certified  Lawye r of a High Court; and, 
5. A representative of the workers Unio n 
 
By so M r. Speaker , His Excellency  the Governo r has fulfilled this requirement  by 
forwarding th ese names and their position held  as a requirement in the  County Governmen t Act . 
I, therefore urge  my fellow Members, since the Governor has shown goodwill by  abiding  by the 
rule of law by forwar ding this panel with the requisite requirement  under the County 
Government Act , we honor his wish and approve  these names so that he can perform his 
functions as required by law in ample time without prud ence of the law so.  
Mr. Speaker , this is a goodwill from H is Excelle ncy because not all of us or not all the 
public are aware of  this amended version ; so he could have assumed there is  no requirement and 
gone  forward doin g his duty as normal but since he  is a law abiding citi zen, he opted to follow 
the req uired  law and he re we are as an Assembly requi red by the County government and the 
Constitution of Kenya that we exercise our dut ies; one of it is approving hi s Selection Panel so 
that they can perform their duties after they have been approved  by the Coun ty Assem bly. I, 
therefore urge the Hon ourable  Members we go ahead and approve the names so that other things 
can flow . Tha nk you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank y ou, the Leader of Majority. Yes , 
Honourable  Chief Whip, M ajority Chief Whip ? 
 
The Majority Chief Whip (Hon. Mumba ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika. Na mimi pia 
nimesimama kuunga mkono  maana  nikiangalia hii Panel ndio itaweza kuanza kusaid ia kazi 
tofauti tofa uti na ikiwa Gavana mwen yewe ametuletea haya majina ; ni kuonyesha  
amewachunguza v izuri na ana  imani na  wao na anaju a ni watu ambao wanaweza ku kaa na 
kufanya kazi hii ambayo wanata rajiwa kufanya bila tashwishi wala kutatizika . Kwa hivyo 
ningeom ba kwa  sababu  ni kama kazi yetu y a kwanza kwa kuom bwa na Gavana  hapa tumpitish ie 
jambo lake il i aweze  kuona kuwa tumemsaidia katika kuanza k azi zake ili a sione  kuwa 
tumekuwa kikwazo .  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 5 Tumfungulie  bawa zake aanze kazi zake ndio na sisi tuweze  kuona ka zi zinasongea kwa  
sababu mpa ka dakika hii tunaona mambo mengi bado yamesimama na kati ka njia ya mfumo  
huu. Hata tukimaliza tunataka tuletewe pia mengine na men gine kabla hatujaenda muhula wa 
kupumzika,  tuweze kufungu a milango mingi ili kazi ziweze kufanyik a. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Allen 
Katana ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nimesimama kwanza nakupa shukrani kwa  
ajili ya na fasi hii Mheshimiwa Spika na pengine Bunge hili asubu hi ya leo  litaniwia radhi kwa 
sababu sitaki kuwa miongoni mwa Waheshimiwa ambao kazi yao ni kupitis ha vitu hata ambavyo 
pengine saa nyengine inakuwa ni vigumu k uvieleza. Sitapitisha mtu  ambaye simjui Mheshimiwa  
kwa sababu sitaki kuwa muongo katika utenda  kazi wangu ; laiti tungepew a nafasi ya 
kuwafahamu hawa watu kwanza basi tungekuwa tunap itisha watu amba o kwa hakika 
tukiambiwa anafanya kazi hii ndio maana amelet wa katika Bunge hili, mim i nitakuwa wa  
kwanza kupitisha lakini kwa hayo naomba kutounga mkono Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourab le Milka 
Ngare?  
 
Hon. Ngar e: Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving this chance to comment  on the Motion that  
has been brought b y the Majority Leader . I was st ill going  through  to internalize , however now  
that you have gi ven me a chance  to comment, I do support the Governor ’s choice because 
operations must continue within the County so I su pport the nominations b y the Governor. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fa dhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Hamid ? 
 
Hon. Hamid Mohamed: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa fursa hii . Langu ni wazo, 
sijapinga wale walio  chaguliwa lakini naona ikiwa tutak wenda nam na hii  itakuwa ni makosa ; 
tutachagua watu, h awajui wamechagu liwa na nani, kesho twapishana nao ndani ya h izi corrido rs 
hatuju ani, yeye hajui mimi  ni nani na mimi  sijui yeye ni nani . Kwa hivyo mimi sipingi wale 
waliochaguli wa lakini k itu ninacho  kiona kitakuwa k ina manufaa yetu sisi sote kwenye Jumba 
hili na heshima  ni kabla ya uteuzi wa watu ni tuwe na kamukunji , tujue sisi twachagua watu 
namna hii , sura zao ni ha wa, tumepata kuzungumza nao neno moja au mawili . Lakini tuletewe 
majina tu ; hatujapinga  hao waliochaguliwa nataka nieleweke mara tena na narudia tena nalik ariri 
tena, sijapinga walio  chaguli wa lakini napin ga huu mfumo tunao  fuata wa kuletew a majina 
tupitis he, basi itakuwa sisi kila tunacho letwa tu tupitisheni . Kwa hivyo sijapinga Mheshimiwa  
Spika yangu , ni hio hoja yangu.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. 
 
The Deput y Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable.  Honourable  
Member s, I would like to bring to  your attention that this is a Selection Panel for ve tting the 
County Secretary and Secre tary to the County Publ ic Service Board , so af ter vetting , after this 
Panel vets the two candidates they will be brought to this County A ssembly throug h the 
Committee on Appointments for further  interrogation  and as you know Committees are 
extension  of the Assembly so, please be confined with in the Motion.  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 6 We are discuss ing these Members who were to vet the two individuals ; note that  the 
Governor has no t appointed  a Cou nty Secretary  nor has he appointed Chair of the Public Service 
Board so please let us be in line  with our debate t hat is on the floo r, of the Members recru ited to 
vet the said individual , Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Patrick Mbel le? 
 
Hon. Mbelle: Ahsante  Bwana Spi ka. Bwana. Spika , nafikiri nikimnukuu Kiongozi wa 
Wengi katika  Bunge alitusome a nafikiri  katika … akiwa ana jibu atatuambia ni kifungu gani 
katika Katib a kikisema kwam ba Mwen yekiti wa Kamati  hii ya  kuweza kuu … kwa Kiswahili  
vetting  sijui twaitaje, Wasw ahili wanisaidie …, kuchunguza yule County Secre tary nafikiri 
Chairperso n amesema ni mtu ambaye hafanyi  kazi katika serikali na nikiangalia wa  kwanza 
ambaye ni Dr. Wi nfred Kithinji huyu ni  Lecture r katika Chuo Kikuu  inaitwa Kenya M ethodist 
University  (KMU) iliyoko  hapa Buxton  na mama huyu  angalia hi storia yake hata katika tovuti 
ya Google ni kwamba alikuwa mwalimu aliyepitishwa na kuidhinishwa na tume ya kuaj iri 
walimu na vile vile sasa hivi ni Lecture r katika Chuo Kikuu cha  KMU . Wa pili n afikiri kulingana 
na kile alichosema nilipo nukuu kuto ka katika Katiba ; wa pili ni lazima awe ametoka katika 
private sector , awe ni Mwana  biashara na naona hapa amenakili kwa wema  akisema kwamba  
Miss Jac kline Waihenya  ametoka katika private sector , wata tu Bwana Oscar Ojuma a metoka 
katika I CPAK na I CPAK wenzangu Muhasib u upande ule wa  pili Nyota na wengi ne amba o ni 
Wahasibu  nafik iri wanaelewa kwamba hawa ni watu ambao wameidhini shwa na idara hii ya  
ICPAK. ICPAK inamaanisha …., nikusomee tu kwa harak a Mhesh imiwa Spika, ICPAK 
inamaanisha Institute of Certified Public Account ants of Kenya ; kwa hio  ikiwa ameidhi nishwa 
na ICPAK  na kule katika Katiba  imesema hivyo hivyo itakuwa si  wakos a. Wata tu ni Dada  
Mwinyi Bwika  ambaye ni wa LSK na  LSK ni shi rika lililo idhinishwa Kenya linalo an galia 
Mawakili na wanne ni mmoja wetu kutoka Workers Union . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika 
siendi k inyume na yale wenzangu wamesema Mheshimiwa Katana na Mheshimi wa Mwenyekiti 
wa Chama cha OD M ya  kwam ba ni lazima, ni muhimu  tuwajue wale watu … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
…Lakini nafi kiri vile vile Gavana amef uata sheria k wa uhakika kuhakikisha  kila aliye  
muweka ha pa ako kulingana na vile Katiba  inavyotaka . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. 
  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Madialo? 
 
Hon.  Madialo : Thank you so m uch Mr.  Speaker Sir fo r the opportunity . As I have al ways  
said that I believe that Mombasa we are  really l agging behind in implementation of i ssues as the 
Majority Chief Whip has correctly said . We are truly behind , so if by pa ssing these name s 
expeditiously  it will help Mom basa County to move faster than it is movi ng, I truly support.  
Secondly , as the Speaker correct ly said, this is just a Panel that will s it for three to four or two 
days and it is over  to select the County Sec retary . In fact, it is the duty of  the Governor to  select 
the kind of Cou nty Secretary that he saw desires then it is our duty now to oversight , let us not e 
we might run the risk of trying to oversight and at the same time being the Executive. Our duty is 
to oversight , it is the Governors’ responsibility to choose the person that he wants…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
In fact, if it was n ot for the law, if it was not for law for him to choose this Panel who will 
vet the conse cutive  Secretaries ? 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 7 Then he will have gone ahead to choose by him self the Secretary that he wants , then he 
brings the name to us . I would like to urge the House that this thing is as simple as…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, what is it Hon ourable  Allen? Are 
you up on a Point of Order? Which Point of Order?  
 
Hon. Katana:   Yes, it is a Point of Information Hon ourable  Speaker . I tend to think that 
Honourable  Madialo is not informed that is why he is not aware that it is procedural for these 
names to come for discussion in t his Assembly for  approval so that they can go ahead with the 
same exercise . So, I think Hon ourable  Madialo he is not in order to say it is at the mercies of the 
Governor to select directly who he wants to be the County Secretary. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Spe aker (Hon. Fadhi li Makarani ): Okay thank you Hon ourable  Allen , we 
have been informed.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you so much . I am the kind of a person t hat I might be willing to 
be informed because information is power ; I think Hon ourable  Katana did not really  get what I 
said, what I said is that it is true that they must come to this place, what I am trying to dissuade 
the House from trying to do is to try to  beat these ten horses  so much, these people s’ work as the 
Speaker correctly said is to vet . They will use three to fiv e days ; now, it is the Secretary that they 
will have selected that will come to the House through the necessary Committee and we will 
have i nteractions . The most important person is not these people , it is the Secretary so it is the 
Secreta ry that if we do  not agree with th is kind of person that they have selected to us we will 
reject , but these ones let us not waste our time, let us pass this thing.  Thank you.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourab le Doctor  
from C haani Ward? Hon ourable  Osano?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwanza kwa nafasi hii ambayo umenipa 
niweze kuchangia suala hili , lakini mimi ningepen da kwanza nianze kwa kuwaelezea wenzangu 
ambao wanasema sisi tuendelee tu tupitish e haya majina bi la kuwajua hao watu ni kina nani . 
Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Endapo sisi tutafanya makosa ya kwamba wale ambao wamepewa wajibu wa kutuletea 
watu ambao wanac hukua nafasi muhimu kabisa kwa sababu Secretary  to the Public Service 
Board  Mhes himiwa Spika huy u ndio m uajiri mkuu katika tume ile inayo  ajiri watu ndani ya 
Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Spika , yule ambaye pia anaitwa County Secretary  yeye ndio Head of 
Public Service kwa hivyo kama wale ambao watatumika kuwachagua hawa kutuletea katika hili 
Bunge watakuwa ni watu ambao hawajawajibika, ni watu ambao hatujui misimamo yao ni ipi , ni 
watu ambao hatujui maadili yao ni yapi , ni watu ambao hatujui wamet okea wapi na mchango 
wao katika uongozi huu wa Mombasa ni upi Mheshimiwa Spika tutakuwa tumeahirisha  matatizo 
ambayo  yatatupata hapa mbele…  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 8  
[Applause ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika , tusiwe na haraka ya kufanya vitu kufurahishana , tusiwe wa kufanya 
mambo kwa sababu ya hi sia tuonekane wazuri ule upande mwengine . Mheshimiwa Spika , ni 
wajibu wetu sisi kuhakikisha yeyot e ambaye jina la ke litaletwa hapa tayari  kuanzia pale mwanzo 
tunapoweka misingi lazima misingi yetu iwe ya sawa … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Leo hii ukienda kat ika idara ya ujenzi majumba mengi yanaporomoka , si kwa sababu 
yalijengwa au waliojengwa hawakuwa wanaujua kuje nga; ni misingi ilikuwa mibaya 
Mheshimiwa Spika . Hili Bunge lazima liweke misingi ya sawa, hili Bunge liweze kufanya kazi 
si kwa kufuata tu upepo la kini tuna haki ya kujua unakuja tumekupa nafasi ya kuchagua kwa 
niaba ya wale waliotupigia kura kwa sababu M heshimiwa Gavana  Mheshimiwa Spika pia 
alipigiwa kura . Kwa hivyo mimi pia niseme kwamba sijasema napinga lakini nasema ya kwamba 
lazima tuweke misingi  ya sawa ili tunaposonga mbele tusonge tukiwa imara , tuko sambamba na 
kila kitu kinaenda sawa. Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spik a. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Osano. Yes , 
Honourable  Juma Kambi?  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . 
Kwanza nipongeze Waheshimiwa wa Bunge hili la tatu kwa sababu  ni Waheshimiwa ambao 
wanajielewa na wanajua pia ni nini wamekuja kufanya katika Bunge hili lakini pia niwe upande 
wa kuunga mkono kwa sababu haya majina yaliyoletwa hapa sio watu ambao watatusaidia kwa 
lolote hao ni wa  kupiga msasa wale ambao watakao  fanyiwa vetting County Secretary  na 
Secretary to the Public Service Board . Kwa hio  ndugu zangu sisi amba e atakuwa wetu itakuwa 
ni County Secretary  huyo ndio twafaa tumchambue tu muweke katika laini ya sawa. Hivyo basi  
tu niwaambie Waheshimiwa tuunge mkono Hoja hii ili tuweze k usonga mbele na harakati zetu 
za serikali ya Gatuzi l a Mombasa . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Juma K ambi. 
One of the senior most Member is up , so I will give it up to Hon ourable Maimuna . 
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . M wanzo ningependa 
kukupatia shukrani za dhati kwa sababu nitachangia kuhusu ajenda hii ; Mheshimiwa Spika ni 
lazima tuwe na fah amu kuhusu hizi ndio procedure  za Bunge , hawa ni wale watu watak ao pokea 
wale wa tu wachukue stakabadhi  na ndio waweze kutuletea sisi kama Wabunge tuweze kukaa 
tuwachambue na tuwafanyie vetting .  Kwa hiyo hii Kamati ni ya muda  kama Selection 
Committee … 
 
[Applaus e] 
 
Kwa hiyo mimi nitasema ya kwamba tutakwenda kulingana n a mfumo wa Katib a; 
tutakwenda kulingana na Kanuni za Kudumu za Bunge , tutakwenda kulingana na sheria za 
Bunge . Kwa hiyo hapa hata tutakavyo  zungumza vyovyote vile hii ndio sheria inavyotuambia 
kwamba hawa kwanza wachaguliwe na mwenye haki ya kuwachagua ni Gavana . 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor   Page 9 Alafu  atuletee baada ya hapo stakabadhi  zije na wenyewe waje tuwafanyie vetting  
tuam ue ni nani ambaye atachukuliwa. Kwa hiyo hii ni Kamati  ya muda mimi naiunga mkono na 
ningependa wenzangu waelewe ya kwamba kila jambo lina sheria zake , hakuna mtu hapa…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): What is it Hon ourable  Allen? Are y ou up 
on a Point of Order?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Point of Information!  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Or whom do you want to inform?  
 
Hon. Katana:  The Member . 
 
The Deputy Sp eaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Honourable  Maimuna , do you want to 
be informed ?  
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim: No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  She does not want to be informed!  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Maimuna proceed?  
 
Hon. Ma imuna Salim:  Kwa hiyo tusianze mambo m engi, kila mtu ana maoni yake 
lakini mimi najua hii ndio procedure  ya Bunge . Kwa hiyo mimi naunga mkono ili tufungue kazi 
watu wa Mombasa waanze kutaka kufanyiwa kazi , kwa sasa  tumekaa hatuna Mawaziri , hatuna 
County Se cretary  sasa sis i kama Wabunge  tuko hapa tukiweza kupinga jambo kama hili ambalo 
halituhusu itakuwa sivyo. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana: I am up on a Point of Order. 
 
The Depu ty Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Which point of Order Hon ourable  
Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Honourable  Speaker , is Hon ourable  Maimuna in order to say that we do 
not have Ministers…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
…Because I understand there is no vacuum in government, so she i s not in order to say 
that we do not have Ministers. Thank you.  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 10 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Okay . 
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika ninaomba ya kwamba wakaazi wa 
Mombasa waanze kufanyiwa kazi na sisi tuko hapa kama macho yao . Kwa hiyo mimi ninaunga 
mkono hii Kamati waweze  kuanza kufanya kazi na sisi tufanye kazi kama Waheshimiwa 
kuwakilisha  watu wetu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , naunga mkono.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Maimuna. Yes , 
Honourable  Bernard  Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Ogutu : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi nisimame kuunga mkono hoja 
hii…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
…Kwa sabab u hata wale ambao wanaongea mwisho wanasema wanaunga mkono.  Pili 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sitaki kujua mwenye atak uwa kwa hiyo panel kuchagua, mimi nataka 
kujua yule amba e ataletwa kama County Secretary … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Huyu wa Panel atakuja kunifanyia kazi gani kule mashinani? Huyu wa Panel atakuja 
kunisaidia vipi wakati mimi nataka watu wangu wasaidike kule chini? Mimi  nataka huyu County 
Secretary  ndio nijue na kama sitojua hapo kutadhoka Mheshimiwa Spika lakini kwa hi i Panel… 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ogutu , please use 
parliamentary language ! 
 
[Laughter ] 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ooh! S amahani Mheshimi wa Spika…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mimi nimeunga mkono na tupitishe hili jambo kazi ianze mara moja. Ah sante sana 
Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the oppo rtunity. Mr. Spe aker, this is a House 
of rules and procedures and … [Off microphone] …and I ha ve actually … it is a very healthy 
discussion taking place . According to me , the Panel that has been brought in this House so that 
we can approve it make sense Mr. S peaker, to me th is panel is toothless…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 11 …It is toothless because it has no… 
 
[Loud consultations ] 
Mr. Speaker , protect me from … 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Order! Order! Hon ourable  Members ! 
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker , I was sayi ng it is toothle ss by meaning that it is not going to 
do any harm…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
It has no harm to the operations of the whole County Mr. Speaker.  The work of this Panel 
is very clear , it has been stated in the Motion very clear ly their work is just to rece ive the 
document  and then listen to the people who are being vetted ; one of them being the County 
Secretary . Mr. Speaker , after that I want to repeat this then those ones will now be brought to this 
Honourable  House so that we can have a lengthy discussion  concerning the character, concerning 
the education , integrity and other issues but for another hope I do not see any harm . Let the 
names come to this House then we shall discuss the people who have been passed.  Mr. Speaker , 
again I want just to assume tha t today this Hon ourable  House rejects or does not approve this 
Panel, wh o is going to approve … I just want to …, what now are we up to  or what do we want 
Mr. Speaker, if we do not pass this thing because obviously the same thing it will repeat … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Obviously the s ame will repeat Mr. Speaker because again it is the Governor who will 
bring the … what the other people, they will not be these ones, but still there will be another team 
of people who will come to this House. We shall still reject  because t here is no provi sion in the 
law that you are supposed to meet the Panel, discussing them there is no that provision Mr. 
Speaker , so we shall be doing nothing in this House. Let us allow this Panel to go through, let the 
ones to be vetted now Mr. Spea ker, b ut if we come in  this House, then we are going to open our 
eyes wider and discuss issues.  Mr. Speaker, I support.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes, the Hon ourable  
Member from Jomvu Kuu Ward.  
 
Hon. Ong’ao:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika . The MCA wa Jomvu anaitwa Joshua 
Mose, lakini najua kwa nini unatatizika kidogo yaruhusiwa. Nasimama kuunga hoja hii…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Cha kwanza, tumesomewa sh eria ni kwamba lazima awe si mfanyi  kazi wa serikali, awe 
kutoka private sector  na mimi nikia ngalia hizi titles hapa naona, they are right , mtu wa ICPAK, 
LSK, workers union . Sisi ni tuunge haya majina mkono yaende wafanye uteuzi , wale wataleta 
sasa ikiwa si wa  sawa tupinge ! Si ni kweli? Lakini sasa hii sioni haja ya kuchukua mda mwingi 
kujadiliana  kulingana na vi le Mheshimiwa Omondi amesema watu wako toothless let us  …  
 
[Interruption ] 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 12  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): There  is an Honourable  Member who is 
up. Yes, Hon ourable  Allen?  
 
Hon. Ong’ao:  I do not want to be informed ! I know he wa nts to inform me . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mheshimiwa S pika naomba unichunge na huyu jamaa wa Shanzu.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Just give him a minute . Yes, Hon ourable  
Allen?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Honourable  Speaker , I just want to inform the House …. [Inaud ible][Off 
microp hone]  
  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Use your mic rophone.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Honourable  Speaker , in fact you are the best Speaker in Kenya for giving 
me this chance a number of times. I want to inform the House, that whatever has been written 
here to be the titles of these people, there is no way that we can confirm today, that these titles 
are real titles. They might be just fake ti tles that we cannot even subs tantiate , so be informed that 
this can be just fake writing about them.  Thank you, Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akaran i): Thank you Hon ourable  Allen . 
 
Hon. Ong’ao:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika kwa kunipa ruhusa hii ; kwa hivyo mimi 
naunga hii hoja mkono na tusonge mbele , ahsanteni.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
         The Deputy Speaker  (Hon, Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Amriya?  
 
         Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker for acknowledging that am a senior ranking 
Member in this House and when am sta nding, you should be one of the priorities ranking ! 
Anyway , having said that I know ther e would be qualms here by my neighbour ! Mr. Speaker , 
first and foremost, I wish to state as follows; that the inten tion might be good, that first of all we 
are out of tim e, the intention might be good  but again I am concerned that if we do not bring a 
benc hmark from the onset then there will be problems . Because our Majority Leader has brought 
in names and I can see some names are familiar like Ms. Jacqueline Waihenya and s he is an 
advocate  she is a ranking Member  of LSK, but she has been qu oted from privat e sector…  
  
[Applause ] 
 
        Mr. Mwinyi Bwika , I also know him ; he is also an advocate  from LSK, but you see in 
future  we wish when we have been given names,  please Hon ourable  Majority Leader please  let 
us have attachment on the qualification  because these ICPA K there is identification for you to be 
a Member of Institute of Certified Public Accountancy Kenya (ICPAK) and I as I speak here, I 
am a Member of LSK and I can produce my ident ity card . 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 13  
[Interruption]  
 
       Mr. Speaker , protect me I have not even made my poi nt… 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, what is it Hon ourable  Ibrahim?  
 
       Hon. Omondi:  [Off microphone] [ Inaudible ]. 
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Use your mic rophone . 
 
       Hon. Omondi:  I am informing  the House,  not an individual Mr. Speaker  the Member who 
is on the floor, I think she is trying to mislead us … 
  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Just inform the House.  
 
       Hon. Omondi: Yes Mr. Speaker , she cannot stand up and tell us  that when one  is a lawyer, 
cannot do business in this country . Mr. Speaker , one can be a lawyer at the same time  he can be a 
very successful business person . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Ibrahim . Yes, 
Honourable  Amriya , proceed.  
 
       Hon. Amriya Juma : That was not even my point Mr. Speaker ; my point was on the 
credentials of these Members. In future we would wish that if such nomination come on board,  
we want support ing documents . For instance, myself Mr. Speaker I am a ranki ng member of an y 
scale  with my identification card with me ; we need these supporting documents for this 
qualification in future . Mr. Speaker , another issue is that when we are appointing Ad Hoc 
Committees and the laws are clear that their nee ds to be term of reference, t hey need to be a term 
limit, is this Panel going to be here for how long? Because I think from the Motion, am not 
reading that it has been stated, unless I have not gone through al l of it, but I have not seen their 
term limit a nd I have not seen their term s of reference Mr. Speaker. So , we cannot assume  an 
emergency issue that this Panel cannot  skip out and do what is not in their power or ultra  vires 
Mr. Speaker. So having said that I know when you are looking at Art icle 169 of the judicial 
authority Mr. S peaker, we are saying that justice shall be done without undue regard to 
procedural technicalities so for me this might be mere procedural technicalities . But I also want 
to come on record that  in the future this ty pe of scanty information w ill not be ente rtained by 
persons like myself, because we understand the nature of this task and because the County 
Secretary if we want to bring out the best material in town we m ust make sure that the judges 
that are sitting to produce  for us the best ar e also the best  in town. So having said that I rest my 
case there. Thank you very much.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 14        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Amriya . I can see 
you have  exhausted the Motion . Yes, Hon ourable  Nyota? 
 
       Hon. Hamisi Nyota : Thank you Mr.  Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand to make a comment on this Motion and these names that have been brought in this House . 
Members have made several statements  and their opinions, but I stand t o say that I support t his 
Motion from  the Governor because one, I am sure Mr. Speaker the Governor being at his status, 
he cannot just pick names randomly, he must have done thorough investigation of th ese people in 
this Panel. He must have consulted with t he bodies like ICPAK to produce some body like Oscar 
Juma whom I well know, having done CPA Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker , this County Secretary and 
the County Public Service Board be brought before this House, if we see the y deem ed fit for 
them to carry out their  duties, this House  has still the mandate to reject them . For the time being 
Mr. Speaker, let the Governor proceed with this Panel, let them select these people and finally 
they will be brought before this Hous e. Mr. Speaker , I think  it will be fair enough for this House 
to do a good job f or this County , for them to hasten this  operation  for we are stalling behind . Mr. 
Speaker , other Counties are too much far, so I support this Panel by H is Excellency  the Governor 
and let the m proceed selecting these Secretaries and they be b rought before u s and if we have 
any issues with them with their papers and recommendations, with the ability this House still 
stand a chance to say either yes or no, but I  strongly support this Motion Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
so much.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
       The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Nyota . Yes, 
Honourable  Pamela?  
 
       Hon. Ojala : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity contribute on this 
Motion bro ught by Leader of Majority and I r ise to support the Motion…  
   
[Applause ] 
 
       One,  if you lo ok among the names of the nominees, they c ome from different institutions. 
Second, as we are aware our Governor is a competent man and he cannot just bring the names 
who are not qualified in this Hon ourable  House. Hon ourable  Speaker, I urge you to give me your 
eyes, because I am the one …  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Address the Chair please.  
 
       Hon.  Ojala:  Now Hon ourable  House you have been crying all over that we have been 
lagging beh ind, so we do not want to  be lagged behi nd by the business of the House. Kindly I 
urge you to support this Motion brought by the Majority Leader, because I can echo on my 
Member of Honorable Ibrahim Omondi stated that, our  concern is the County Secretary a s the 
Honourable Members,  so I support t his Motion one hundred percent . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 15        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Leila Nyache?  
 
       Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante Mh eshimiwa  Spika na mimi kuweza kunipa nafasi hii ya k uweza 
kucha ngia. Kwanza na mshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu, pili nimpongeze Kiongozi wa Wengi 
ambaye amekuja na hii hoja…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
       Jambo lengine nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii. Mhe shimiwa Spika mimi kiv yangu 
nasema naunga mkono hoja hii na tukiangalia kazi zetu zim elala , Kaunti zengin e Mhe shimiwa  
Spika washaanza kazi zao na sisi bado tuko nyuma na huu ndio utaratibu wa Bunge. Hizi ndio 
sharia tunafu ata za Bunge. Kwa hivyo tukitaka kuwajua hawa watu hata sijui itatusaidia nini? 
Kama vile wenzetu wamesema tuwajue, hawa ni watu watakaa hi i Kamati  kwa siku nne tu  ama 
tano, kisha ni basi wataondoka. Sisi haja yetu kubwa ni huyu County Secretary  ndio muhi mu 
kwetu ndio tumwangalie kwa kina tuweze kumchambua na tujue ni mtu wa aina gani mwenye 
ambaye ataweza kutusaidia ili na sis i tuweze kusaid ia watu wetu kule mashinani. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi naomba Bunge hili waweze kuunga mkono hoja hii  wasipoteze md a 
kwa sababu mda unakwenda , tumepoteza mda sana, sisi tuko nyuma . Ningeomba waunge mkono 
na sisi tuungane na wenzetu, tu weze k usaidia w atu wetu pale mashinani , ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa  Spika, nasimama kuunga hoja hii mkono.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Leila . I now call 
upon the mover of the Motion to respond.   
 
       The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika nawashukuru Waheshimiwa  kwa kuchachawiza Bunge hili , lakini pia inapaswa t unapoleta 
hoja ya Waheshimiwa  wawe ni wenye kuzingatia na kusikia ni yapi tunayowasilisha katika 
Bunge hili, kinyume na kukup urukuka na kuon gea [??] ambazo hazina natija wala hazina 
mshiko , wala hazijaeenda shule katika ku isaidia jamii.  Mheshimiwa Spika , uteuzi wa tume hii ya 
kufanya mahojiano ya Katibu  wa Gatuzi  na vilevile Katibu  katika Gatuzi  letu tumepewa 
mwelekezo kwa mujib u wa sheria za Ugatuzi . Mheshimiwa Spika , awali nimezinukuu, ya 
kwamba kinyume n a hizi ambazo ziko katika marekebisho ya mwaka 2020 awali katika kanuni 
za Gatuzi  44, Mheshimiwa Gavana alikuwa amepewa mamla ka moja kwa moja ya kuteua majina 
na kuyawasilisha Bungeni  kisha Bunge hili liko na jukumu kulingana na Kanuni za  kudumu 42, 
ya kwamba tunapopokea majina haya basi yatawakilishwa kwa Kamati husika na kwa hali hii 
Kamati husika ni Kamati y a Uteuzi Mheshimiwa Spika. Lakini kisha Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kutafuta  usawa na uhaki  wa uwakilishi Bunge lilifanyi a marekebisho Kanuni hii na ikaweka ya 
kwamba ni lazima Mstahiki Gavana kuteua jopo litakalofanya mahojiano kwa nafasi hizi  na 
katika jopo lile , sheria imemuelekeza ni nini Mstahiki Gavana anapaswa kufanya; si k wamba tu 
kuteke leza mamlaka yake lakini ameelekezwa ni kipi cha kufanya  kambiwa ateuwe Mwenyekiti  
ambaye si mfanyi  kazi wa umma, akaambiwa ateuwe Mwakilishi  wa kitengo cha biashara ama 
biashara binafsi , ateuwe Mwakilishi  wa Mawakili  vilevile ateuwe Muhasib u na ateuwe 
Mwa kilishi  wa shirika la wafanyi kazi katika Gatuzi  lile. Mheshimiwa Spika , katika kutekeleza 
ama kupata waw akilishi hawa, Mstahiki Gavana aliandikia barua kila Tume na Tume zenyewe 
ndio zilizowakilisha  pendekezo lao ya k wamba huyu tunataka atu wakilishe katik a kikao hicho 
cha mahojiano. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hili suala limekuwa zaidi ya uw azi ambavyo watu 
wanalitarajia…  
  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 16 [Applause ] 
 
       Mheshimiwa Spika , mamlaka ya Tume hii yanakamilika punde watakapo waki lisha majina 
mawili  katika kila nafasi  kwa Mheshimiwa  Gavana ; ya kwamba katika hawa tuliofanya 
mahojiano, huyu na huyu tumewaona w anastahiki zaidi , zaidi ya hawa kwa vigezo hivi; kisha 
Mstahiki Gavana atateuwa mmoja  katika majina yale kuja katika Bunge hili. Kamati ya Uteuzi 
italikalia, itaiti sha staka badhi na vigezo vya wale wastahiki kama ilivyo inavyotakikana katika 
sehemu ya 15, ambayo inazungumzia uhalisia na vigezo vya mtu kushikilia nafasi hii ya County 
Secretary  ama Katibu katika Tume ya Huduma  za umma Mheshimiwa Spika ambazo imeelezea 
vizuri, awe ni nani, awe na kigezo gani, ana uzoefu wa kazi kwa muda gani ambayo h ayo 
yatakuwa ni miongoni mwa yale Bunge hili chini ya Kamati ya Uteuzi yatachunguza kwa kina 
kwa sababu hawa watac huku a nafasi ya ajira kwa muda wa miaka  mitano . Lakini kwa Tume hii 
Mheshim iwa Spika, ipo kisheria na jukumu lake linakamilika wa takapomaliza mahojiano , hivyo 
basi niwaombe Waheshimiwa  ya kwamba wakati mwengine kama huna hoja ni bora kufyata 
kinywa chako … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Majority Leader , you are out of 
order! And please withdraw that Statement.  
 
       The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Naomba kuitoa 
kauli hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika , nihimize Waheshimiwa  ya kwamba tuna 
majuk umu lakini pia majukumu yetu yana mipaka na haipendezi kwetu sisi kum hoji Mstahiki 
Gavana anapotekeleza majukumu yake, pale anapokengeuka  kama sarahangi wa serikali yake 
tunapaswa kuleta hoja Mheshimiwa lakini anapokuwa amefwata kanuni inavyostahiki, na 
kufuata t aratibu kwetu sisi Mheshimiwa Spika ni kumuunga mkono na kuumpa nguvu ili aweze 
kushikililia sheria katika utekelezaji wa majukumu yake . Mheshimiwa Spika , tumeziona baadhi 
ya serikali Gatuzi  na changamoto katika utenda kazi  wake kwa sababu ya Gavana  kukataa 
kufuat a Katiba na Kanuni zilizopo za kisheria  lakini kwetu sisi hata kama ni miezi mitatu  tuna 
kila sababu ya kumshukuru Gavana wetu ya kwamba ameonyesha nia njema kuishikilia Katiba 
na vipengele vinavyohusian a na Katiba kama ngao yake ya kutekele za majukumu kwa  minajili 
ya watu wa Mombasa.  
Kwetu sisi Mheshimiwa Spika, k atika hili inatupa matumaini ya kwamba tunako  kwenda , 
tunatoka kwenye kiza sawia na zile Kaunti  zingine tunakwenda katika nuru ya kudumu ambayo 
manufaa yake na faida zake kama seri kali na kama wa wakilishi wa wananchi wetu tutaweza 
kuyaona.  Kwa hayo mengi nawashukuru Waheshimiwa  wote walioweza kuchangia na pia 
Mheshimiwa Spika nimezinukuu  nukuu za wale Waheshimiwa  waliokuwa na ma oni mbadala na 
nimezichuku a kama chanya ya kwamba tutaz itendea kazi na  tutapeleka mawasilisho kwa serikali 
yetu ya kwamba mbeleni pengine katika suala hili Mstahiki Gavana, kwa nia njema tu anaweza 
akaita wawakilishi wawili , watatu akakaa nao katika kuandi ka barua zile kupeleka kwa Tume 
zinazostahiki ili wanap owakilisha maji na ya wale watu, na wao wajihisi japo sio k atika 
majukumu yetu, lakini ya kwamba wamehusishwa kibarabara katika zoezi lote hili ambalo 
Mheshimiwa Gavana amelianza ; kuwaandikia tume ya wa wakilishi wa Mawakili  barua, 
kuwaandikia mahasibu barua  ya kwamba anga lau zile barua zile Waheshimiwa  tuzione kwa  
wakati kabla ya wale hawajawakilisha majina yao ndio zikija hapa . Mheshimiwa Spika , tusiwe 
na shauku ya kwamba Mheshimiwa Gavana aliandika barua  ama hakuandika  na kwa sababu 
Mheshimiwa Gavana ni m tenda kazi ambay e yuko wazi , kwake hili halina kigegezi .  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 17        Nina imani atakuwa wazi na sisi, atafunguka na kila hatua atahusisha Bunge hili kama ilivyo 
nia yake . Na sisi ni w ajibu pale ambapo kuna changa moto tumwelekeze Mstahiki Gavana 
kwamba hapa tuna duku duku na pa le pak o sawi a; pia tuweze kumuunga mkono kwa sababu huo 
ndio uzalendo Mheshimiwa Spika; kuunga panapostahiki na kupinga pasipo stahiki. A hsante ni 
na ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na nihimize Waheshimiwa  wenza kuweza kuunga mkono majina 
haya ili kazi i weze kuende lea. Ahsante.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you the Leader of Majority for that 
response to your Motion. Honourab le Members , I know put a question that the Motion by the 
Leader of Majority, Hon ourable  Athuman  Mwa mwiri on , Nomina tion o f Recruitment Panel for 
Mombasa County Secretary and Secretary to the County Public Service Board , be approved in 
this Honourable House in same  terms as moved . Honourable Chief Whip , you are out of order ! 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
[Applause ] 
 
       Yes, Clerk ? 
 
MOTION  
RESOLUTION TO PETITION THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ON COUNTY WARDS EQUITABLE 
DEVELOPMENT FUND  
 
       Honourable Allen Katana?  
 
       Hon. Katana:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker. I stand to give  a Motion on resolution to 
petition the National A ssembly on Count y Wards Equitable Development Fund. Mr. Speaker Sir, 
I beg to move the follo wing Motion:  
 
     THAT , pursuant to Articles 37 and 119 of the Constitution of Kenya , this County Assembly 
resolves to petition the National Assembly individually and c ollectively as M embers of County 
Assemblies and the County Assemblies Forum (CAF) vide the a nnexed draft petition for the 
National Assembly to intervene and ensure that:  
 
       THA T, the COUNTY WARDS EQUITABLE DEVELOPMENT FUND  be incorporated in the 
proposed Con stitutional Amen dment Bill before the National Assembly by the Hon ourable  
Stephen Mule, MP and the  Honourable  Gichimu Githinji, MP alongside other proposed funds 
namely the National Gove rnment Constituencies Development Fund (NGCDF), National 
Government Af firmative Action  Fund (NGAF), the Senate Oversight Fund and the Economic 
Stimulus and Empowerment Fund  either prior to the publication of the said Bill or before it is 
referred to the Se nate in accordance with rules of procedure of Parliament:  
 
       THAT , the p roposed Constitu tional Amendment Bill in amending Article 204 of the 
Constitution should provide for the  following with respect to County Wards Equitable 
Development Fund: -  
 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 18 1. THAT, each County government shall allocate funds comprising of a certain 
percen tage of the resp ective total County’s Annual Budget Estimates or as shall be 
advised by the Commission o n Revenue Allocation (CRA) during the enactment  of the 
County Allocation of Revenue Act to cater for County Wards Equitable Development 
Fund ;  
 
2. THAT, all monies allocat ed to County Wards Equitable Development Fund shall be 
considered as funds allocated to Wards pursuant to Article 206 (2) (c) to be 
administered in accordance with the provisions of an Act of Parliament; and  
 
3. THAT,  Parliament shall enact a legislation to p rovide for the administration of the 
County Wards Equitable Development Fund . 
 
              Mr. Speake r, I therefore ask Hon ourable  Mbaya of Timbwani to sec ond the Motion.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Mbaya?  
 
       Hon. Salim Mbaya:  I second.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now propose a 
question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Allen Katana Motion on , Resolution to Petition the 
National Assembly on County Wards Equitable Development Fund  be deba ted in this Hous e. 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
       Yes, Honourable  Allen from Shanzu Ward? 
 
       Hon. Katana:  Nakushukuru Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa nafasi hii ; na sitakuwa na mengi ya 
kusema kwa sababu nilitarajia wengine wapinge lakini nashukuru kwa kuwa sikusi kia mtu 
yeyote k upinga kwa ajili ya kulijadili suala hili . Mheshimiwa Spika , tumekaa katika vikao 
vinavyo angalia sana mas lahi ya Waheshimiwa  wa Bunge la Kaunti  na tukaona kunavyo vitu 
vingi ambavyo kwa hakika Waheshimiwa  hawa inakuwa kama ambaye haviwafai , lakini kwa 
hakika hivi vitu tulipendekeza ya kwamba ni  muhimu wawe watavipata  na sitaki kutapa tapa 
kuongea kuhusu mambo mengi . Mhes himiwa Spika, nataka kuongea kuhusu hii hapo awali 
tulikuwa tukiita kama Ward Development Fund  lakini sasa kama mkao tuliok aa katika Baraza  la 
County Assembly Forum  (CAF ) tukasem a itakuwa ikiitwa , County Ward Equitable Development 
Fund ; na Mheshimiwa Spika  kama ilivyojitokeza katika hoja yetu ni kwamba tukiwa Bunge la 
Kaunti  moja kwa moja tunaigiza serikali ya kitaifa pamoja n a Bunge la kitai fa. Kama 
nilivyotangul ia kusema kwamba kunavyo vitu vingi ambavyo sisi kama Wabunge  wa Kaunti  
vinak uwa kwetu sisi si faida , sasa kumekuwa na Mswada  ambao karibuni utakuwa ni sheria kule 
Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika ya kuidhinisha kwamba ile iliyo kuwa ikiitwa NGC DF ikaweze 
kufanya kuwa sh eria na hivyo basi Wabunge na viongozi na akina mama, na Wabunge pia wa 
Seneti wawe wakipata fedha zitaka zokuwa zikiwasaidia kufanya ka zi zao. Sasa vile vile ikawa ni  
pendeke zo la MCAs wote Mhe shimiwa  Spika Kenya nzima , tukiongozwa  na baraza la CAF 
tukaja na sauti moja kusema , itakuwa ni vizuri Mswada huu unapoenda kufanya sh eria kuwa , hili 
swala la mga o wa fedha ambalo litakuwa chini ya MCA kama County Ward Equitable 
Development Fu nd ikaweze kupitishwa kuwa sh eria.  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 19        Kwa hivyo mimi sitaki ku ongea mengi , maana Mswada huu uko wazi Mhe shimiwa  Spika na 
ningeomba ikaweze kuwa wazi hata kwa Waheshimiwa wa Bunge la Nyumba hii wakaweze 
kuunga mkono , ili tu unganike pamoja na Waheshimi wa wa Ken ya nzima , ili tukaweze 
kuwatendea kazi wananchi wa liotuleta hapa , tukizingatia kwamba kule mashinani , kulingana 
kwa mujibu wa Katiba tuliyo ipigia kura , ni kwamba kinacho muunganisha mpiga kura na 
serikali si mtu mweng ine b ali ni yule MC A pale na kwa hivyo tunakuta shida n yingi moja kwa 
moja tunakumbana nazo sisi kama MCAs. Kwa hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika , ni ombi langu 
kwamba  Waheshimiwa wenza katika N yumba hii wataliunga mkono sw ala hili,  ili hazina hii 
ikaweza kut engwa  kwa ajili ya kufan ya kazi kw etu. Mheshimi wa Spika , ahsante.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhi li Makarani ): Yes, Honourable  Amriya Boy?  
 
       Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you so much Mr. Speaker . I rise to support the Motion on the 
Ward Equitable Development Fund . Mr. Speaker , the constituti on is very clear ; Article 1, 2, 4, 6 , 
Article 174 of the constitutio n, Article 175, Article 184, Article 196 on the importance of citizen 
participation and devolution , to reach at the citizen level , at the grass root level and the princip les 
also of devolution are very clear ; accountability , involve ment of the people , equity, equitable  
distribution  of resources and so on forth , and we  must  acknowledge that , as much as we have the 
two levels of government , the National of the County Level s, ten ye ars down into devolution , we 
have not been able to achieve much because some of  the resources not accessible at  the village 
level . Mr. Speaker , so having this and am glad , that in the wisdom of the CAF they have changed 
it to equitable dev elopment or distrib ution , because equity and equality are two different things , 
so this developm ent fund will be equitable . What do you mean by saying it will be equitably  
share? It means that the re are areas where the semi -develop ed; there wil l be need of two 
percentage  and those areas that are not developed in need of ten percent , that is called eq uity. 
Equity does not demand that we are treated fairly , but equity demands that we treated reasonably  
well for us to access equitable distribution o f few resources that we have Mr. Speaker.  
So, I am in support that th ese funds should be  in the C onstituti on and it means that we 
will be now  as per A rticle 220, be having our allocation as the Ward Development Fund as non -
ceiling item , right f rom the Commi ssione r for Revenue Allocation . We will be receiving direct ly, 
our work will  just to budget for it and we  will be  receiving our distribution equitable ; just as the 
National government  is going to get  and we are going  to get as the Ward distribu tion fund and it 
will not  leave us or even the powers that be , in only option because the law will be very clear 
right from the revenue allocation Mr . Speaker  it will be very clear that Mombasa County will get 
60 percent of their develop ment vote in their County Equitab le distribution or will get 10 percent 
or even 40 percent and we are going to plan accordingly . They sa y that if you fail to plan, you 
plan to fail . So, we have been having a challenge when we have our development since  we have 
had to pass  through the Executive for approval and so on and forth and we do  not have a 
development vote as Members of County  Assem bly. This will give us an  ample opportunity , to 
have t he same and even it will not water -down our role as an oversight  body; w e are told that our 
role enshrines in the constitution as ov ersight , representation and legislation Mr. Speaker , how 
are you on earth supposed to  represent a person if you have no resources ? If I am supposed to  
represent  my citizenship in a wedding , in a funera l, in bursary , how am I supposed to do that 
when we do  not have development vote Mr. Speaker?  So, I strongly agree that we ha ve this , but 
even we should not stop us from making as we petition Parliament ; this should  not stop our local 
arrangement  because we  are moving into Ja nuary , we are going into December , we have needs 
that our people are expecting , so this should not stop us.  
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 20        Now that we have this Motion or petition in Parliament,  it should not stop us from 
proceeding with whatever arrangements we are ha ving so as we can enhance devolution at a 
grass root level . So, I congratulate my brother from Shanzu for this noble Motion and we are in 
full support of the same and we endeavour  that we be equipped with all the necessary resources , 
so that as a devoluti on family we can as sist also in development . Thank you.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Sylves ter Kai?  
 
       Hon. Kai:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika kw a kunipatia fursa hii  ili nikaweze kutoa mchango 
wangu , kuhusiana na hoja hii ambayo imeletwa n a Mhe shimiwa  Allen Katana . Kwanza , 
nichukue fursa y a kipekee , kwa mara ingine tena kumpongeza ndugu yangu Mheshimi wa Allen 
Katana , kwa kuweza kupata fursa ya kutuwakilisha kama Bunge la Mombasa katika lile baraza 
la  CAF , na niseme ya kwamba amenitia moyo mkubwa sana , ya kwamba nimeweza  kupata 
matumaini , ya kwa mba tumeweza kuwakilishwa kikamilifu  katika baraza lile , na husus an kwa 
ule mda na wakati ambao ameweza kuleta hoja hii , kwa sababu ni ule mda ambao Bunge zote 
tatu ziko katika hali ya kujitayarisha kuona ya kwa mba tunapofanya ma rekebisho kipengele hiki 
tumeona Sen eti imejipanga Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Tumeweza kuona pia Bunge la kitaifa 
Mheshimiwa Spika  limeweza kujipanga kuona ya kwamba  inaenda ku wa na  sheria ya wao 
kupata h uu mga o ili wakaweze kuwezesha huduma zao kamil ifu. Hivyo basi ni vyema pia sisi 
kama Bunge  ambalo tunatambulika kikatiba na hususan  tukiwa na ju kumu kubwa sana katika hii 
serikali ya ugatuzi , kwa sababu sisi ndio tuko pale mashinani Mhe shimiwa Spika. Kwa h ivyo, 
basi nisiseme mengi ila niseme ya kwamba , sisi kama  Bunge kup itia Mhes himiwa ambaye 
anatuwakili sha katika baraza hili  tukaweze kuwa na umo ja na tukaweze kumsaidia na akili zetu 
na nguvu zetu  ili kuhakikisha ya kwamba matakwa ya Bunge hili , ambayo tunaamini pia ni 
matakwa ya wale tunaowakilisha ,  basi yak aweze kufikia baraz a lile na yakawezwe kutim izwa 
kwa wakati ambao unaofaa . Kwa hayo mengi  na machache Mhe shimiwa Spika , nikaweze 
kusema ya kwamba , ninaunga kikamilifu hoja hii na ikaweze kuendeshwa kwa uwepesi zaidi  ili 
ikaweze kutufaidi sisi sote . Shukran sana  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Appla use] 
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Honourab le Members , the Majority Leader 
is up , so let us give him , the Majority Leader?  
 
       The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwamwiri ):  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , I am up 
on a point of order ; Standing order 28; “I seek leave of this House that we adjourn to all ow 
Members , to attend extended  matters of the County Assembly’ . There is a report which has to be 
approved by a joint Committee, that is House Business Committee, Comm ittee on Appointmen t 
and Committee of Select ion before it is forwarded to the Business of  this House. I seek leave Mr. 
Speaker that we adjourn at this point  so that the Membe rs can attend to the extended and  the 
matter of the House be referred in the aft ernoon . Mr. Speaker , thank you.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Any seconder? Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim?  
 
       Hon. Omondi:  I second Mr. Speaker.  
 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 21        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now propose a 
question , that the Motion moved by the Major ity Leade r, on postponement  of this section be 
debated in this House ? 
 
[Question  proposed  and agreed to ] 
 
       Yes, Honourable  Majority Leader?  
 
       The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ):  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  
Spika ni kuomba tu Waheshimiwa , kwamba waruhusu kikao hic hi kikamatike kwa s asa na 
kiendele saa nane , kwa sa babu kuna ripoti muhimu ambay o kamati tatu zinapaswa kwenda 
kuikalia sahi i na kuiafiki , ili kupeana nguvu na mamlaka ya shughuli zengine kuweza kuendelea 
Mhe. Spika na ripoti hii ilitarajiwa kabla ya saa s ita na robo , na tuk itazama chronometer katik a 
lango  letu la Bunge Mhe shimiwa  Spika , ni dakika za kuhesabu zilizosalia. Kwa hivyo niomba 
Waheshimiwa ya kwamba hoja iliyoko mbele yetu ni hoja muhimu na nyeti , tuipe mda tuimalize 
lile, ili saa nane turudi na nguvu  mpya , ari mpya na uweza w a kudebate ama kui jadili kwa hera 
zaidi na kuhakikisha sauti yetu imeweza , kufika inapostahiki na sisi miongoni wa zile gatuzi 
zengine kuwepo na mfuko hu u maalum ya kuweza kutekeleza majukumu . Kwa sasa ni kwamba 
tu Waheshimiwa tua fiki hii , tuweze kw enda mapumziko kidogo , mpaka masaa ya mchana 
ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Madialo?  
 
       Hon. Madialo:  Bwana Spika , naomba hivi t ukiendelea ku jadiliana , feeling the mood of the 
House , naom ba kwamba  uamue  ya kwamba tume kubaliana , ahsante.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Madialo , I am not the one to 
decide that , the Hon ourable  Members will decide . Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim?  
 
       Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker , I want to support the Motion by the  Majority Leade r; that we 
adjourn and we act ually catch up with this Motion again when we are fresh. Mr. Speaker , reason 
why I am saying is that , the Motion that has been brought is very important , we need to come up 
when we are very fresh and discuss it i n this House , thank  you Mr. Speaker.  I suppo rt the 
adjournment.  
 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Ibrahim . Yes, 
Honourable Nyota Hamisi?  
 
       Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you . I think because of time the Majority Leader has made it 
clear  that we a re running out of time , instead of wasting time  let us adjourn and come back in the 
afternoon . Thank you.  
  
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, I now call upon the Majority Leader to 
respond.  
 
       The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ):  Ahsante M heshimiwa  Spika na ahsante kwa 
Wahe shimiwa wenza kuafiki hil i. Shukran.  
 
November 29, 202 2                      COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        17 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic vers ion o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the Hansard E ditor  Page 22        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now stand to put a 
question that the motion by the Leader of Majority , on adjournment of this sitting until afternoon  
be approved in this House ? 
 
[Question put and ag reed to ] 
 
MOTION DEFERRED   
 
       Yes Clerk?  
 
                                                ADJOURNMENT  
 
       Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourn ed until Tuesday 29th November , 2022 in 
afternoon at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11:52 a.m.  
 
 
 