October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY   
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 19th October, 2017  
The House met at 2:51p .m. 
 (Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS   
 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Members you may sit down. Yes Clerk?  
PAPERS  
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Leader of Majority  Party ? 
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, let me ta ke this 
opportunity to lay the P aper, Mombasa County  Budget Review and Outlook 2017,  Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
(Paper laid ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon. Members  I now commit the P aper to the 
Committee on Finance, Budget and A ppropriation. Yes Clerk?  
PAPER  
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, let me lay the Paper on 
the report on the a mendments of the part XXI and the Second Schedule of the Interim Standing 
Order . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Paper laid ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
 Hon. Hamisi  Mwidani, please move the M otion.  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Hon. Speaker , let me move a M otion on the 
adoption of the report on the Amendments of Part XXI and the S econd Schedul e of the Interim 
Standing Order, and I would like Hon. Amur  to second the Motion . 
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker I rise to second the Motion.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members, I now propose the question th at the M otion 
on adoption of the report  on the amendments of Part XXI and the Second Schedule of the Interim 
Standing Order be debated . 
(Question proposed and agreed to) 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi  Musa Mwidani?  
(Leader of Majority moved  the report ) 
PROPOSED AMENDMENT ON PART XXI AND SECOND SCHEDULE  
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Following the passage of a M otion sponsored by 
Hon. Mwaka Zahoro  on Tuesday the 17th October , 2017 titled proposal to amend Standing 
orders, t he Speaker gave a directive that the Committee on Appointments, Rules and Procedures 
to as a matter of urgency, amend part XXI and Second S chedule of the Interim Standing Orders 
and present a report for adoption by the Assembly o n Thursday 19th October , 2017 which is 
today.  The Chairperson called a  meeting of the aforementioned C ommittee on the 18th October at 
3:30p.m to  discuss the amendments as directed by the Speaker.   
 Mr. Speaker Sir, it is my humble pleasure to present to y ou the report of the Committees 
on Appointments/Rules and Procedures on the propo sed amendments to part XXI and Second 
Schedule of the Interim Standing Orders.  
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Hon. Speaker , allow me to present the proposed amendments to part  XXI and Second 
Schedule of th e Interim Standing Orders for consideration and adoption by this Honorable 
Assembly.  
2. Proposed Amendments  
2.1 The proposed amendments to the Interim Standin g Orders are as follows:  
a) PART I – Introductory - 
In cases not provided for, the Speaker to decide ;  
Standing Order No.1 (2)  
Replace the phrase , “County Assembly of Kenya” with “County Assembly of 
Mombasa”.  
b) PART XII – Motions  
Amendments to be in writing;  
Standing Order No. 52(2)   
Replace the terms , “Senator” and “Senate” with “Member” and “County A ssembly” 
respectively.  
c) PART XXI –Select Committees –  
County Assembly Business Committee  
Standing Order No. 152(1) d  
Sub (d) be amended to delete twenty one and replace with nine and to delete twenty nine 
and to replace with thirteen so as S tanding Order 152(1) d to read as follows:(d) Not less 
than nine and not more  than thirteen Members,  who shall  be  nominated  by   County  Assembly  
parties  and approved  by the County  Assembly  at the commencement  of every  Session,  
reflecting  the relative  majorities  of the seats held by each of the County  Assembly parties  in 
the County  Assembly  and taking into c onsideration t he interests of Independents.  
Committee on Selection  
Standing Order No. 153(1)  
Standing Order n o. 153(1) be amended to delete eleven and replace with nine and to 
delete nineteen and to replace with thirteen so as Standing Order 153(1)  to read as 
follows:  
Standing Order 153 (1) There shall be a Select C ommittee to be designated Selection 
Committee , consisti ng of Leader of M ajority Party  who shall be the Chairperson , Leader 
of M inority Party and not less than nine and not more than thirteen Members, who shall  
be  nominated by County Assembly parties and approved by the County Assembly.  
Committee on Ap pointments   
Standing Order No.185  
The Standing order be amended to include Procedure and Rules so as the title of the 
Committee t o be Committee on Appointments/ Procedure and Rules.  
Standing Order 185(1) be amended to include , in the event there is no Leader of 
Minority P arty in the County Assembly, a M ember will be nominated to serve in the 
Committee. Standing Order 185(1) to read as follows:  There shall be a Select C ommittee 
to be designated the Committee on Appointments/Procedures and Rules to be app ointed 
by the County Assembly, consisting of the Speaker as a Chairperson, the Leader of the 
Majority Party, the Leader of the Minority party and not more than three other Members 
nominated by the County Assembly Business Committee, on the basis of proport ional 
Party Membership in the County Assembly taking into ..., sorry, Mr. Speaker Sub 5,6 
and 7 … 
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 (Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : 13 Members D elegated County Legislation . 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Sorry it was fixed in a  wrong position, t hank you 
Mr. Speaker. Delegated County Legislation Standing Order No.190  (1) to include membership to 
be not less than nine and not more than thirteen so as to read as follows:  (1) There shall be a 
Select C ommittee to be known as the Committee on Delegated County Legislation with a 
membership of not less than n ine and not more than thirteen M embers.  
d) Second Schedule  
e) Sectoral Committees  
The Second Schedule be amended to provide for the following Sectoral Commi ttees and their 
subject areas amended accordingly;  
1. Finance, Budget, Appropriations and Economic Planning  
2. Water, Sanitation & Natural Resources  
3. Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock and Cooperatives  
4. Education, Information Technology  and MV 2035  
5. Environment , Waste Management & Energy  
6. Trade, Tourism and Investments  
7. Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works  
8. Lands, Planning and Housing  
9. Youth, Gender,  Sports and Cultural Affairs  
10. Health  
11. Justice and Legal Affairs.  
Recommendations  
a) That this report containing the Committee’s observations,  findings, conclusions and 
recommendations on the proposed amendments to the Interim Standing Orders ...  
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members I think we are out of order.  
(Laughter ) 
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think my C lerk has 
mislead me but actually, okay Membership in the County Assembly taking into consideration  the 
numerical strength of the p arties and interests and independent Members. Where there is no 
Leader of Minorit y Party in the County Assembly, one other M ember will be nominated to the 
Committee by the County Assembly Business Committee.  
(Loud c onsultations ) 
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Sub 5, 6 and 7 to be added to expand mandate of the 
Committ ee by including the mandate of P rocedure and Rules so as from sub 4 the Standing 
Order reads as follows:  
(4)The  Committee  shall consider,  for approval  by the County  Assembly,  appointments under  Articles  
179(2)  (Members  of County  Executive  Committees ). 
(5)The  Committee  shall consider  and report  on all matte rs relating to these Standing Orders. 
(6)The Committe e may propose amendments  to these  Standing  Orders  and any such amendments  shall 
upon  approval  by the County  Assembly,  take effect  at the time appointed  by the County Assembly. 
Seven…  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : Point of Order Mr. S peaker, from the amendments of S tanding order of 
185 we do not see where  the majority leader is reading … 
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 (Interruption)  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes I think Hon . Members there is a problem with printing.  
(Loud consultation with the T able Clerks ) 
 You may continue.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : Mr. Speaker Sir, I propose we adjourned and do the arrange ment of the 
minutes again. Please!  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker, I actually don’t know the Member as to  what 
is the problem with the Committee of Appointments in Standing order 185 because she could have given 
the raise; the cas es or any problem on it, b ecause we cannot say it has to be postponed and adjour ned 
while this is a report from the C ommittee!  
 Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : It is the arrangement of the minutes  because it has a lot of confusion.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Khamisi Musa Mwidani according to Hon. Faith she has 
no problem with the amendment of Standing order of 185 but she is saying the arrangement of the papers 
were not done in  correct way so we can let the S ecretariat  do the proper arrangement. Yes?  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwida ni): Mr. Speaker, I have been taken clearly becaus e whatever 
she had mention ed is  what I have read here , even if she.. . 
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But she is raising a point that there is confus ion in the 
arrangement of this P aper, she has no problem with whatever you have read but you have not read it in 
order , it is not in a proper order. I think.. . 
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : Mr. Speaker if he insist s to continue I can offer to arrange the papers for 
you. 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sure?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Boniface: Yes. 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . I suggest you  start from first please.   
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Yes and Mr. Speaker we have to tell the House that actually;  you 
know it is the matter that should be done today and actually because of the direction we have, we had to table it 
today s o Mr. Speaker I would request the Member ..., I know sometimes there are some typing error s or 
arrangement error s so with that one I can say sorry for that but actually we should also know how to say this, to 
save time, because as you know now we are going to adjourn the Assembly.  If we will not pass this interim 
document then it’s we to appear in delay.  So Mr. Speaker what I had it was what she has mentioned but now I 
have the correct one which has been arranged by my fellow Member, learned friend.  
(Laughter /Applause ) 
 So M r. Speaker, allow me to start a fresh.  
(Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani)  repeated reading the report  amid confusion arising from sequencing of the 
report)  
PROPOSED AMENDMENT ON PART XXI AND SECOND SCHEDULE  
 Following the passage of a M otion sponsored by Hon. Mwaka Zahoro on Tuesday the 
17th October , 2017  titled proposal to amend Standing O rders, t he Speaker gave a directive that 
the Committee on Appointments, Rules and Procedures to , as  a matter of urgency, amend part 
XXI and Second S chedule of the Interim Standing Orders and present a report for adoptio n by 
the Assembly on Thursday 19th October , 2017 which is today.  
 The Chairperson called a  meeting of the aforementioned C ommittee on the 18th October , 
at 3: 30p.m to discuss the amendments as directed by the Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, it is my 
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 humble pleasure to present to you the report of the Committees on Appointments/Rules and 
Procedures on the propo sed amendments to part XXI and S econd Schedule  of the Interim 
Standing Orders.  
 Hon. Speaker, allow me to present the proposed amendments to part  XXI a nd Second 
Schedule of the Interim Standing Orders for consideration and adoption by this Honorable 
Assembly.  
2. Proposed Amendments  
2.1 The proposed amendments to the Interim Standing Orders are as follows:  
f) PART I – Introductory - 
In cases not provided for, the Speaker to decide ;  
Standing Order No.1 (2)  
Replace the phrase “County Assembly of Kenya” with “County Assembly of 
Mombasa”.  
g) PART XII – Motions  
Amendments to be in writing ;  
Standing Order No. 52(2)   
Replace the terms “Senator” and “Senate” with “Member” and “County A ssembly” 
respectively.  
h) PART XXI –Select Committees –  
County Assembly Business Committee  
Standing Order No. 152(1) d  
Sub (d) be amended to delete twenty one and replace with nine and to delete twenty nine 
and t o replace with thirteen s o as Standing Order 152(1) d to read as follows:(d)  not less 
than nine and not more  than thirteen Members,  who shall  be  nominated  by  County  Assembly  
parties  and approved  by the County  Assembly  at the commencement  of every  Session,  
reflecting  the relative  majorities  of the seats held by each of the County  Assembly parties  in 
the County  Assembly  and taking into c onsideration t he interests of Independents.  
Committee on Selection  
Standing Order No. 153(1)  
Standing Order n o. 153(1) be amended to delete eleven and replace with nine and to 
delete nineteen and to replace with thirteen so as S tanding Order 153(1) to read as 
follows:  
Standing Order 153 (1) There shall be a Select C ommittee to be designated Selection 
Committee , con sisting of Leader of M ajority Party who shall be the Chairperson , Leader 
of M inority Party and not less than nine and not more than thirteen Members, who shall  
be  nominated by County Assembly parties and approved by the County Assembly.  
Committee on Appo intments   
Standing Order No.185  
The Standing O rder be amended to include Procedure and Rules so as the title of the 
Committee t o be Committee on Appointments/ Procedure and Rules.  
Standing Order 185(1) be amended to include, in the event there is no Leader of 
Minority P arty in the County Assembly, a M ember will be nominated  to serve in the 
Committee. Standing Order 185(1) to read as follows:  
There shall be a Select C ommittee to be designated the Committee on 
Appointments/Procedures and Rules to be appointed by the County Assembly, 
consisting of the Speaker as a Chairperson, the Leader of the Majority Party, the Leader 
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 of the Minority party and not more than three othe r Members nominated by the County 
Assembly Business Committee, on the basis of proportional Party . 
Membership  
 Membership in the County Assembly taking into consideration the numerical strength of 
the Parties and interests and independent Members where the re is no Leader of Minority Party in 
the County Assembly, one other M ember will be nominated to the Committee by the County 
Assembly Business Committee.  
Sub 5, 6 and 7 to be added to expand mandate of the Committee by including th e mandate of 
Procedure and  Rules so as from sub 4 the Standing Order reads as follows:   
(4) The Committee  shall consider,  for approval  by the County  Assembly,  
appointments under  Articles  179(2)  (Members  of County  Executive  Committees ).  
(5) The Committee  shall consider  and report  on all matte rs relating to these Standing 
Orders. 
(6) The Committe e may propose amendments  to these  Standing  Orders  and 
any such amendments  shall upon  approval  by the County  Assembly,  take effect  at 
the time appointed  by the County Assembly.  
(7) The Committee  may propose  rules for the orderly  and effective  conduct  of 
Committee  business  and any such rules,  shall upon  approval  by the County  
Assembly,  continue  in force  until amended  or repealed  by the County  Assembly .  
(8) Any rules approved  under  paragraph  (7) shall be annexed  to the Standing  Orders 
and shall be binding upon Committees to the same extent as these Standing Orders .  
(9) The quorum  of the Committee  shall be one half of Members  of the 
Committee,  but the Speaker  shall not be counted  for the purposes of quorum  and 
shall not vote.  
County Assembly Procedure and Rules Standing Order No.188  
 The title be deleted and replaced with Com mittee on Powers and Privileges . The 
Membership and mandate to be provided as per the Act so as the title to read as Committee on 
Powers and Privileges.  
County Assembly Implementation Standing Order No. 189  
 Standing Order 189(1) to include membership to be not less than nine and not more than 
thirteen so as to read as follows:  
(1) There  shall be a Select Committee  to be known  as the Committee  on Implementatio n with a 
membership of not less than nine and not more  than thirteen M embers.  
Delegated County Legislation Standing Order No. 190  
 Standing Order 190(1) to include membership to be not less than nine and not more than 
thirteen so as to read as follows:  
(1) There shall be a Select C ommittee to be known as the Committee on Delegated County 
Legislation with a membership of not less than n ine and not more than thirteen M embers.  
Second Schedule  
Sectoral Committees  
The Second Schedule be amended to provide for the following Sectoral Committees and their 
subject areas amended accordingly;  
1. Finance, Budget, Appropriations and Economic Planning  
2. Water, Sanita tion & Natural Resources  
3. Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock and Cooperatives  
4. Education, Information Technology and MV 2035  
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 5. Environment, Waste Management & Energy  
6. Trade, Tourism and Investments  
7. Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works  
8. Lands, Planning a nd Housing  
9. Youth, Gender,  Sports and Cultural Affairs  
10. Health  
11. Justice and Legal Affairs.  
Mr. Speaker Recommendations;  
Recommendations  
a) That this report containing the Committee’s observations , findings, conclusions and 
recommendations on the proposed ame ndments to the Interim Standing Orders be approved and 
be tabled before the Assembly for adoption.  
b) Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move that the Hon . Members of this Assembly to adopt this report.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa, yes Hon. Amriya?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I beg  to second this report . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you , yes Hon. Hatimy do you have anything  to say 
about the report ? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I second the report.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : It has already been seconded so do you have anything?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  It is a question , the Committee on Labour and Welfare has not 
been mentioned in this report and there's an amendment.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you , yes Hon. Amur . 
 Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I think that the Vice Chair has reported back to the Assembly it 
is now for the House to adopt it so that we can move forward as we are heading for recess and 
this report is mor e important , without this document we will be stuck somewhere so I beg the 
House to accept and move forward. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Naliaka . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Wafula : Mr. Speaker Sir I support the amendments. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Naliaka, yes Hon. Mary . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Osongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to support the Motion.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hamida . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Hamida Ali: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I support the Amendments . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Chireri: Thank you Mr. Speaker I fully support the amendments.  
(Applause)  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Zahoro  Juma . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Zahoro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker today I want to say something ; my 
name is Mwaka Zahoro not an 'a' it has been trending that so I want to keep it straight in  the 
records.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Zahora . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Zahoro:  Zahoro. 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Zahoro . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Zahoro:  Exactly . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay . 
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Hon.  (Ms.)  Mwaka Zahoro:  And another thing is that I am in  support of the adoption of 
the report of the amendments and I would wish the House c ould pass it together with  the Second 
Schedule of the Interim Standing Order. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon. Ibrahim .  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I think the responsible or respective House 
Committee had dealt with this report comprehensively and they are now giving us this report 
well polished and therefore it is our turn as the House to adopt it and I urge other Members to 
adopt it because this is the framework on what we are going to work on this particular House , so 
I beg the House to adopt it. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon . Faith ? 
 Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : Mr. Speaker i beg t o support the amendments but i woul d like the 
Committee to consider 153 S ub Section 1 the way they have considered Standing O rder 185 (1). 
Thank you . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Rosemary ? 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mukavi : Thank you Mr. Speaker I  second the amend ments . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon . Osongo . 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Osongo:  Thank you Mr . Speaker I beg to second . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Mwamwiri ? 
 Hon. Mwamwiri : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think this House recommend s the se 
amendments;  I therefore support and urge other M embers to adopt the amendments, thank y ou 
Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members I now call upon the mover Hon . Hamisi 
Musa Mwidani to reply.  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr . Speaker , first and for emost let me 
thank all Members who contributed to this Motion; that they made it this M otion to go through I 
just say thanks for what you have done this afternoon it’s a very important document and 
actually even the M embers would realize after they part here for the recess . So I thank all the 
Members for what they have done, thank you very much.  
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members i just put the question that this House adopts 
the report on the  amendments of part 21 and the Secon d Schedule of the Interim Standing 
Orders.  
(Question put and a greed  to) 
(Applause ) 
 Clerk?   
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
 Hon. Leader of Majority please move the M otion . 
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Hon. Speaker let me move the Motion on 
Procedural Motion, adjournment of the County A ssembly . 
(Hon. Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) moved the Procedural Motion)  
 THAT PURSUANT TO S tanding Order 25(3) of the Interim Standing O rders, this 
Assembly adjourns until Tuesday, 14th November , 2017, in accordance with th e calendar of the 
County Assembly (Regular sessions) . 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker , may I call  upon Hon. Murfad to second the Procedural M otion, 
thank you . 
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker I rise to second the M otion raised by Hon . Hamisi 
Mwidani .  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Hamis i Musa.  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I think this House has already passed 
the calendar for the House two days back and according to the A ct we have to proceed for 
adjournment and am taking this opportunity so that we make it provision Standing O rder 25 so 
that the House be adjourned till Tuesday 14th November,  2017 . So thank you Mr. Speaker and I 
wish all the M embers to have a good stay on the recess and because it's a s hort recess I even 
convene the Chairmen of C ommittees th ey can have time to have their C ommi ttee meetings so 
thank you Mr. S peaker and let's have a very  good recess with enjoying the C ommittees  of the 
House , thank you . 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I seek leave  of this House on behalf 
of my C ommittee , we wanted permission so that we can run our business let it be on record Mr. 
Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon . Murfad?  
 Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I wish to beg that if any o ther C ommittee has an issue be 
granted that permission, let us all be equal in case any other C ommittee has an issue then  this 
issue should cover other C ommittees ... 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Nyiro.  
 Hon. Mwaega : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kuelekeza macho yako kwangu, naf ikiri 
nasimama tu kuunga mkono M swada wa Kiongozi wa Wengi  kwamba tut umie mda  huu 
kuendeleza mjadala katika K amati zetu kwa sababu ndio zimeundwa tu hivi karibuni na kuna 
mengi ya kujadili . Kwa hio mimi kama Mwanachama wa K amati tofauti tofauti nafikiri 
nitatumia mda wangu kujiwasilisha katika K amati ili niweze kutoa michango yangu, pia 
nitach ukua mda huu nikutakie mda mzuri wa  mapumziko, a hsante sana  
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon . Nzai?  
 Hon. Nzai: Thank you Hon . Speaker I also take this opportunity to congratul ate the Hon . 
Members for all that has been discussed and passed.  I also want to wish all the best during the 
recess as you go back to your people. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you H on. Ramla?  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Ramla Said:  Thank you Hon. Speaker I just want to  second the  Majority 
Leader for  the recess , I hope they will use it effectively.  Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you. Yes H on. Aran Moses?  
 Hon.  Oindo : Thank you Mr. Speaker I support the Motion,  congratulate  my fellow Hon. 
Members and als o make sure that as we go for r ecess we will be busy with our Committees and 
as the C hair Youth, Gender, Sports a nd Culture I will urge the M embers to be ready  we will be 
calling for meetings and also  this House is a NASA stronghold and NASA M embers please 
when you are called for demonstrations avail yourselves.  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes H on. Leila?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika pia mimi naunga mkono hiyo hoja 
iliyoletwa na Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi B ungeni . 
October 1 9, 2017                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                           17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Ningependa kuwa ambia W aheshimiwa wenzangu  tuzingatie hizi K amati zetu tukiitwa 
tusikosekane tuje na tuunge huu mjadala naunga mkono na pia nakut akia kila la heri kwa 
mapumziko . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante . Yes Hon . Fahad?  
 Hon.  Fahad Abdallah : Yes Mr. Speaker I would like to support the M otion that has 
been brought by our Majority L eader today and also wish everyone a happy recess and I hope 
our voters are going to benefit from the time bec ause they have missed us a  lot so I wish you all 
the best . Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members please note Standing O rder 25(3) on the day 
when the C ounty Assembly is scheduled to adjourn to a day other than the next normal sitting 
day in accordance with the County A ssembly calendar , the Leader of the Majority party or the 
Leader of the Minority party or another Member of the County Assembly Business Committee 
shall move a M otion of adjournment which shall be debated for not more than three hours after 
which th e County A ssembly shall adjourn without question put . So yes H on. Kitula ? 
(Applause and laughter ) 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kweli kitabu hichi 
kilikuwa kinahitaji mabadiliko zaidi maana masaa matatu ni mengi sana…   
(Laughter ) 
 Wana nchi wetu wanatuhitaji mashinani Mheshimiwa S pika wao ndio wametuajiri kazi hii 
wanatuhitaji zaidi kuliko kutumia muda mwingi katika Bunge  hili kupitisha  Miswada katika 
Bunge  hili. Mheshimiwa S pika ningependa kuunga mkono Mswada ulioletwa na Kiongozi wa 
Walio W engi, kwanza ni jukumu letu kama K amati kuweza kutembelea mashinani  maana 
mashinani kunahitajika kazi nyingi . Mheshimiwa S pika vile  vile wana nchi wetu tutaweza 
kuwatembelea na kuw aeleza majukumu yetu,  tumei ngia katika J umba hili na tumeweza kujua 
mengi  na tumeweza kusoma na naomba Mwenyezi M ungu  aweze  kutuweka katika Bunge la 
kitaifa . Mheshimiwa S pika vile  vile tutaweza  kufuatilia m iradi ambayo ilikuwa katika serikali 
iliopita tuweze kuzitazama kama Kamati na kama kiranja wa B unge ningependa kuhimiza 
wanachama wa muungano wa NASA kuweza kuhakikis ha ya kwamba tarehe 26 kama vile 
alivyo himiza kiongozi wet u Raila Odinga tuweze kutimiza mashinani.  Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon . Members I think I am still within the three 
hours so we can continue with the debate.  Yes H on. Feddis?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mbura:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, pia mimi ningependa kuunga mkono 
kwanza Kamati  zote ziweze kukutana wakati wa hii likizo na ni vyema tukutane kwa sababu 
kuna mengi ya kujadili , hata mimi nimetoka mba li lakini nitafanya  vyovyote nije kwa hizi 
Kamati nizidi kuchangia zile changamoto ziko mashinani kwangu.  Ahsante.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Yes Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members there being no other business the A ssembly stands adjourned until 
Tuesday  14th Novem ber, 2017 at 2: 30p.m. 
The House rose at 3: 42p.m. 
 
 