March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 17th March , 2020.  
The House met at 10:52a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  
 
(Loud consulta tions)  
(Silence ) 
 
 Yes, Clerk next order?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHA IR 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTIVE S TO ADDRESS THE SPREA D OF COVID 19 
 
 Hon. Members , good morning again . Let u s take this opportunity to thank the Almighty 
God for enabling us to assemble here  today.  Hon. Members let us pray that the Almighty God ... 
we seek refuge in you  from  leprosy, insanity , elephantiasis and evil disease. ..  Have to cross 
check with the order paper ... Hon. Members , we are all aware of the global challenge that we are 
curren tly facing, but we trust that with God and proper precaution s, we shall overcome this 
outbreak. Overcoming the outbreak will enable us to resume our normal business as an 
Assembly and as a Country.   
 Hon. Members  His Excellency the President Hon. Uhuru Mui gai Kenyatta and our 
Governor Hon. Hassan Ali Joho  have  given an executive directive that we avoid public 
gatherings as the spread of the virus in such gatherings may be accelerated. We all have to take 
precautionary measures in order to curb the spread of  this deadly virus.   
 Corona Virus  cases trend has been as follows; New York week 1 – 2, week 2 – 105, week 
3 – 613!  Hon. Members France w eek 1 – 12, week 2 – 191, week 3 – 653, week 4 – 4500. Hon. 
Members Iran week 1 – 2, week 2 – 43, week 3 – 245, week 4 – 4750 , week 5 – 12730 .  Hon. 
Members Italy week 1 – 3, week 2 – 152, week 3 – 1036 , week 4 – 6362 , week 5 – 21157 . Hon. 
Members Spain week 1 – 8, week 2 -300, week 3 – 674, week 4 – 6050 . Hon. Members  Kenya 
week 1 – 3, week 2 - ? The next two weeks are c rucial for Kenya.  

March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2  If we take adequate precaution and break the chain , then we can tide  the Corona virus 
outbreak or else  we have a big problem on our hand s especially for the elderly population. Hon. 
Members so far so good,  our government has done well s o far in its fight to contain the Corona 
virus. Now we are in stage one  in which the virus spreads through individuals infected , but soon 
in second and third stages it spreads through social contacts & in social gatherings and that is 
why the government pr o acted and banned all gatherings and closed schools.  
 Hon. Members t his is most critical stage and  number of confirmed cases spread rapidly 
everyday like what happened in Italy between last week of February & second week of March  
From 300 to 10,000. Hon. Members i f Kenya is not able to manage this stage for next three  to 
four weeks , then we could have confirmed cases not in hundreds but in thousands.  
 Hon. Members this next one month is crucial and t hat is why most events & public 
gatherings have been c losed for the next thirty  days.  Just because schools are closed avoid 
getting that compulsive travel & h oliday bug. Holidays will come next year too , why try your 
luck with Corona e specially with children?  Hon. Member’s , marriage functions, b irthday partie s 
etc. can wait, d on’t try your luck & that bravado that nothing will happen to me.  
 Next 30 days will be  the most crucial in  the medical h istory of Kenya. Every Kenyan is 
obliged to take  all precautions while at home and  while outside for any important w ork. Hon. 
Members precaution is not panic, b e a responsible citizen by following and educating others to 
remain careful for next one month , thank you . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
MOTION  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT  OF THE COUNTY ASSEMB LY SINE DI E 
 
 Yes, Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani the Majority Leader please  move the Procedural 
Motion.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Let me t ake this 
opportunity to move a Procedural M otion;  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, pursuant to S tanding Order 25(3), this House RESOLVES to adjourn 
Sine Die, due to Executive directive by the President in a bid to contain the spread of 
Coro na Virus . Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir.  
 
 Mr. Speaker I urge Hon. Hatimy to second the M otion.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I second.   
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa . Hon. Members I now 
propose a question . 
 
(Low consultations ) 
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3  Hon. Members , I now propose a question , that the Motion by Hon. Hamisi Musa 
Mwidani on adjournment of the County Assembly  be considered b y this H ouse in the same term s 
as moved?  
 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani , please make your contribution . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mheshimiwa  Spika huu ni wakati wa 
kuangalia maisha, Bwana Spika naf ikiri ume soma ratiba za nchi jinsi ugonjwa huu ulivyoanza na 
ilipofikia . Kwa hivyo Bw ana Spika sisi ni vizuri kuchukua preca utions kabla  kupata madhara. 
Mheshimiwa  Spika gathering , hata Assembly  ni gathering , hivyo basi  ikiwa twa weza zuia watu 
wasiweze kuwa gathere d na sisi pia iko haja kuwa tusiwe kuna gathered  kwa sababu ugonjwa 
huu si  ugonjwa ambao unachukuliwa kidhihaka , ni ugonjwa ambao unashika kwa haraka sana. 
 Kwa hivyo ningependa kwa heshima na vile nawapenda Wabunge wangu wa hii Bunge 
tungepata hio fursa y a kukaa nyumbani na kuweza kutumia madawa vizuri , angalau  kwa hizo 
siku tuna ambiwa ni siku thelathini , lakini we  have  said ni Sine Die; Sine Die ni wakati wowote 
itakapo patikana nafuu tutarudi Bunge.  
Bwana Spika ningeomba Waheshimiwa tulichukulie hili jam bo na umuhimu sana , kwa 
sababu  afya ni muhimu kuliko hata s enti, tukifik iria kuja kazini kwa sababu ya s enti na upatikane 
kwamba umekufa kabla ya hio senti... Bwana Spika naf ikiri hilo litakuwa si jambo bora. Ni 
vizuri tuji linde ndio tuweze kuona siku ya k esho na kesho kutwa na tuweze ku patia huduma  
watu wetu vizuri.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba hili jambo tusilichukulie kimzaha, tusilichukulie kisiasa 
tulichukulie kwamba ni janga ambalo sasa,  yaweza mpata mtu yoyote kwa hivyo naomba 
Wabunge wenzangu wakubal iane na mimi tua hirishe  hivi vikao mpaka wakati hili jambo 
litakapotulia tuweze tukirudi tukawa tuko salama. A hsante Bwana Spika.  
. 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani. Y es 
Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker I have a fear we should disinfect this House so going 
around…  
 
(Technical hitch)  
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : You can use the Clerks ... 
 
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker . Thank you so much for giving me this  time to 
contrib ute and as the M otion state that we are supposed to adjourn and it i s a directive from or it 
is an E xecutive order ; both from t he National government and the C ounty government.  Hon. 
Speaker the records and the statistics that you have just given out shows how rapidly this thing 
spread . 
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4  And if you are not keen enough Hon . Speaker even us if we be lucky enough to come 
back that will be luck on our side and as we always say that prevention is always better than cure 
and I think even now it has reach ed a state even if you cough ... I can see your coughing now and 
some Hon . Members are smiling and glancing at you.  Hon. Speaker by breaking the cha in and 
the circle of spread of C orona virus we need a break or we need social meeting breaks, we n eed 
to avoid handshak es and we can do this most of things when we are indoors. Like just a good 
examples it is still hard for some of the Hon. Members to adopt a culture of not shaking hands 
and Hon. Members a pandemic  that has been declared by the World Health O rganization  (WHO) 
we as a House we don’t have any issue or anything but we will just to comply. Hon. Speaker I  
wish to support the Motion moved by the Ma jority Leader. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Tobias Samba. Yes Hon. N zai. 
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker to have also given me a chance to air my 
views. Mr. Speaker I stand to support the M otion ; as in right now I am enjoying my nearest 50 
years and I am expecting may be to see my grandchildren so if at all we  can adjourn it will be as 
healthy as anything as in healthy is better than anything else . Everything can b e bought  in this 
world but you can not b uy life Mr. Spea ker, so I stand to support the M otion.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. N zai. Y es Hon. Fadhili 
Makarani?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fa dhili Mwalimu) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia nimesimama kuunga mkono Hoja ilio  mbele yetu kuhusu sisi 
kwenda mapumziko kutokana na janga ambalo ni janga limekumba dunia nzi ma. Mheshimiwa 
Spika kupitia ujumbe wako umeto a takwimu ambazo zimeonyesha vizuri jinsi gani ugonjwa huu 
ulivyotangazwa katika dola tofauti tofauti na wazi inaonyesha kuwa ilivyoanza haikuanza tofauti 
na il ivyoanza hapa Kenya na vile vile pia ukasisitiza k utuambia kuwa tusione kuwa haiwezi 
kutupata.   
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni kweli yoyote y ule a naweza kupatikana na janga hili na inaogofya 
sana kuona jinsi gani inasambaa ama ugonjwa huu unasambaa kwa haraka sana. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika hatua hii ambayo tumeic hukua ni hatua muafaka na tungeomba hata mimi  
ningeomba pia W aheshimiwa wenzangu tutakaporudi kule kwetu mashinani tuwe wajumbe na 
kueneza ujumbe kwa wenzetu kuweza ku weka tahadhari am bayo itasaidia kwa kiasi kikubwa.  Ila 
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kupit ia Kiti chako twaelewa Mombasa yetu tuko na sehemu kama 
sehemu ya pale katika kivuko cha F eri na pia vile vile kupitia K iti chako tuko na soko kubwa 
ambalo ni soko la Kongowea.  Mheshimiwa Spika twaomba kupitia K iti chako na kupitia Bun ge 
hili na kupitia pia K amati ya A fya tuweze kuchukua hatua muafaka ambazo zitaweza kusaidia 
pakubwa .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika lau ikiwa tutasema tu twavunja vikao vya Bung e bila kufikiria 
sehemu hizi am bazo nimeweza kuzisema basi tutakuwa tunawacha hatari ambayo ni hatari 
kubwa sana. Tu mesikia wakiongea paka Bunge kuu lakini hatujasikia wakitia mkazo s ana kwa 
pale katika kivuko cha F eri na vile vile pale katika soko la Kongowea.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi 
naomba Wabunge wa N yumba hii na vile vile kupitia K iti chako tujaribuni iwezekanavyo 
tuweze kusaidia watu wetu na tuangazie hizi sehemu mbili maana lau, hatuombi itokee lakini lau 
itatokea basi sehemu hizi itakuwa ni yenye kusambaa kwa haraka sana . 
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5  Na kupitia zile takwimu umetup atia baada ya mwezi watu wanaweza wakahesabu 
mambo mengine.  Kwa hiyo ndugu zangu naomba , tena nasisitiza tuweze kushi kana kwa pamoja 
na tuhakikishe S erikali kuu imeangazia sehemu hizi vilivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hayo 
naomba wenzangu tuunge mkono hoja hii, ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Fadhili , the Deputy Speaker for 
your contributions . Yes Hon. Milka Moraa?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance to al so give my 
contribution on the Procedural M otion that has been brought by the Majority Leader and I stand 
to suppor t it. Following the P residential decree which was made on Sunday 15th , 2020 at a press 
release , he did confirm to the N ation that we ha ve two more confirmed cases of C orona virus 
infection and it is coming from the Head of S tate that indeed is serious.  We have no choice as a 
colleague of mine has said her e earlier to follow suit and to  lead by example so that we can take 
safety measures to avoid the spread of this deadly virus by doing self -isolation because the 
minute one of us , and God forbid the minute one of us gets it and you can see the way are seated 
together in this room and also ou tside and it is also African that  we might forget and shake each 
other’s hands we might forget and hug  each other, there is something that we do by instinct; so 
the best thing is to do self -isolation at our homes so that we do what is prevention is better than 
cure.  
We do not even have the machinery as it is now to contain a large number of sick people 
as a country , so the best thing is to go home i solate ourselves , try to  observe the hygienic 
measures that we have already given though social media and all that we have heard through 
reading and following what you have just read Mr. S peaker the disease spread s very fast.  If Italy 
had taken the steps that we are taking now or  the country is taking now probably they would not 
be w here they are now having a lock down so we do not want to get to that stage. So I do urge my 
colleagues that it is good for us to adjourn and come back l ater when th e situation has  been 
contained. Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Milka. Y es Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. Mr. Speaker just before I air out my views I 
want to belie ve that here we are having a very honest and a very genuine deb ate and I want to 
believe that M embers are free to give their views free ly and I don’t think that this Procedural 
Motion is already predetermined . Mr. Speaker , the reason why I want to say this is because  the 
Members who have already spoken  or the Members who were on the floor were very categorical 
and they were referring from the di rective that were given by the Head of S tate on the reduction 
of social gathering s; some of the examples of why we need to adjourn from this particular 
Honourabl e House.   
 Mr. Speaker I want to say this and as I said this I want to  be understood well and so well; 
one, first of all is very important for us to be able to trace or to be able to understand the way this 
COVID -19 spreads.  Mr. Speaker COVID -19 does not s pread or it is not an air bone disease that 
is number one because here first of all we need to differentiate between the facts and the fiction , 
they are a lot of myths amongst ourselves . 
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6  Most of us we are not medic s and we are not professionals , we are la y men and we just 
hear like Mr. Sp eaker yesterday I was listening and  I was trying to listen to some of the views 
from the people who were giving their views through the TV and the way they were talking and 
trying to describe h ow C orona spreads and so on i t was amazing and that one was a true 
indication that indeed most of the people are not much informed about this particular disease.  
That is why I want to say this Mr. Speaker Corona virus or COVD -19 is very infectious but it 
only spread or survive on a bo dy surface or any other surface , like for example the hands it can 
survive but for a shorter time.  
Mr. Speaker I want to give reasons why I am opposing this Motion; t hat is number one 
and I want to be protected and given time to explain myself.  Number two Mr. Speaker if this 
Corona virus survives in the surface like th e hands that one can be avoided; w e can avoid that by 
avoiding to greet each other and even sterilizing our hands as we get in the room. Number two 
Corona virus spreads through droplets , like for example coughing or some aerosol sprays that 
one can also be easily prevented and we have even done it before by prevention of TB whereby 
somebody should be very careful when coughing he should use an handker chief and so on and so 
forth. This issue sho uld not scar e us and run away from this Honourable  House Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Mr. Speaker Sir I want also to say this that this particular disease…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Renson Thoya . 
 
 Hon. Thoya: (Off Microphone).  
  
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Hon. Ibrahim please wind up your contribution 
and Hon . Members I want to urge you that you need to take this disease very seriously and 
please don’t mock about this disease please it’s  not a joke! W hen you are sayin g something you 
need to mean it. Yes Hon . Ibrahim just wind up please.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I  have understood and I think this is a House  
where every M ember is entitled to give his views freely and openly Mr. Speaker Sir. To me I 
believe what we need to do instead of us adjourning  we just know we just came from a long 
recess everybody knows that , and I think what we need to do even if we adjourn today  from this 
House and I want to be categorical on this I want to be on record we are b oarding vehicles as we 
travel home that  is number one , we are not flying  as individual s we are boarding vehicles  and we 
are going to meet strangers we like it or  not! T hat is true and even the PSV vehicles are still 
working and people are still going to w ork so I just want to wind up Mr. Speaker...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Amur  let the Hon. Member...  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : (Off Microphone).  
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : And that is why Hon . Ibrahim you are told ... anyway just 
wind up Ho n Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir , I understand that prevention is better than cure . I 
understand that more than him , I know what am talking about I think what we need to do in this 
House instead of us adjourning  we need to take the precautions for  us to avoid this particular 
spread instead of adjourning th erefore I stand to oppose this Motion. T hank you . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Ibrahim and I can just tell you part of the 
precaution is adjourning this House so that one you should  know .... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 And thank you for telling this House that we need to take precaution.  Yes Hon. Amur 
Murfad ? 
  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mheshim iwa Spika amba ye hajafukuzwa hajui kukimbia na 
usilolijua ni usi ku wa g iza; ikiwa nchi ambazo zimejisasua kimati babu uli mwenguni , ulimwengu 
mzima leo unalia kutokana na ugonjwa leo inasikitisha kwamba sisi ambao tuko rated  labda 
third world  tunasema kwamba hatutaki precautions ! Ni kutoelewa , ni kutofahamu , ni kutojua 
madhara ya ugonjwa huu na nitaregea kusema asiefu kuzwa hajui kukimbia lakini wale 
waliofukuzwa tayari wameanza kukimbia.  
 Ikiwa U ingereza , Marekani , Utaliano na nchi zengine kadhaa tayari zinaomboleza sio tu 
kwa kupatikana na maradhi mpaka vifo vimetokea . Nchi kama uitaliano Mheshimiwa Spika hata 
barabar ani hata watu kutembea hakuna ni maafisa wa polisi peke yake wanaopita wakikupata ni 
hatia . 
 Je sisi ndugu zangu ambao tuko third world  hatusemi hatuna matibabu mazuri lakini 
mkusanyiko wetu tunavyo  kusanyika sisi hata kwenye familia zetu katika nyumba zet u tunaishi 
kwenye mazingira ambayo chumba kimoja tuko watu ishirini , je wacha sisi pengine tuna 
majumba mazuri wahes himiwa , kuna wale ndugu zetu ambao tunaka a nao kule vitongojini 
tunawafikiria nini tusichu kulianeni mzaha tusifanyieni  shere na magonjwa hay a. 
Mungu asitujalie Kenya na ndu gu zetu wengine hili sio jambo la kufurahiwa wala 
kufanyiwa kashfa wala kufanyiwa dhihaka Mungu atuepushe na aepushe Kenya maradhi haya 
kwa sababu sisi tuko milioni 45 kwa uchache Mungu asitujalie ukija huu hatuna nguvu za 
kukabiliana nao mia kwa mia .  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kitu kikubwa kila mmoja aombe Mungu wake Mungu 
atuwezeshe tulishinde janga hili ili watu wetu wanusuri ke na sisi wenyewe tutaongoza ki na nani 
ikiwa watu wetu itakuwa hakuna ? Kwa hayo machache  ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : Thank you so much Hon . Amur . Yes Hon .  Mwaega Nyiro ? 
  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and I appreciate that you have allowed my senior to 
go first and I am a very disciplined young boy so indee d it is good to recognise the age of my 
senior elder grandfather .  
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8  Mr. Speaker indeed it is a very sad day for Kenya and the world ; it should go in history 
this thing happened when we are leaders elected to represent our people and when God gives you 
challenges when you are a leader this shows the amount of love God has for us so that he can  
also see how we are going to behave in such a crisis as leaders that we have been bestowed with 
a lot of responsibilities on our people.  
Mr. Speaker it is indeed goo d for us to adjourn so that we can also participate in the 
awareness of our M embers ; it is true that most of our people in the villages are not aware of all 
these things we are talking about  here because even the message was given in English and am 
sure mo st of the people in the  villages do not understand  English . So Mr. Spe aker as also part of 
precautionary  measure s I would also like to request our Hon . Governor to also extend a hand to 
our brothers and sisters who are in hospitals especially those who are  recovering and also there 
are th ose who have recovered and canno t manage to pay their bills . 
So as a way of decongesting the hospitals i kindly request i f a message can be sent by the 
Governor through the department so that these citizens who have recover ed but are still in the 
hospitals because they can’t pay their bills . Maybe we can assist them to go home so that they 
can also rest and quarantine themselves at home instead of staying in a very high risk area like 
the general hospital .  
Again as a Christ ian am aware of very many bodies which are lying in the  morgue  and 
Mr. Speaker as the bodies continue lying in the morgue families are gathering in their homes to 
continue to solicit for funds so that they can be paying the bills for the morgue .  Mr. Speak er it 
is also in good faith if the G overnor will see  to it that members of the community  get the bodies  
of their loves one's just what  the Governor of Kakamega did so that people can also bury their 
dead and the gatherings can also be reduced .  
Mr. Speaker  again if the C ounty can give a  directive  sometimes our beloved ones die at 
home and  because of the preparation we Christians tend to take bodies to the morgue  so that they 
can do preparations for the burial . This has been a tr adition for a long time ; indeed if the 
Governor can also give direction that  when  one dies at home we can be forced or instructed to do 
the burial  almost immediately so that we can also avoid the gatherings in the villages .  
Again Mr. Speaker the month of Ramadhan is approaching and a s we a re all aware 
because all of us M ombasans we have been approached by different people from my village who 
want to do weddings because you know if you have not legalised your marriage during 
Ramadhan it 's like you have to separate . So most of the boys and young men in the villages are 
trying hard to make sure that they legalise their marriages and also in such traditions people tend 
to gather an d celebrate . So it is also good for Imams to be instructed to minimise the groupings 
in such celebrations so that you c an maybe have the Imam and the two  people who are getting 
married and maybe the parents who can participate so that we also reduce the gatherings. Mr. 
Speaker these are the things that are allowing us to go home so that we can also be able to 
participate in instructing our people on the need to minimize groupings.  
Mr. Speaker as Hon. Ibrahim Omondi who is a teacher and the Chairpe rson of the 
Education Committee said , all our children are at home, yesterday I was fo rced to do three  CATS 
because  the university is closing down ; the CAT S that I was supposed to do them in a whole 
week I did them in one day ! This is because the U niversity is closing down, s o if i come here and 
all our people are at home Mr. Speaker, Waswahili  wanasema ni kinaya . So let u s go home  to 
protect our children because they are at home and also minimize travelling because as you travel 
from one place to another ... I am aware that some Hon. Members here would like to go 
upcountry to their families but again let us minimize the mov ement s.  
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 We can also stay in Mombasa so that we can reduce the risks of maybe taking the disease 
to our people in up country. Otherwise Mr. Speaker the adjournment is in good faith because this 
is a pandemic and it is indeed true tha t we cannot handle any p andemic;  we cannot even as a 
Country even as a County sometimes when it rains here everybody is running away from the 
floods and it is  just floods for a day or two b ut sometimes we find it is heavy on us , what about a 
pandemic that is holding the whole wor ld at hostage Mr. Speaker.  
So indeed we should be proactive and this whatever we are doing here Mr. Speaker is 
being proactive and it is in good faith and I support it and let us go to the  grassroots  and 
enlighten our people on the pandemic so that we can  all stay safe. Mr. Speaker I support the 
Motion. Thank you very much.    
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Mwaega for you contribution. 
Yes Hon. Abrar i? 
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrar i: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mwanzo ningependa 
kutambua kuwa  hii ni Procedural Motion  ambayo hatufai kuijadili lakini nina mao ni ambayo 
mimi naona sisi kama W aheshimiwa ni  kiele lezo chema kwa wananchi na sisi kama tutakuwa 
tunafunga Bunge na wenzetu kule tunawaambia kuwa wakifika mahali waoshe mikono waji nini 
itakuwa sio sawa.  
Tuchuku e mathalan  kama sokoni; s okoni ni mahali watu ambayo takriban 100,000  kwa 
siku wanakutana ndani ya soko, leo sisi hapa tuko watu 42 tu tunaambiwa tufunge na lile soko 
ambao liko na watu takriban laki moja wanaingia na kutoka , tunalifi kiria vipi? Kama sisi 
tungekuwa ni kiele lezo chema ni kuwa kama ni hizo sanitizer  ziwekwe pale nje sisi tuwe twaja 
Bunge kama vile watu wengine wanafanya shughuli zao kama kawaida. Kufunga Bunge itakuwa 
hatujafanya lolote kwa sababu wale walioko nje wanatu sikiza sisi kama viongozi wao ambao 
wametuchagua , kile tutakacho kiamua sisi hapa tuwapelek ee wale wananchi kule chini.   
Kwa hivyo nakuomba kwa busara tuliangalie hili kwa undani, tuangalie mahali kama 
Feri, Feri pale kwa siku wanavuka takriban laki tano h adi laki sita wanavuka ndani ya ile Feri; ile 
Feri tutasema ifungwe pia k ama vile tulivyofunga Bunge? Matatu tunazopanda si wote amba o 
kuwa wanaweza kuwa na magari yao , wengi wanatumia magari ya abiria, wote hao wote 
tutawaambia pia watu wa matatu wafunge wasifanye kazi zao?  
Kwa hivyo hii kusema la kweli naona mwenye aliyekuja na fikira hii, h ii ni fikira potofu. 
Sisi kama W aheshimiwa ni kiele lezo chema kwa wananchi kule sasa kwa hivyo kwa busara yako 
Mheshimiwa Spika nakuomba utupe mw elekeo. Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Abrar. Hon. Abrar I think you 
are all aware you are elected as an MCA and part of your job is to represent your people; s o if 
you are in this House and your people are suffering there, how are you helping you r people? So 
you should be there whether in Kongowea Market to do the sensitization and tell the people 
which measures to take…  
(Applause)  
Rather than being in this House and have those sittings which you are looking for…  
(Applause)  
Yes I think huo ndio mw elekeo wangu n imekupatia kwa hio utachukua ama ! Yes Hon. 
Renson Thoya.  
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Naunga mkono h oja hio ya kwenda nyumban i 
ili kujiepusha na maafa zaidi; h ata hivyo wakati tunaouunga mkono kwenda nyumbani ni lazima 
mambo fulani t uyaw eke sawa , kuna zile huduma muhimu janga hili linataka watu waoshe 
mikono mara kwa mara…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Hon. Renson I was just advising the Hon. Member 
again that confidential ly... that at least they should request for t he Executive to arrang e for a 
sensitization in every W ard I think that will be ideal….  
(Applause)  
So that every Member will have those sittings there in their W ards to sensitiz e the ir 
people. Yes you can continue.  
Hon. Thoya:  Nafikiri Mheshimiwa Spika umeg onga ndipo kwa sababu hata wakati 
tunaenda kule nyumbani ni lazima kuwe kuna kazi tunafanya kulingana na janga hili si kwamba 
tunaenda kujificha…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And again you know we are here and we are paid salary I 
am not sayin g that we should go there and we have sittings for money. We are he re to work for 
the Hon. Members, s o Members please get me clear it is part of our job. Yes continue Hon. 
Thoya . 
 
Hon. Thoya:  Nilikuwa nasisitiza kuna sehemu nyingi husu san kule sehemu  ya Jo mvu 
hakuna huduma za maji; k wa hivyo haya ni baadhi ya mambo ambayo tunajaribu ku waambia 
wale watekelezaji kwa sababu mara kwa mara unatakikana kuosha mikono. Ikiwa eneo lile la 
Mikindani, Jomvu na Miritini yale maji ya kawaida hakuna inakuwa ni cha ngamoto  hususan 
tukiangalia ule u wezo wa watu wetu kwenda kununu a maji kutoka kwa maduka. Kwa hivyo 
huduma kama hizo tuweze kuhakikisha kwamba maji yatakuwepo . Wakati tunaondoka hapa 
tujue kwamba tuko mwezi wa tatu na ni msimu wa mvua na tunaju a kwamba zile dharu ra za 
mafur iko zinaambatana na msimu huu n i lazima zile Idara zinahusika na maswala ya dharura 
ziweze kukaa imara kwa sababu hivi sasa kila mmoja anakwenda kujifungia ndani ya nyumba 
watu kutoka itakuwa ni ngumu.  
Mbali na hapo kuna watu ambao w atachukulia  wakati  huu nafasi kuweza kunyanyasa na 
kudhulumu wananchi wanyonge ; ni lazima Serikali na asasi za Serika li kukaa macho kwa sababu 
ikiwa hatutachukua hatua hio ninajua hali za kiuchumi hivi  sasa mimi ninajua hata ukiona 
Waheshimiwa wengine wanadinda kwend a ni hali ngumu kule tunakoenda. Je yule mtu wa 
kawaida atakuwa vipi? Kwa hivyo naomba sana Serikali iwe macho kwa upande huo. Otherwise  
nauunga mkono.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya. Yes Hon. Ramla Said?  
Hon. Ramla Said:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika , nasimama kuu nga mkono hii Hoja kwa 
sababu naona kuna umuhimu kwenda ku create awareness  kwa walemavu kuwa Corona  ni 
ugonjwa wa aina gani na inataka kuchuku a hatua gani ambayo waweza kujiepusha nayo. Kwa 
hivyo naomba umoja ili tuweze kwenda  kufanya sensitization . Thank you.  
(Applause)  
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mbura?  
 
Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii. M imi pia nimesimama 
kuunga mkono Hoja hii iliyoko mbele yetu. Ni vyema kuweza kwenda nyumbani na hasa sisi  
viongo zi tuweze kuelimisha jamii zetu k wa sababu mtoto kama ameregeshwa nyumbani 
hakujafanywa uhamasishaji jamii mashinani haijui kabisa. Kwa hivyo ni sisi kama viongozi 
tuweze kujumuika na jami i zetu mashinani kuwaelimisha.  
Tumetaja mambo ya Feri pia tus isahau dump site  zetu kwa sababu kuna wenzetu wengi 
wanaishi katika hizo dump site  na kusema kweli wengi hawajui. Kwa hivyo ni vyema pia sisi 
tujumuike na  ma Afisa  wetu wa afya tuelimishe  jamii zetu ili pia wao waweze kujua ugonjwa 
huu kwa undani na waweze  pia kujikinga nao. Kwa hivyo ningeomba Bunge hili tuweze 
kusaidiana na tuunge mkono tushirikiane  na jamii zetu ili tuweze kuoko a maisha ya jamii zetu na 
hata sisi wenyewe. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na Mungu atulinde sote turudi tukiwa salama.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Mbura. Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi?  
 
Hon. Chireri:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ningemuunga mkono Mwenyekiti 
wetu ambaye ni Kiongozi wa Wengi Bungeni  kwa kuleta Hoja hii; Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo 
la kuhuzunisha lakini  yote tunasema tunamwachia Mungu, Mungu ndio muweza wa yote. Kitu 
ambacho nitapenda kusisitiza Mheshimiwa Spika, jambo hili ni tudumishe usafi na kuna mm oja 
amezungumza jambo la maji.  
Ningependa Mheshimiwa Spika Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa itili e mkazo maji ya mekuwa 
matatizo Kisauni ninavyokuambia Mtopanga iko  karibu na yale matangi ya maji  lakini la ajabu 
Mtopanga haina maji na jambo hili tumeona maji ni muhimu katika kupambana na hili janga 
ambalo tuko nalo.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tumesikia habari za kuwa katika Supermarket  kuna yale madawa 
ambayo tunaweza kutumia na kukinga jambo hili ; la kusikitisha ni kwamba wale watu wetu kule 
mashinani, ile dawa si chini ya 500, ile dawa ni zaidi na kuna wengine kule mashinani  hawawezi 
kujikimu na haya madawa . Ningeomba serika li yetu ya K aunti tumemuona Gavana wetu na  
nampongeza kwa juhudi zake zile ambazo anazifanya ili kukinga wananchi wake wasije 
wakaathirika .  
Kama itawezekana hii elimu hatuwezi kuita watu wote kwa pamoja kama tumeshaelezwa 
tayari haiwezekani lakini elimu i ende door to door  tukisaidiana na watu  wetu  na kama yale 
madawa yatapatikana wale ambao wanatembea nyumba baada ya nyumba waweze kupatiwa hata 
kama ni chupa moja moja ili wananchi wetu waweze kutumia, ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker ( Hon. Kha tri): Thank you very much. Y es Hon. Mwaka?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante s ana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nasimama kwa ajili ya 
janga ambalo liko la Corona  na masikitiko yangu makubwa sana ni kivuko cha Fer i. Kivuko cha 
Feri kama mi mi mwenyewe ni mkaaji wa Likon i, kivuko cha Fer i kinapitia watu wen gi na 
sanitizers ambayo ita wekwa pale naomba pia national  pia wasaidie kwa sababu wa K aunti peke 
yake hatutayaweza mambo ya kivuko.  Kwa sababu leo hii mimi nimevuka  sanitizer yenyewe iko 
upande  mmoja am bayo kwamba haito weza na hatutaweza kwa kusema ya ukweli.  
 Feri pale sijui tutatumia akili gani ili ya kuweza kusaidia wananchi kwa sababu vivuko ni 
viwili ; cha ng’ambo ya town  na ng’ambo ya Likoni na utapata um ma unaovuka pale ni wengi 
sana.   
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12  Kwa hiyo sisi kilio chetu s ana ni kivuko na tu muombe Mwenyezi Mungu  kwa sabab u 
hali ilivyo ni mbaya na wanaopita pale ni wengi na wengi  na ni walala hoi ambao kwamba 
amejimaki a  kwenda kw a Muhindi kufanya kazi hata akiona pale msongamano yeye anaona si 
muhimu kuchukua sanitizers . Kwa hiyo mikakati ambayo itawekwa iweze ku wekwa kwa wingi 
ili kuweza kuwas aidia na kuharakisha kwenda kwenye shughuli zao. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
 The Speaker ( Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Mwaka. Y es Hon. Fatma?  
  
 Hon. Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii . 
Mimi pia nimesimama kidete kuunga mkono mjad ala ulioletwa na Mheshimiwa Ham isi Musa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika hili janga la Corona  ni maradhi na maradhi yanatokana kwa Mwenyezi 
Mungu  lakini  vile vile waambiwa jikinge na Mwen yezi M ungu naye akulinde. Waheshimiwa 
wamelalamikia kuhusu maji nafikiri kila mtu akitoka ndani ya nyumba yake huwa anaoga na 
hatutaweza pia kukaa ku ngojea serikali ya K aunti ama serikali kuu haitaweza kutukimu sisi sote . 
Kama m unavyojua nchi yetu ni nchi ya kimaskini , ni sisi wenyewe kwan za tuweze kueleza watu 
wetu kil a mtu akitoka kwake aweze kubeba sabuni kwenye chupa asingoje serikali imu wekee 
sanitizer  ama asingoje serikali imuekee maji katika upande wa Fer i... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu  usingoje serikali ikukinge wewe ni wewe mwenyewe 
uanze kujikinga maanake maisha ni yako , si ya Raisi Kenyatta wala si ya Gavana wa Kaunti wa 
Mombasa wala si ya Spika wa Kaunti ya Mombasa , ni wewe mwenyewe kwan za uweze 
kijikinga na vile vile Mwenyezi  Mungu  atakukinga na Kaunti na serikali itach angia palipobakia. 
Vile vile…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 I don’t want to be informed Mr. Speaker!  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon. Milka?  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon. Fatma please!  Yes?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Hon. Speaker for this chance . I think the Hon. Member is 
misleading this House by directing M embers to carry soap and water from their homes whe n 
there is a kitty known as disaster  management and when…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Order Hon. Fatma pleas e? 
 
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13  Hon. Ngare : It is the duty of the a government to take care of its citizen ry when such 
kind of calamities be fall a government ; so Hon. Fatuma please stop misleading the House for 
them to carry we are supposed to be taken care o f, the gover nment is s upposed to care of its 
citizens . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker ( Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Milka. Yes Hon. Fatma continue?  
 
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ni kweli kabisa mwanadamu 
watakikana kwanza wewe mwen yewe ujikinge na  sijazungumza vibaya Mheshimiwa Spika ; 
nimeeleza kwanza wewe mwen yewe ujikinge ndio serikali ya Kaunti  na serikali kuu iingilie kati ,  
ukae ukingoja hivi wewe ukienda nyumba ni kwako huoshi mkono wangojea Kaunti ikuoshe 
mkono ndio upate kula chakula?   
 Mheshimiwa Spika vile v ile sisi twaenda zetu nyumbani lakini tuna wafanyi  kazi wetu 
pia ndani ya hili Jum ba ningeomba ikiwa sisi twaenda  zetu nyumbani na wao pia waweze 
kupewa fursa za kwenda nyumbani ili  kukaa na familia za o na wao pia wajikinge madamu pia 
nao ni binadamu . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Fatma . Yes Hon. Leila?  
 
 Hon. Nyache : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi kunipa fursa hii ya  kuweza 
kuchangia. Kwanza nimesimama  kuunga mkono hoja hii iliokuja na Kiongoz i wa W engi 
Bungeni ; ni hoja ya maana sana Mheshimiwa Spika kuhusiana na hili janga la Corona . 
Mheshimiwa Spika kama vile mnavyojua hapa, hili janga limeingia katika ulimwengu mzima sio 
eti ni hapa kwetu p eke yake ni ulimwengu mzima na ni hatari kila mtu anaogopa kulingana na 
vile linavyo ua wana adamu . 
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi wenzangu wamezungumza mengi na mimi 
ningeomba tu kwa upande wangu niweze kuchangia kidogo niseme ya kwamba kuna wale 
madak tari wetu wa vijijini wale wanajiita CHW ambao wana  data zote za manyumba kukitokea 
mkurupuko wowote wa maradhi huwa wanahusishwa kutembea katika nyumba kwa nyumba. 
 Hivyo basi  mimi ningeomba pia waweze kuhusishwa maanake wao wana  data za 
nyumba zote na wanaweza kufikia wale wananchi kwa njia ya urahisi. Ikiwa kutatokea hizo 
sanitizers  za Kaunti zitapatikana basi CHW waweze kuhusishwa maanake wao ndio 
wataturahishia kazi na sisi viongozi pia twende tukazungumze na wana nchi wetu kuhusiana na 
gonjwa hili hatari la Corona . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon. Leila . Yes Hon. Naliaka?  
 
 Hon. Naliaka:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for granting me  this opportunity. Mr. Speaker 
Sir I stand to support the Procedural Motion of today to adjourn the House and Hon. Members 
have already given out their reasons as to why to do so. So considering the mood of the House I 
think it is high time you pose the question and we do the ne cessary. Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Naliaka , it is a Procedural Motion so we do  
not put a question for Procedural M otion s. Yes Hon. Members anyone who wants to contribute?  
March 17, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         17  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14  Yes Hon . Junior?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Wambua ): Ahsante sana Spika kwa k unipatia nafasi hii. Mimi 
nasimama kuunga  mkono hoja hii am bayo imeletwa na  Kiongozi wa Wengi  na ambayo ni ya 
maana sana. Sisi ku ahirisha vikao vya  Bunge tunataka ili twende tukaelimishe watu wetu ; sisi 
hapa ni  Waheshimiwa ambao tunawakilisha Wodi  zetu na kule nyumbani ndio watu ambao 
wanaweza kudhurika zaidi  sana kwa sababu wao hawajaelewa zaidi kuhusu ni kitu gani ambacho 
kinaendelea.   
 Raisi amesimama na kusema anafunga mashule yote na mimi nashangaa Mheshimiwa wa 
Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati ya Elimu  hapa anatuambia sisi tuendelee wakati mashule yote 
yamefungwa na yeye ndiye  mtu wa kwanza angekuwa anatuelimisha anatuambia kwa sababu 
mashule yamefungwa sisi na sisi twende nyumban i tukaweze kuelimisha watu wetu  kwa sababu 
sisi wale ambao wametuchagua wako katika hatari. Sisi wenyewe tunaambiwa tukae mita moja 
mbali na sisi unao na jinsi tun avyokaa hapa , inaonyesha ni hatari zaidi kwa hivyo mimi naunga 
mkono ku ahirisha vikao vya  Bunge mpaka wakati utakaofaa, ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon. Junior Wambua . Hon. Members 
I direct the Committee on Health to sit down after this session and give us the way forward or the 
Members to give us the direction that the health department is taking on this issue of COVID  -19 
on awareness and sensitization and another issue which Honourable Milka has raised about  the 
emergency fund . I think it is clear in PFM Act , 2012 (110) on the disaster mana gement issue so it 
is upon the Ministers to do that if they find that there  is need of th at and again it  only happen s 
with the approval of the Assemblies , so if they happe n to need that emergency fund it has to 
come to the Assembly for the approval. Yes Hon . Majority Leader?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, may I take this 
opportunity to tell the Members who supported and those who did n ot support the motion that it 
is a very important issue or a motion for the health of our leaders and as I have said we should  
not  take it as if it is a political issue it is an issue of do and die so Mr. Speaker I am very happy 
for the members to accept this adjournment because of safeness we have to start we as leaders on 
the safeness and then we go the other party of our people who elected us. So Mr. Speaker I have 
nothing much to say but to support and to say that I really appreciate for the members th e way 
they supported the motion.  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon. Majority Leader, Hamisi Musa. 
Hon. Members again I just want to add on that I have directed that the Committees may sit in 
emergency circumstances  and we should take precautions even if when you are sitting just make 
sure you don’t sit next to each other. Yes Clerk next order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Thank you Hon. Members this House stands adjourn ed until such time that I will pub lish 
the date of the resump tion. T hank you.  
  
The H ouse rose at 12:00 p.m. 