February 15, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 15th February, 2017  
The House met at 9:09a m. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down.  Yes Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Yes Hon M ary Akinyi . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to table a Notice 
of Motion on Installation of Billboards on Entry Roads .  
(Hon  (Ms) A kinyi table d the  Notice of M otion)  
Mr. Speaker Sir , 
Aware that the County has several entry ro ad gateways at Shika Adabu, Shimo la 
Tewa, Mwakirunge and Miritini.  
Further aware that the existing banners welcoming  visitors to the County are faint or 
in some cases do not exists;  
Concerned that visitors may not be awar e or properly guided as to our C ounty 
boundaries;  
I therefore Mr. Speaker urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
The County Government to install billboards on entry roads at County boundaries for 
guidance to visitors and members of the public.  
(End of Notice of Motion)  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you, y es Clerk . 
MOTION  
Yes Hon f or Changamwe, yes Hon Fadhili . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I just need your guidance 
because I believe the Motion was brought yesterday but there was a part was to be amended , I 
think we were waiting for the question to be put if you allow me to read the amendment I will 
proceed to read the amendment . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Do you have the authority from the Mover 
of the Motion . 
Hon. Mwalimu: Yes Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes you can go ahead . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I will start from the beginning 
of the Motion . 
(Hon Mwalimu  move d the amended Motion on behalf of Hon Odari) 
Mr. Speaker I beg to move the following  Motion.  
That aware that the first Assembly b egan its sittings in March 2013 ; 
Further aware that this House will soon be dissolved to pave way for the General 
Elections scheduled for 8th August, 2017.  
Noting that the rightful term of any of our previous pa rliaments has always been five 
years.  
Concerned that our term will be less than five years given the date of the next General 
Elections in August 2017.  
I therefore urge this House to RESOLVE  that: 
1. The County Tre asury to factor the afore -said Members' co mpensation in a 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill for the FY 2016/2017.  
February 15, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 And Mr. Speaker this is the amended part , yesterday it read the year 2017/2018 Mr. 
Speaker.  
2. That payment of the above -mentioned eight months salary b e effected before the 
lapse of Members' term in August 2017.  
(End of Motion)  
Thank you Mr. Speaker and I beg the Hon  Members to approve and second  the 
amendments.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Who is going to second the amendments? 
Yes Hon Saad Faraj . 
Hon. Faraj:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker I rise to se cond the amendment 
which reads , ‘The County Tre asury to factor the afore -said Members' compensation in a 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill for the FY 2016/2017 ’.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon  Saad Faraj, I now propose 
a question on an amendment that the C ounty Tre asury to factor the afore -said Members' 
compensation in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill for the FY 2016/2017. Yes Hon Fadhili . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker as it was said yesterday we 
need to factor the said amendmen ts in this Motion because what was written yesterday it 
wasn't factoring us because by the FY 2017/2018 as it was yesterday the House or the 
Members present in this House will be out and it was up to us to amend what was brought 
yesterday.  
Mr. Speaker even the constitution states that our term should be five years and if you 
fail to plan you ... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You plan to fail . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you M r. Speaker , you plan to fail so it is our right cause it is 
in the constitution and we have seen also from the National Assembly we are not the ones 
beginning this trend it started from the National Assembly a nd even if the date of the next 
General Elections will be pushed forward may be we are ready to wor k for the said months 
that the government or the date of the next general election will be minus the days we are 
supposed to have .  
Mr. Speaker I beg the Honorable Members to support this amendment and to support 
this Motion for our budget to be factored in this Supplementary budget and as the Chairman 
of Public Accounts Committee we are not and i repe at we are not misusing public funds it is 
our right.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Amur Murfad . 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I rise to second the Motion...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : With amendment . 
Hon. Amur : Yes with amendments Mr. Spea ker, we are not claiming but it is on the 
contract that we take for five years .  
Mr. Speaker I just want to inform the House even the IEBC who were found guilty 
they were compensated for their term , so for us we are not of any interest  it is our right so we 
are fighting for our right , if they were found guilty misusing the office of IEBC and they were 
paid what is the argument  for us not to be paid . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Saad Faraj . 
Hon. Faraj:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker , as we are all aware that our budget 
is a program based budget in fact they should include it in our budget so that we can be able  
to utilize  the funds for a certain vote.  
February 15, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 Mr. Speaker the argument  here was that we were suppose d to serve our term 
according to the Constitution ; it is a constitution al right if you look at Article 177 of the 
constitution part 4 it clearly states that County Assembly is elected for a term of five  years.  
Mr. Speaker we  were supposed to serve full term five years but because of the issue 
that was raised and having understood very clearly what the people wants we are ready even 
if it seems we are going for election tomorrow but at the same time we must be i n session for 
the five years and I understand clearly that this is our constitutional right and if we are to look 
back at the IEBC Commission ers they did not complete the full term but they were 
compensated .. 
(Applause ) 
We are not setting a prece dent, it is not a new idea that we are coming up with, it has 
been there or along and we want people to understand this position as Members of the County 
Assembly of Mombasa and people who are representing the fraternity at large. Thank you 
very much Mr. Sp eaker and may the Almighty bless you all.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Boma . 
Hon. Boma:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii mimi pia naunga 
mkono mswada huu ambao umeletwa na Mheshimiwa Jimmy Odari.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tulichaguliwa Machi 201 3 na kipindi chetu kilikuwa kinatakikana 
kiishe baada ya miaka mitano kuanzia Machi 2013 miaka mitano yetu itakamilika Machi 
2018 lau Bunge letu litakatizwa Mwezi wa nane wazungu walisema hiyo ni breach of 
contract…  
(Laughter  and applause ) 
Ukiangalia Bunge Ku u pia nalo limepitisha mswada kama huu huu haitakuwa vizuri 
kwa sisi kupunguziwa muda wetu wa kutumikia katika Kaunti yetu  hii, mfano mwengine 
unatokana na wale watu wa IEBC ambao kandarasi  yao ilifupishwa na walikubaliwa walip we 
pesa zao zote.  
Kwa hiyo pia m imi naunga mkono hoja hii Kaunti yetu kwa vile tumehudumu vizuri 
bila ya matatizo tulipwe wale ambao watakwenda kuuza mbaazi wajue vipi watauza mbaazi. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Laughter ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes in the absence of further debate I 
would like to tak e the opportunity to let the mover of  the amendment to reply to the Motion . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the given minutes that you 
have accorded me to respond I will let the original mover of this Motion to respo nd but just to 
add on the Motion , in charge of the motion the IEBC factor ... 
(Interruption ) 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon  Mary . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker I think you have finish ed debating this Motion an d am 
responding to this Motion and I have given  two minutes to the original mover Hon  Jimmy 
Odari .  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It is a point of order .  
Hon. Mwalimu:  There's no point of order cause am responding Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Let's give her time Mr. Speaker, Hon  
Mary what is your point of order . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  Sir I would like to know if 
he is the photocopy because he has just said the origi nal person will respond to the Motion . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay that's your point of order . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker we have seen those who are going to sell ‘mbaazi’. 
February 15, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 (Laughter ) 
And I clearly said am the mover of t he amendment Motion Mr. S peaker, the real 
mover of this Motion is in the House...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon  Hatimy what is it?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  The Honorable Member is claiming to be the mover of the 
amendment but the amendment should be in writing . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker I think the ‘mbaazi’ vendors are increasing . 
(Laughter ) 
…and am surpri sing the Chairman of Finance is not coping Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 
we have it in writing in front of us and it is the amended written copy . Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker...  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Did they seek leave in the House to do the amendment  
because it was reading 2017/2018 .  
Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker please guide the Honorable Member because that it is 
the only part that was amended and Mr. Speaker point in to consideration the IEBC factor .  
Mr. Speaker IEBC were paid for  the months that they did not work for why not us and 
I give this opportunity  to Hon  Jimmy for the remaining minutes to respond to this Motion. 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Murfad w hat is it?  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker he cannot over rule that Hon  Odari to speak , he is not the 
Chair . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It is h is right you can give y our minutes to 
somebody to talk. Yes Hon Jimmy O dari the original mover of the Motion . 
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Odari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I wish to con cur with Hon  Fadhili 
because i clearly express the permission to give the amendments to be include d in the Motion 
and Hon  Speaker am for the Motion and I urge this Honorable House to pass this Motion 
with the amendments as it is in the Order paper before us. Thank you , Hon Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Members I think I will put the 
question that thi s House  pass the Motion with the amendments . 
 (Question put and agreed t o) 
(Applause ) 
Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members this House stands adjourned until in the afternoon. Thank you.  
The House rose at 9: 30am. 
     
 
 
 