May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 5th May, 2020.  
The House met at 4:13p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Hon. Members you  may be seated.   
 
(Technical hitch ) 
(Consultati on with Table C lerks)  
  
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM T HE CHAIR  
MOMBASA COUNTY SUPPL EMENTARY BUDGET ESTI MATES FOR FY 2019/2020 
 
Thank you Hon. Members, good afternoon again. I am pleased  to welcome you to this 
sitting. O ur main Business to day is to consider the Mombasa County Supplementary Budget 
Estimates for FY 2019/2020.   
Hon. Members,  the House adjourned Sine D ie on Thursday 17th March , 2020 to curb 
the spread of C OVID -19 Pandemic. I therefore urge you to strictly adhere to the guidelin es 
set by the Ministry of Health  (MoH)  and the World Health Organization  (WHO)  that includes 
use of face masks, observing social distancing and continued hand washing as we conduct 
our business today.   
It is also worth noting that only a few Members have been invited to attend today’s 
Sitting to achieve the social distancing measure.  
Hon. Members, it is highly regrettable to note that Momba sa County has the second 
highest number of C OVID -19 infections in the Country after Nai robi. For that reason, today’s 
Sitting will go a long  way in helping the County Government of Mo mbasa in combating the 
virus and strongly believe that in solidarity we shall defeat this deadly disease.  Hon. 
Members, s ooner or later we shall overcome C orona virus pandemic and we shall res ume our 
core roles of legislation, oversight and representation.  
Hon. Members,  once again I take this opportunity to welcome you all and pray that 
we shall have a productive engagement and deliberations for the benefit of the peopl e of 
Mombasa.  Thank you H on. Members.  
Yes Clerk?  Next Order?  

May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 PAPER  
REPORT ON THE MOMBAS A COUNTY SUPPLEMENTA RY BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2019/2020  
 
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy, Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations please lay down the Paper . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay down the Report on 
Mombasa County Supplementary Budget Estimates 2019/2020 . Thank you.  
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy laid the Paper)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed Mohamed . Yes Clerk, next 
Order?  
 
MOTION  
REPORT ON THE MOMBASA  COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY  BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR  FY 2019/2020  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed Hatimy, Chairperson 
Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations , please move the Motion.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr . Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker THAT, the House adopts the Report on the Mombasa County 
Supplementary Budget Estimates for the FY 2019/2020 laid on the table on Thursday, 30th 
April , 2020 Pursuant to Section 135 of the Public Management Act, 2012 and Standing 
Orde rs 215 & 2016 as follows:  
(a) Approves an increment of the total recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 
2019/2020 by Kshs. 581,368,088  in respect of votes in the First Schedule;  
(b) Approves a reduction of the total development expenditure for the Financial Year 
2019/2020 by Kshs. 978,139,134  in respect of votes in the Second Schedule;  
(c) Approves an overall decrease of the total Budget for the Financial Year 2019/2020 by 
Kshs. 1,072,238,068  in respect of votes in the First and Second Schedule.   
 
Thank you Mr. S peaker . I beg to move.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Seconder?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I request my Vice Chair to second Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : I second.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed Mohamed Hatimy. Hon. 
Memb ers I now propose a question that the Motion by Hon. Mohamed Hatimy on the Report 
of Mombasa County Supplementary Budget Estimates FY 2019/2020  be considered in this 
House in the same terms as moved?  
 
(Question P roposed and a greed to) 
 
Yes Hon. Mohamed Moh amed Hatimy , Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Budget 
and App ropriation s please make your contribution.  
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika nataka 
kuambia Nyumba hii kuw a hivi leo tunaweza kuweka hii Supplementary budget , amba yo 
Supplementary budget  yenyewe tumeweza kuweka pesa Ksh s 581 million i kwenye mfuko wa 
recurrent  na tukapunguza Ksh s 978 million i kwenye mfuko wa development  na pia kwenye 
Nyumba hii ipate kuweza kuteremsha Ksh s 1.072 billion i kama v yenye ilivyo kwenye 
Appropriation Bill Mhe shimiwa  Spika, kwani vile tunavyokwenda hakuna collection ya 
kutosha na pia itakuja kutushika mbeleni.  
 Kwa hivyo tumesema kuwa badili ya kuweka Ksh s 14 Billion i tuweke 13 Billion i ili 
tuweze  kwenda kwa ukweli Mheshimiwa Spika. Naomba N yumba hii waunge mkono  ili hii 
Supplementary  kutuwezesha kuweza kutumia hizi pesa , ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Hatimy . Yes, Hon. Majority 
Leader the Vice Chair please give us your contributions . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Hamisi Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spi ka. M imi 
pia nimesimama kuunga mkono mapendekezo haya ya Supplementary budget  ya 2019/2020. 
Bwana Spika naona ni kwamba tumejaribu kuangazia mambo yaliyo mazuri, hususan  
tukiangalia katika upande  wetu wa recurrent  kama Bunge , tum ebakisha Kshs 
361,255,895,000.   
 Bwana Spika ninge ongezea na kutilia nguvu kwamba  hizo pesa na kipindi kilichobaki 
cha miezi miwili, ni kwamba kutokee utaratibu mzuri baada tushatoa mishahara, itakuwa 
tumebaki na pesa ambaz o pia zinaweza kusaidia kwa mambo mengi, ima hata kw a Wo di 
zetu, ama kwa mitaa yetu kwa Waheshimiwa, kwa sababu nimeona wakati huu tume songa  
vizuri na hapo p alipobaki kwa hiyo miezi miwili  ningeomba kufanywe utaratibu mzuri wa 
kuweza kuzitumia hizi balance  zitakuwa zimebaki kuliko kurudi Treasury . Ahsante Bwana 
Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Majority Leader . Yes, Hon. 
Murfad Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa . Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika ukweli wa 
mamb o ni kwamba tunahita ji kufanya Supplementary budget  kwa haraka iwezekanavyo ; 
kwanza tu, tuna majanga ambayo pia  yametuingilia katika nchi yetu pamoja na nchi jirani, 
tunahitaji kuwapa huduma wananchi wa Mombasa na mambo yote yanahitaji pesa. Leo 
tutaweza kuangalia wale watu upande wa Afya  hata angalau nguvu wakati tukipitisha ili 
waweze kupata pesa na kukabiliana na maradhi ambayo yanatukabili sa a hii.  
 Mheshimiwa  Spika mda umebakia ni mda mdogo, wa mwezi mmoja ama miwili 
mwaka wa fedha wa kiserikali u ishe na ikiwa kuna saba bu za kwamba sisi tuangalie kama 
pesa zipo na tu weze kusaidia katika janga hili  basi Nyumba hii haina budi kukubaliana ili 
tuweze kusaidia janga hili lisitu dhuru zaidi ya hapa lilipofikia . Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Ho n. Murfad Amur . Yes, Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker to have given me this chance to also 
air my views. Actually I do con cur with the supplementary budget ; as in, in all calendars the 
financial year is coming to an end and we shall look not to be wise if at all s uch amount will 
go back to the T reasury. So with m e I see it’s a good move though  we have the pandemic in 
front of us but it’s also our duty to make sure that we have really utilized what we had 
budgeted for it at once . Thank  you very much Mr. Speaker.  
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Junior  Wambua?  
  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Juni or Wambua) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika , nimepata 
nafasi mimi pia niweze kuchangia katika mjadala huu. Bwan a Spika tunajua majanga amb ayo 
yametupata katika nchi yetu na ulimwengu kwa jumla na ni jambo la busara kama tutaweza 
kupitisha hii supplementary budget  ili tuweze kutumia hizi pesa, ili watu wetu waweze 
kutibiwa na mambo mengine yaweze kuendelea katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa . Ahsante 
Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
(Hon. Kitula declined to contribute)  
 
 Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika 
nachukua fursa hii kuungana na Waheshimiwa  wenzangu na hao walio  wote kwa kauli yako 
na kuambia G atuzi letu la Mombasa kuweza kujitahidi na kunusurika katika janga 
lililotukabidhi tukiwa sa a hizi ni G atuzi la pili katika kuathirika na swala zima la COVID -19. 
 Mheshimiwa  Spika supplementary  hii kwe tu sisi ni ya dharura tukizingatia hali ya 
halisi tulio  nayo katika janga tulilo  nalo sasa hivi ya kwamba nguvu kazi na fedha zaidi 
zielekezwe katika maswala mazima ya kupambana na jitihada na sw ala la Corona  
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Mheshimiwa  Spika tunaunga mk ono ama naunga mkono ripoti lakini zaidi ya hayo 
tukumbuke ya kwamba baj eti iliyoathirika zaidi ni baj eti ya maendeleo na maendeleo haya 
yalikuwa hayako katika Wo di zetu na tu na maswala ya kuelezea wananchi.  
 Kwa hivyo ni ombi langu baada ya haya Mheshimi wa Spika pia kila idara 
iliyoathirika katika supplementary  hii iweze ku pata fursa na K amati ya Bunge kueleza ni kipi 
kimea thirika na kimeathirika katika Wodi gani  ili tuwez e kwenda sambamba na fedha zetu.    
 Mheshimiwa  Spika tutaona hakuna kilichofanyika n a pesa wameachiwa japo ni 
kidogo na mwisho wa siku watasema pesa zi lienda kwa Corona  na sisi katika idara hatukuwa 
na chochote kwa kile k idogo kilicho baki cha maendeleo idara zikae na K amati zieleze ili 
tuweze kwenda sambamba, lakini tunaunga mkono jitiha da za serikali yetu kuw eza 
kupambana na swala hili la Corona  na Insha Allah Mwenyezi Mungu atatuwezesha G atuzi 
letu liweze kuwa salama . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Athman Mwamwiri . Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Than k you Mr. Speaker. F irst I will start by condoling with those who 
lost their lives and loved ones in this pandemic and also to say a prayer for those who are still 
in Hospital and indeed God is good He is going to see them through.  
 Mr. Speaker I also wan t to con cur with the Chair of Finance for bringing a good move  
so that we can assist our Governor in the many efforts that  he has been struggling to do 
something. I t’s good that we also  add something into his pockets  so that we can continue with 
his team t o help the people of Mombasa in combating this menace that is really bedevilling 
our people . 
 So Mr . Speaker indeed I support the M otion but again I also want to urge the Chair to 
also continue looking unto it that the few development that can be done, wit h the remaining 
amount with the citize n are still expecting a lot.  
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Remember as we continue to fight Corona it’s also good to get informed that some of 
the things that are used to fight Corona are water, which is also a ba sic essential in the 
department  which is also supposed  to use the remaining budget to make sure that there is 
enough wat er and boreholes in the villages  so that some people can continue to have free 
flow in water as we continue to fight this pandemic . 
 Otherwise Mr. Speaker I support the move and I support the supplementary budget . 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Nyiro . Yes Hon. Moham ed 
Hatimy please reply.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. N afikiri sitakuwa na 
mengi ya kuon gea kwani Members wote wameona umuhimu wa kuja na hii supplementary , 
kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika naona kwamba ni majukumu yetu kufanya oversight sasa sio 
kama tume allocate  hizi pesa ikawa tutaenda tu hivi  hivi, tutakuwa tunafungua macho 
tunaangalia hizi pe sa zatumika vipi kwani pesa nyingi ambazo zitakua zimebaki kwenye hii 
ni pesa ambazo zaenda kwa mishahara na pesa ambazo zimekuwa allocated kwa mambo ya 
Corona  na pia nataka kuambia N yumba hii kuwa kwenye Kshs 200 million i ambazo 
tumekuwa nazo tumeweka kwen ye hii kuna Act yetu ambayo yasema kuna kitu kina itwa 
Management plan  nataka iwe kwenye kumbukumbu kuwa Management plan  imekuja na pia 
ningependelea Mheshimiwa S pika nikupatie ili iweko kwa siku za mbeleni tukija 
kuzungumza juu ya pesa hizi tul io allocate  za Corona  iwe inakwenda kwa mujibu wa plan 
ambayo imeletwa kutoka kwa upande wa executive . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika naunga 
mkono wenzangu nawashukuru kwa kuweza kuunga mkono hii hoja na tupitishe hii ili tupate 
kumaliza, ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon Hatimy . Hon. Ha timy hiyo Management 
plan kwani iliing ia mlango wa nyuma ama vipi, kwa  nini haijawekwa kwa Order paper ! 
Clerks? ! Kweli B unge tutaendesha hivi? Hii mutaweka kwa Order paper  kesho iletwe. I 
think that is the procedure a nd we will follow the procedure but the good th ing you have said 
you have the M anagement plan so we will have another sitting tomorrow and then you will 
bring it in a proper manner .  
 Hon. Members I think Hon . Hatimy has said that it is good we play our ro le as 
oversight after passing this supplementary Bill and we all know why we are here to pass this 
supplementary bill , we all know that people of Mombasa are affected and that is why all of us 
are here , it’s part of our job but we are here to support our p eople and make sure that our 
people get that  service from the C ounty . So Hon . Members I now wan t to put the question 
that the Motion by Hon. Moha med Hatim y on the report of the Mombasa County 
Supplementary budget estimates for the FY 2019/2020 be approved in this H ouse in the same 
terms as moved.  
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
 Yes, C lerk?  
 
BILLS  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY SU PPLEMENTAR Y APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 2 OF 2020  
 
 Clerk , read the Bill for the first time.  
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 FIRST READING  
(The Clerk read the Mombasa County Supp lementary Appropriation Bill N o. 2 of 2020 for 
the first time)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Members the Bill stands committed to 
the Committee of Finance, Budget and Appropriation for consideration . Yes, Clerk ? 
 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY S UPPLEMENTARY APPROPR IATION BILL NO . 2 OF 2020  
 
 Yes, Hon. Hatimy Chairperson Committee on F inance , Budget a nd Appropriation? 
Move the M otion that the Bill now read for the second time?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , since we are late we don’t have 
time so I request you Mr. Speaker you resolve we read the second  time and to dissolve we go 
to Whole House Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Mohamed Hatimy. Hon. M embers I 
now propose the question that the Bill by Hon. Moham ed Hatimy on the Mombasa County 
Supplementary A ppropriation No. 2  be now read the second time ? 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
SECOND READING  
(The Clerk read t he Mombasa County Supplementary Appropriation Bill  No. 2 of 2020  for 
the second time ) 
 
 Thank you . Yes Clerk Committee of the Whole House. Hon . Members the House will 
now dissolve to the Committee of the Whole House.  
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
 
ORDER OF  COMMITTEE READ  
 
(The Mace was lowered)  
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exite d the Chair)  
 
IN THE COM MITTEE  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair ) 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members welcome to the 
Committee of the Whole House on the Bill on Mombasa County Supplementary 
Appropriation Bill No. 2, 2020 . Yes Clerk?  
 
(Interruption)  
 (Loud consultation)  
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Hon. Mem bers as the procedure of the Committee of the Whole house we will start by 
clause number 03 then we proceed to the Hon . Chair Committee on Finance to propose any 
amendments in this Bill. After that we will proceed by reading the Clauses, the recurrent  
clauses and then will proceed to the development clauses as one, and proceed back to 
reporting to the Assembly. Yes Clerk?  
 
(The Clerk read Clause s 03, 04, 05  in accordance with the Supplementary Appropriation Act ) 
 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
 Hon. Members I now propose a que stion that Clause s 3, 4 and 5 as re ad by  the Clerk 
be part of the Bill? 
 
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
 
 Yes Moha med Hatimy, use your mic rophone . 
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mr Speaker, I propose the clau se 01 be amended to read 
13607…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy, we started with Clause 03, 
so…  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Ok. Mr Speaker, then I do hereby propose amendment s; 
Clause 03 of the Bill be  amended by deleting the whole Clause 03 and substitute t herefore the 
following, Three, the sum granted by Section 02 shall be appropriated for the several services 
and the purposes as specified in the second column of the first schedule and second schedule 
in the amount specified in the third column of those sc hedules.  Thank you Mr . Speaker.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members, do you hav e any input as 
per the amended Clause? Before I proceed to put a question?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 I can see the House is satisfied, I now proceed to put a question that Clause 03 as 
amended be par t of the Bill? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
 Hon. Members, I understand everyone has got a copy of the Bill so the Clerk will read 
the vote numbers for us to proceed. Yes Clerk?  
 
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 (The Clerk read the First schedule, recurrent expenditure, the total supply of Kshs. 
9,935,086,287, donor funds Ksh s. 92,494,306, Appropriation in Aid  Kshs. 4,500,656,344 ; the 
vote numbers for the respective am ounts  in the Bill, Vote number R3011, R3012, R3013, 
R3014, R3015, R3016, R3017, R3018, R3019, R3 020, R3021, R3022, R3023, R3026 , Second 
schedule; the total develop ment expenditure  of Ksh.4B illion . The second schedule, composed 
of development expend iture, with the total supply  Kshs. 4,484,281,250 , Donor  funds  Kshs. 
847,677,569. Appropriation in Aid is Ksh s. 1,576,581,324 , the development vote numbers 
D3011, D3012,D3013,D3014,D3015,D3016,D3017,D3018,D3019,D3020,D3021,D3022,D3 0
23,D3026 ) 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I propose that the votes in 
the first and the secon d schedule be part of the Bill . 
 
(Question p roposed and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes, Hon.  Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Chairman I propose that the first and 
second schedule that the Bill be amended by deleting the first and second schedule and 
substituting therefore the following new first and second schedule as annexed Mr. Chairman. 
Thank you.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members any input as per the  
amended schedule because there is a deduction of about Ksh. 1Billion ? Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti maswala  ya bajeti ni makadirio na Waswahili  wanasema mipango sio matumizi.  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti niunga me ama niafiki mapendekezo hayo tukizingatia hivi sasa 
tuko katika hali ya kidharura n a hatuna uhakika makadirio tuli oyaweka mwakani ya k wamba 
tutaweza kuyafikia mapato . Hivyo bas i ipo haja ya kuchukua tahadhari iwapo hatutaafikia 
makadirio tuliyoweka awal i na hapa tukiendelea kufanya mipango kwa bajeti tulio  ikusudia 
au kwa pesa tulizo  kusudia kwamba tungezipata na uhakika wa mambo ipo uwezekano 
mkubwa ya athari ya sisi kutozipata pesa hizo .  
 Kwa hivyo kufanya mabadiliko haya na kufanya makadirio kwa kile amb acho tuna 
uhakika tutakipata ni muafaka ili tusiwe tunaondoa ngo ma juani , hali halisi ni kwamba hata 
serikali kuu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti juzi imeafiki kwamba itapata pigo katika kuokota 
ushuru . Kwa hivyo hata sisi k wa tahadhari hiyo niunge mkono Kamati ya Fedha na 
Makadirio kwa kulizingatia hilo na kututahadharisha mapema ya kwamba hatutafanya na 
bajeti ya kima tulicho  kusudia awali lakini tutashuka kwa uwezekano kwa tutakachokiokota . 
Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti kwa hivyo ninaunga mkono mapendekezo hayo. Ahsante.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Hon. 
Members I now put a question that the amended first and second schedule be part of the Bill?  
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 (The Clerk read  Clause Number 2 ; that t he County Treasury may issue the sum of Kshs . 
14,419,368,080 only out of the County Revenue Fund and apply it towards the supply 
granted for the services ending on the 30th June , 2020 ) 
 
   Hon. Members I propose that Clause 2 as read be part of the Bill ? 
 
(Question pro posed and agreed to ) 
 
        Yes Hon. Hatimy what is it?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Chairman . I propose Clause two to be 
amended;  The County Treasury may issue the sum of Kshs. 14 Billion  to be amended to Kshs. 
13,607,129,170 out of County Revenue Fund for the services of the year ending 30th June, 
2020 . Thank  you. 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy this is an 
amendment and for the pur poses of Hansard please come clear on what you are amending?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I do hereby request the House to amend  by deleting the 
following , ‘The County Treasury may issue the sum of Kshs. 14, 419, 368, 038 only out of the 
County Revenue Fund and apply it towards the supply granted for the services year ending 
30th June, 2020 and replacing therefore with the County Tr easury may issue the sum of Kshs. 
13,607,129,970 only ... wamefanya makos a hapo , Kshs. 13,607,129,970 out of the County 
Revenue Fund and apply it towards the supply granted for the services year ending on 30th 
June, 2020.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Any input Hon. Members? Yes Hon. 
Athman  Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Chair . Mr. Chair I con cur with the 
amendment since the earlier projections of Kshs. 14B illion  is almost impossible to ascertain 
and going to reality and setting the target to Kshs.  13Billion  Mr. Chair that’s a noble issue 
and I do support Mr. Chair . Thank you . 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mw alimu) : So Hon. Moha med Hatimy come clear to 
this Hon ourable  House that there is a typing error in that amendment that you have given to 
this Honourable  House. So I now put a question that Clause 2 to read the County Treasury 
may issue the s um of Kshs. 13,607,129,970 only ... 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 
(The Clerk  read Clause Number 1  that The Act may be cited as The Mombasa County 
Supplementary Appropriation Act Number 2 of  2020 is suance of Kshs. 14,419, 368,038 out of 
the Consolidated Fund for the services year ending on 30th June, 2020 ) 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): I propose that Clause o ne as read be part 
of the Bill . 
 
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 (Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatim y? 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Ch airman. Mr. Chairman I propose Clause 
one be amended ; the Bill be amended in Clause one by deleting the issue of Kshs. 
14,419,368,038 Billion  out of the consolidated fund for the service of the year ending 30th 
June, 2020  and replacing therefore with the issue of Kshs.13,607,129,970 B out of the County 
Revenue fund for the service of the year ending 30th June, 2020 . Thank you Mr. Chairman.  
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hatimy but as again for 
the purposes o f Hansard records, you have not stated if its Kenyan shillings or Tanzanian 
shillin gs so read again and come clear . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Chairman the amount is in Kenya shillings Mr. 
Chairman. Thank you . 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you H on. Members , any input 
before I put a question?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 I now put a question that Clause tone as amended be part of the Bill?  
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
(The Clerk  read t he long  title; the Mombasa County Supplementary Appropriation Bill No. 2 
of 2020 , an Act of the County Assembly of Mombasa to authorise the issue of ce rtain sums of 
money out of the County Revenue Fund and application towards the service of the year 
ending on the 30th June , 2020 and to appropriate those sums for certain public services and 
purposes ) 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a question 
that the long title as read be part of the Bill . 
 
(Question proposed  and agreed  to) 
 
 Hon. Members any input before I put a question?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 I now put a question that the long title as read be part of the Bill . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Chairman Finance, Budget and A ppropriation? Give a Motion for the House to 
report back to plenary.  
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Yes Mr. Chairman we disso lve the Whole House and we 
go to the Assembly. Thank you . 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Propose a Motion and a seconder . Yes 
Hon. Mwidani , the seconder?  
 
(The Leader of Majority and Vi ce Chairperson Committee of Finance, budget and 
Appropriation Hon. Mwidani Bowed to second ) 
 
 Hon. Members I pro pose that as a House adopt the  Motion proposed b y Hon. Hatimy 
that the House dissolves back to plenary . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 
 I now put a question that the House resolve back to plenary . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
PLENARY RESUMED  
 
(The Mace is raised)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in th e Chair)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadh ili Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  Yes, Chairman 
Finance , Budget and A ppropriation please report back to the Assembly what tran spired in the 
Committee of the Whole House.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish to report to this 
Honourable Ho use that the Hon . Members during the Committee of Whole House approved 
all the Clauses and I request to the third  reading to be read . Thank you . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Chair Mohamed Hatimy 
for reporting back.  Were there any amendments?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes as per the amendments Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Chair . Hon. 
Mohamed Hatimy as per our S tanding Orders 132, ( 2) you are supposed to give a M otion so 
that the Bill may be read for a third time.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. Speaker I propose the Bill be read a third time . Thank 
you. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : And who is a seconder? Yes Hon. 
Ahmed Nyun do? 
 
 Hon. Ahmed Nyundo : I second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
May 5, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 THE MOMBASA COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL NO. 2 OF 2020   
THIRD READING  
 
(The Bill was read for the Third time ) 
 
 Hon. Members any input on the third reading?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourn ed until We dnesday 6th May at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 5 :09p.m. 
  
 