November  14, 2017                MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBL Y DEBATES                  18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesda y, 14th November, 2017  
The House met at 2: 47p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  we may be seated.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon.  Members  I welc ome you all back to yet another period of services in our annual 
calendar.  Hon.  Members  as you are aware from  19th to 26 of September we proceeded for an 
induction where we were enlightened on how to discharge our duties in relation to our 
mandates.  
Hon. Members  I am happy that we as a team, were able to constitute various sectorial  
and Select Committees  that are responsible for oversight as a mandate of the County 
Assembly.  It is also worth noting that we, again as a team were able to vet, recommend  and 
approve the seven County Executive Committee Members  nominated by  the Governor to 
various dockets during  a special sitting held on Thursday 9th November , 2017.    
Hon. Members  the first is nothing but among the many steps we ought to undertake to 
fully co nstitute our County Government. We still have some remaining slots in various 
dockets of executive not forgetting we a re also awaiting nomination of Chief Officers for us 
to vet and approve.  
I wish to urge all of you to remain steadfast and focused in play ing our constitutional 
and statutory roles on behalf of the people of Mombasa , therefore the need to work 
harmoniously with executive without having to compromise on our roles.  As Legislatures  we 
are expected to come up with necessary, crucial Bills that w ill be beneficial to our people. 
Motion s are also important catalyst that ha ve the power to change the lives of the people on 
the ground. It is therefore advised that you constantly interact with your constituents to 
understand their needs, feelings and concerns so that you may bring Motion s that will touch 
on their lives for better consideration in this House.  
Members  belonging to different Committees  and especially the Chairpersons, I kindly 
urge, for better delivery of your services that you come up wi th annual work plan s that shall 
act as your guidelines.  
Members , the  Standing Orders are of crucial importance to us ; it contains the 
practices , tradition and procedures for running this County Assembly. Let us make ourselves 
conversant  by constantly  going through it. It provides for different aspects such as the 
procedure on how to bring a Motion  to the H ouse as per Standing orders 43 to 53 , Members  
who wish  to bring a Notice of Motion  shall first have to submit a signe d copy  of the proposed 
Motion  to the C lerk of the County Assembly, who shall then submit to me to either approve 
or not approve depending on the subject matter.  
Once again Members  Karibuni te na, it is my hope that together we s hall work to 
consolidate the du ties bestowed upon us by our people.  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon.  Members , with those few remarks, the Assembly stands adjourned until 
Wednesday, 15th November , 2017 at 9 :00a.m.    
The House rose at 2 :56p.m. 
 
 