March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 1   
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 20th March, 2019  
The House met at 9:11a.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT B Y CHAIRPERSON EDUCAT ION HON . OMONDI ON RENOVATION AND 
SUPPLY OF LEARNING E QUIPMENT /TOOLS IN THE ECDE 'S 
 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi? Any Member from Education C ommittee? Y es the Vice -
Chair Hon. Ali Shariff? Use the mic rophone , proceed.  
 
 Hon. Ali Shariff:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. I wish to request for more time for th e 
Committee to respond to this S tatement on renovation and supply of learning equipment/tools in 
the ECDEs which was requested by Hon . Raphael Bwire.  
 Mr. Speaker, the D epart ment of Education, ICT and MV2035 respond ed to this matter, 
however the C ommittee was not satisfied by the response and thus we request for more time for 
a fact finding exercise through site visits to the ECDEs in question and consultation with our 
financi al experts before meeting with the Department for consultative answers.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, we wish to bring to this Hon ourable  House a comprehensive response 
that will satisfy the cry of the people of Mombasa County.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So when you say more time what do you 
actually mean by more tim e, a weeks’ time or a month time?  
 
 Hon. Ali Shariff: After the sites visit you can give me two weeks’ time  Mr. Speaker.  
 

March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 2  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Two weeks’ tim e okay its noted, yes Hon. 
Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker point to note I think it is high time we take the business of this 
House very serious and it has been always my plea and my prayers that whenever a C ommittee 
has been mandated to bring a response this has been a trend  where  they ask for more  time all the 
time and while a Member is requesting for a S tatement there is specific time that we normally 
give, they ask for themselves that they be given that duration .  
 We are setting a very bad precedent i n this House that there is no a single day a 
Committee has been mandated to bring a report and brought a very conclusive, convincing, clear 
report , until when will all this happen and I will request even if we are going to give them a 
chance it  is either t hey admit that they have fail ed or they cannot carry out their mandate well as 
required . So it is my prayer not only this C ommittee but the H ouse C ommittee they are failing us 
Hon. Speaker , we cannot k eep on giving them more time it i s as if they do  not believe in 
themselves .  
 So I would request through the direction that you are going to give that you set a very 
good example that this should be the last  time,  if they cannot carry their mandate out there a re so 
many people from various C ommittee s we can  even dissolve the whole House C ommittee so that 
at least we might come with a very good C ommittee which will work for people and the interest s 
of the people of Mombasa. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu):  Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya: Mr. Speaker I appreciate that we are doing a good work and as we are 
addressing the issue of executive we need to address our House here. I want to bring it to 
attention  that there is total confusion in the C ommittee of Education , it is just last week when 
they were supposed to tell us on the status of bursary they artic ulated that forms are being made 
or whatsoever just to wake up Monday morning cheques are being issued. I need to ask this 
Honourable  House that are they aware what is happening in that department or they are just there 
as rubber stamps? So we need to know what i s going on in Education, they give us the real facts. 
Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you  Hon. Renson Thoya. Hon. Members 
from what has been said by the  Honourable  from Tudor I will call upon the Liaison C ommittee 
to sit tomorrow morning and deliberate on that issue so that business shall return as usual in this 
Honourable  House , the C ommittees to fast -track whatever  that has been asked by the Honourable 
House and the response  back to this House within a reasonable time so the Liaison C ommittee 
will sit tomorrow morning … 
  
(Silence)  
 
 So from tomorrow if the  Committee fails we will know the route to take but we sh all not 
allow M embers to …??? it has been a habit that M ember s keep on repeating what other 
Committees are doing ; the issue of coming to this Hous e and giving just  three lines S tatement 
that we need more time that trend must end … 
 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 3 (Applause)  
 
 And Committee C hairs please take note . So Hon. Ali Shar iff we have given you the time 
as you have asked for but please talk to your Committee that this time round we will need the  
comprehensive report as you have said. Yes Clerk next order?  
 
DILAPIDATED STATE OF THE ROAD FROM BWAGAMOYO TO MAUNGUJA  PRIMARY SCH OOL  IN 
MWAKIRUNGE WARD  
 
 Yes Hon . from Mw akirunge Feddis Mbura , your S tatement on status of Bwaga moyo to 
Maunguja primary School R oad. 
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningetaka kumuuliza Mwenyekiti  wetu  
wetu wa Barabara na M iundo M isingi  kwam ba kuna barabara ya Bwaga moyo mpaka shule ya 
msingi ya Maunguja ; hio barabara kusema kweli ni mbovu, ni mbaya na saa hii twaelekea 
mfumo wa mvua . Kusema kweli itakuwa ni hasara kwetu ama itakuwa ni aibu kwetu kama 
Kaunti kwa sababu kuna watu binafsi ambao saa hii wanataka watafute mati nga waweze kulima 
ile barabara.  
Kwa hivyo kabla wale wafanyi  biashara kufanya hilo zoezi ningeomba tafadhali tuweze 
kuchukulia kwamba kabla mvua, ile barabara ikaweze kutengenezwa iwekwe murram yaani 
kuwe hata kama na alama k wa sababu najua itakuwa ni wakati wa haraka pengine ama ni ghafla 
lakini tuonyeshe kwamba kuna jambo limefanyika kwa sababu wakati wa mvua ukifika wa mvua 
basi hata watoto huwa si rahisi kwenda shule, walimu huwa si rahisi kwenda shule. Kwa hivyo ni  
ombi k wa Mwenyekiti  wetu aweze kufuatilizia aone ni kitu gani itafanyika kabla mvua. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : So Hon. Feddis you just want people to show off 
that there is something done or you want the road  to be…  
 
 Hon.  Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Hiyo ni lugha tu lakini hizi Taarifa  
nimeleta wakati mwingi sana kwa hio  ni lugha tu lakini ningetaka ile barabara itengenezwe 
iwekwe murram  ili watu wa Mwakirunge pia waishi kama wenzi wao. Ahsante sana  
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay, thank you. T he Chair Transport 
Committee , any response?  
 
 Hon.  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nimesikia kilio cha Mheshimi wa 
mwenzangu na nitakwenda kwa Engineer  mhusika niende nikazung umze na ye kwa sababu 
amesema ni dharura  ili tuweze kwenda hapo mashinani  kwa haraka iwezekanavyo tukiwa tuko 
na yeye kama Mwakilishi wa hilo eneo ili ajieleze kinaga u baga vile anavyotaka ndio sasa 
Engineer  atajua vile ataendelea ndio niweze kuleta ripoti katika hii Nyumba yetu.  
 Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 4 (Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  So when do we expect the report back?  
 
 Hon.  Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri ikiwa leo ni Jumatano  pengine  kwa 
sababu leo tuko na vikao viwili na sitowez a kupata nafasi ya kwenda kule pengine ni muone 
ninaomba N yumba hii inipe nafasi ya kuwa nitamuona kesho halafu kwa mu da wa wiki ijayo 
tupange siku ye yote ya kwenda . Kwa hivyo haitachukua muda wa kama wiki moja ikiwa tutaleta 
majibu pengine ni kama Alhamisi  wiki inayokuja, niweze kuwa na majibu. Kwa sababu katika 
wiki katikati siku moja ya wiki ijayo  ndio tutaweza kwenda huko ili twende tukaangalie halafu 
sasa ndio niweze kupewa ripoti ambayo pengine ikiwa nimechelewa sana pengine Alhamisi ya 
wiki ijayo ndio  ninaweza kuileta. Ahsante Mheshimiw a Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Ok noted. Yes Clerk? There is an Hon. Member who is up. Yes 
Hon. Faith?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Mr. Speaker I am st anding on Standing Order 41 (2) c.   
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ):  Okay proceed . 
 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Mr. Speaker S ir I would like to know fr om County Assembly Service 
Board and Committee of F inance whe n are they planning to pay the W ard office rents and our 
staff in the mashinani ? Thank you . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes any Member from the S ervice Board, yes 
Hon. Maimuna any response?  
 
 Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. N ashukuru kwa swali hilo 
lakin i nitasema ya kwamba sisi kama B odi tulifanya kazi yetu tunajua ya kwamba pesa mpaka 
zishuke chini ndio watu wawe ze kulipwa. Kwa hiyo sisi kama B odi tulipeleka  maombi ya  pesa 
haijashukishwa chini na tunajua ya kwamba pesa haijatoka Nairobi. Hilo ndilo jawabu.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon.  Thoya : Nafiki ri Mheshimiwa Spika  Mheshimiwa Faith ametaka kujua kutoka kwa 
Bodi ya Bunge la Kaunti Assembly Service Board  ama mtu yoyote kutoka Kamati ya F edha na 
jambo hili ni jambo ambalo hata wewe mwenyewe linakuathiri . Tunataka kujua hizi pesa 
zilikuwa zinatoka mar a kwa mara lakini saa hii sijui zinakuja n a SGR ama zinakuja na 
mkokoteni k wa hivyo tunataka tupate habari kamili ikiwa Service B oard  haiwezi k ujibu tupate 
majibu kutoka kwa Kamati ya F edha.  
 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 5  The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  But a Member from the Servi ce B oard I think 
she was clear enough she said they have made a request but the money is yet to be disbursed to 
the County A ssembly of Mombasa. So I do  not know which clear  information do you want? 
They are still waiting for information because they have a lready  requested for the money, s o I do  
not know what clear information do you need and the Hon. Member has been clear enough? Yes 
Hon. Renson?  
 
 Hon.  Thoya : Kitu ambacho ningeweza kufahamisha Mwenyekiti ninajua lakini itakuwa 
ni vyema tupewe mikakati ya k uwa hizi pesa tunaweza kuzipata. This thing is biting in the wall , 
wale maofisa ambao tumewaandika ni wazazi kama sisi wako na majukumu kama sisi na wakati 
wowote utasikia ofisi zimefungwa itakuwa ni aibu ilioje? Hiyo ndio tunataka kusema ni mikakati 
gani inawekwa kuona kwamba tunaweza kuwa tunapata hizi pesa kwa wakati wowote?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Tobias then I will come back to you 
Hon...(??). 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker , County Assembly Service B oard serves the interest of the 
Members of the C ounty Assembly yes whether we go east, west or whether we will wish to 
dodge  but it is their mandate to look upon the interest of the M embers of the County A ssembly, 
number one  I fail to understand when we are being told that we did this now there is nothing we 
can do. We expected Members of the B oard at list to request for time so that at least where they 
left from, they can als o pick it there.  
 They should at least to do a follow up ; at least they should show some con cern,  Hon. 
Speaker it is v ery unfair, very unfair! We have people in the offices for a whole month , today is 
20th we are almost getting into another month ! Even before  God and man, it is very unfair . These 
people have the ir need s to be catered for; they have their rents to pay, the y have school fees, they 
have children to cater for their interest s.  
 It is very unfair and in as much as we are representing our constituents we should  also 
look for our own interest; t he County Government Act is very clear that the interest of the 
Members  of the County Assem bly will be catered for by the M embers of the County Assembly 
Service B oard, and  if they have fail Hon. Speaker there  is no single favour or a single benefit 
Members of the County Assembly have benefitted through th e County Assembly Ser vice 
Board … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 And if there  is show me one … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Speaker even loans today up to date we are yet to receive our loans and we were 
supposed to be given Kshs 5Million  now the rumuors in the air is that we will be given…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 6  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Samba do  not go outside what has been 
asked . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I am just bitter because the interests of the Honourables  are 
not catered for, if we are fronting for our interest s it is selfishness, is  it? We are being called 
names so it is better for the Members of the County Service Board after this sitting they should 
go and enquire, they should bring u s a conclusive, convincing clear report on what Hon. 
Member s have requested for that is my prayer. Tha nk you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith?  
 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika naona siku za hizi 
punde  Kaunti ya Mombasa itakuwa kamera zote za runinga zitakuwa zaangalia kule;  vyenye 
tunaongea wa kati tukifungua of isi zetu za W odi hatukupewa pesa ya deposit  eti ningesema saa 
hii nakalia deposit  na zile ni nyumba za watu za biashara .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika tukiangalia saa hii tuko tarehe 20 nyumba zafaa kulipwa kufikia  
tarehe tano ziwe zishalipwa,  nitahud umia wananchi wa ngu vipi? Kama nimefungua ofisi ! 
Mheshimiwa Spika vyenye tunaongea saa hii ofisi ya Kipevu imefungwa kwa hivyo hakuna 
huduma  saa hii wananchi wa Kipevu watafaidika nayo na ni uzembe wa watu wetu ambao wako 
hapa na hawafuatilii maslahi ya W aheshi miwa … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Nasimama hapa na machungu mengi sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu sitaki 
kuwekwa kwa rekodi ya rubber stamp ; nataka nihudumie wananchi wangu kwa uadilifu vile 
inavyotakikana.  Kwa hivyo maneno ya  kuambiwa pesa hakuna sijui zilikuwaje  basi 
hatungekuwa na hizo ofisi kuanzia siku ya kwanza ; Mheshimiwa Spika nina machungu mengi , 
kwa sababu County Assembly S ervice Board wangekuja waeleze Waheshimiwa ni nini ambay o 
imetokezea ndio tuweze kuelez a wenye nyumba  wetu .  
 Hivyo basi  kufikia hapo Mheshimiwa Spika naona uzembe katika County Assembly 
Service Board na tukiendelea hivi itakuwa vibaya, hivi tunaongea kamera zote ziko katika Bunge 
la Kaunti ya  Mombasa, ziko katika Wodi ya Kipevu hivyo basi  hili suala lifuatiliw e haraka 
iwezekanavyo.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Order! Order! Hon. Maimuna 
Order! Hon. Members I think the Members have been clear enough , they need as per what Hon. 
Samba said ; they need a conclusive, convenient clear report . Hon. Maimuna you are out of order 
am on the floor and try to control your emotions this is a House of business lets follow the 
procedures.  
 As I said earlier you have already communicated to the House but Hon. Members have 
asked you to go back to the Service Board and bring back a clear convincing report so it is just a 
matter of you to accept whatever that you have said but you have to go back to the Service Board 
and bring back a report and how you ar e going to tackle the issu e of Ward rent in the coming 
future and that is clear.  
 Hon. Lucy this is an Assembly so I w ill not  entertain what you are trying to bring to this 
Honourable  House. Yes Clerk?  
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 7  The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Point of order Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : What is your Point of Order?  
 
 The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Chini ya Section 12 of the County Government 
Act (7) (f) ningependa Jumba hili liweze kufahamu Mheshimiwa Spika si ruhusa kuweza 
kusoma ... 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
 
 The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Ki tula): The County Assembly Service Board is 
responsible for performing other functions necessary for the well being of the Members and staff 
of the County Assembly . Mheshimiwa Spika sisi tuko na wawakilishi wawili katika Bodi ya 
Bunge  la Kaunti, County Assembly Service Board ambay e mmoja wapo ni Mheshimiwa 
Maimuna na Mheshimiwa Amur wao wako pale kuweza kutetea haki zetu sisi kama MCAs 
katika Nyumba hii sio mtu mwengine yeyote .  
 Kwa hivyo inashangaza sana kuona japokuwa hukutoa nafasi kuweza kumuuliza 
Mheshimiwa Faith kwamba tusitish ane, hatutishan i Mheshimiwa Spika tungependa 
kufahamishana kwamba Mheshimiwa Maimuna na Mheshimiwa Amur wao ni watetezi wetu 
kama Wabunge  katika Bunge la Mombasa sasa sisi twataka taarifa  kabambe ya kutosha … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kutoka kwao hasa ikiwa leo hata mwambia Mheshimiwa Faith anamtisha nani atatupatia 
sisi majibu Mheshimiwa Spika.  Kwa hivyo hapa hatutishani tunataka tupate taarifa  ambayo 
itaweza kutupatia sisi majibu kamili kwa wafany i kazi wetu , sasa nani atatupatia sisi majibu 
kamili manake hatuna u wezo wa  kuingia katika mikutano ya Bodi? Japokuwa watu wa  kutupatia 
sisi taarifa  ni Mheshimiwa Amur na Mheshimiwa Maimuna lau wangekuwa hawako hapa 
tungewasubiri ili watupatie majibu kamili, ukiangalia majibu kamili twaweza kupatiwa pesa 
tumesubiri tushaandika barua pesa tunasubiri, tutaambia wananchi wetu hivyo . 
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tunataka mtu ambaye ni mtetezi wetu anayetutetea maslahi 
yetu katika Nyumba hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini tunapelekana katika hali hii hatuendi 
sawa lazima ukweli tuweze kuambiana tutendeni haki wafanyi  kazi wetu na haki zetu sisi 
wenyewe Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you for the information , you have 
inform ed the House  that one of the m andates of the County Assembly Service Board and I think 
you were clear enough so it  is upon the Service Board to come clear on this on how they are 
going to tackle this issue in the near future so in a weeks’ time we will need the response from 
the Service Board .  
 Members of the Service Board have to sit and deliberate on this issue that  is why have 
given a weeks’ time if it were no t for that I could have just sa id we need ed a response by 
tomorrow but  because they have to sit as a Committee then a weeks’ time is enough for them. 
 Yes Clerk?  
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fro m the Hansard Editor Page 8 ADJOURN MENT  
 
 Hon. Members the House st ands adjourned until today at 2 :30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 9:41 a.m. 