March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 22nd March , 2018  
The House met at 3 :12p.m. 
(The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 The Temporary Speaker : You may be seated Members . Yes, Clerk.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Hon.  Members  I wish to bring  to the attention of this Honorable  House and 
Assembly that we have visitors from M.M. Shah Academy. I recognize the presence  of the 
delegation which consists of the following. If I call your name you just stand up and bow 
before the Speaker.  
1. Newton Waga  
2. Maqdum Mukhtaar  
3. Mwinyi Abdallah  
 
 You stand up and bow and then you resume your seat ... 
4. Julius Mutinda  
5. Magdaline Atieno  
6. Sarah Mtoni  
7. Nelson Chambi  
8. Luqman Ahmed  
9. Fortune Deche  
10. Peter Njogu  
11. Abubakar Abdulrahman  
12. Saddiq Hussein  
13. Fatma Ali  
14. Leonard  Nanda  
15. Wilson Onyango  
16. Juma Rajab  
17. Henry Katema  
18. Nishma Patel  
19. Adnan Said  
20. Rayyan Abdallah  
21. Charles Gakuya  
22. Yvonne Kalama  
23. Hussein Khamis  
24. Hamid Mohamed  
25. Jannat Abdillahi  
26. Steven Mbugua  
27. Alwiya Swaleh  
March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 28. Ezra Kiprono  
29. Faiza Hassan  
30. Sarah Munga  
31. Khamis Ahmed  
32. Dhrupesh Bhimji  
33. Morgan Opere  
34. AbdiFatah Mohamed  
35. Hussein Bilal  
36. Suleiman Omar  
37. Terry Akinyi  
38. Pauline Atieno  
39. Jameel Ali Mbotela  
40. Mohamed Hemed  
41. Suleiman Abdullahi  
42. Fatma  Essak  
43. Agape Mutua  
44. Khadija Bilal  
45. Faisal Amin  
46. Zafar AbdulGhani  
47. Prudence Talu  
48. Sanaa AbdulKadir  
49. Ibrahim Bejaka  
50. Lewis Rama  
51. Bartram Bengo  
52. Aisha Yassin  
53. Sarah Salma  
54. Solomon Kinyua  
55. Schassorens Lusuli  
56. Khadija Abdallah  
57. Ibrahim Soud  
58. Rumeisa Ahmed  
59. Mohamed Twahir  
60. Mohamed Ahmed  
61. Muadh Jamal  
62. Lyncar Joy  
63. Najla Khalid  
Teachers   
1. Mr. Eric Muchesi a 
2. Mr. Boniface Ekirapa  
3. Mr. Daniel Mwema  
(The Students and Teachers stood and bowed  before the House)  
 Welcome to Mombasa County Assembly, feel free. Mr. Clerk ? 
 
STATEMENT  
RECENT EMPLOYMENT OF WORKER S BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 
 Hon. Tobias Samba?  
March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 (Silence ) 
 Yes, Hon. Nyiro?   
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I stand in for Mr. Samba who is not around. 
Hon. Speaker I wish to present a Statement on the recent employment of workers by the 
County Government. Hon. Speaker, Pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2) (c), I rise to seek a 
Statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Labour and Social Welfare on the recent 
employment of workers by the C ounty Government.  Hon. Speaker, the County Public 
Service Board recently employed workers t o work in the County g overnment, t his is 
accordance with the County Government Act , 2012 which clearly stipulates the powers and 
functions of the County Public Service Board. However, some issues in regards to this 
employment are in need of clarification. Mr. Speaker in the statement the Chairperson should 
examine into and report on;  
a) Criteria used to employ people by the County Public Service Board and whether th e 
criteria conform to what is stipulated in the County Government Act , 2012 ; 
 
b)  Status of the employed. i.e. whether they are on a  contractual or permanent basis;  
 
c) He or she should also report on the recent employment by the County Government 
County Public Service Board.   
Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker : Chairperson Committee on Labour and Social Welfare, 
Hon. Thoya .  
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I have got the S tatement and I want to promise 
that in two weeks' time i will be back reporting on the same. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker : Sorry for how long?  
Hon. Thoya:  Am saying I have received the S tatement by Tudor MCA Samba and I 
should be reporting back to the  House in two weeks' time, that means 14 days. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker : The Cha irperson on Committee on Labour and Social 
Welfare has requested for two weeks and he will be coming  up with a response on the same , I 
think that is agreed.  
 
(Applause)  
Mr. Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
 KUZA TALANTA INITIATIVE   
Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker first of all I want to acknowledge 
the presence of the pupils and teachers from MM SHAH Primary School. Mr. Speaker 
Pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2) (c) I rise to seek a Statement from the Chairperson 
Education, Informa tion Technology and MV 2035 ; I can see Members  are awake on Kuza 
Talanta  initiative.  
Hon. Speaker, the initiative which was a partnership between the County g overnment 
and private sector has gone a long way in helping youth in the County to acquire knowle dge 
and skills.  However, what has been lacking is a report detailing out for instance the numerous 
beneficiaries of the initiatives or the overall impact, the initiative has had on our youth Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Speaker in the statement that the Chairperson sh ould:  
March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 a) Present a recent report on the Kuza Talanta  Initiative detailing out various aspects 
of the initiative for instance...  
(Interruption)  
The Temporary Speaker : Hon. Member whom do you want to respond  or whom are 
you addressing to?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Chairperson Education, Information Technology and MV 2035 . 
The Temporary Speaker : Hon. Member does it fall under the docket of the Youth, 
Gender and Sports ? 
Hon. Ogutu:  It falls under Education Mr. Speaker because during the recruitment 
they were done in the Educational offices at the local level...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker : Then we need to seek for more clarifications on the same 
because the two might be r esponsible for the response s. 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker but whichever way the two Committees can 
combine and give a report. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker : It is okay, are you done with your Statement? Chairperson 
I see is not in, the Vice Chairperson or any other Member from the said Committee on 
Education?  
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I can say i am the only T eacher today in this 
County Assembly because of that I think we will be able to respond back in two weeks' time 
because w e need  to collaborate with the D epartment of Youth, Gender and S ports. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker : Thank you Hon. Nyiro, Mr. Clerk?  
 
STATUS OF SEPTIC TAN KS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon. Shomari . 
            Hon. Al i Mohamed Shomari:  Thank you. Hon. Speaker, pursuant to S tanding order 
41 (2) (c), I rise to seek a  Statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Water, Sanitation 
and Natural Resources on the status of septic tanks in the County.  Hon. Speaker, It is only 
recently that six children died in Mishomoroni  when the cement slab covering the septic tank 
collapsed while they were standing on it. This has led to residents asking about the status of 
other septic tanks.  Hon. Speaker, in the S tatement the Chairperson should inquire into and 
report on:  
(a) Status of septic tanks in the County ; 
(b) Measures that the County Government will take to ensure that such tragedy does not 
occur again.  
            Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker : Thank you Hon.  Member , the Chairperson on Water, 
Sanitation and National Resources Hon. Priscilla Mumba is not within, either Vice Chair or a 
Member? Hon. Nyiro, are you a M ember or a Vice Chair?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Member for water .  
 The Temporary Speaker :  Ok, welcome back . 
March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  Hon.  Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker indeed it is very saddening to hear that people are dying 
in speeds of such shoddy work that has been done and as an Assembly I take this opportunity 
to say sorry to the people of Magogoni for losing their loved ones in this tragedy.  
 
            So, as a M ember in that Committee we really are saddened and we will be able to 
inquire into it and give a very conclusive report about it in two weeks ’ time. Thank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker : Hon.  Members  make  sure in the next weeks ’ all those 
who have promised to bring back the feedback s kindly do it we may not be giving you  again  
another chance. Yes Mr. Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
 The Chairman on Committee on Gender, Youth, Sports and Cultural Affairs ?  
(Silence)  
 Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
 The Chairperson on Education, Vice Chairperson?  
(Silence)  
 Any other M ember? Yes Hon. Amur . 
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir i am not standing  as a M ember or a Vice Chair or a 
Chair.  Mr. Speaker we want to see whether the Members  of the Committee on Education are 
here because this is a sensitive issue and they had promised us that today we shall get the 
feedback of the requested Statement...  
(Applause)  
 ...So for them not to be here Mr. Speaker, either they are trying to escape this issue 
because it is a sensitive issue and we had requested that this S tatement be brought. I t was 
brought last time but the House deferred it back , we want a comprehensive report on it. 
Please give us direction Mr. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker : Yes any M ember from this Committee? Or the Hon.  
Member  has requested if there is any M ember from that Committee, are you a M ember? Yes 
Hon. Robert Nyiro . 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker as I have said earlier I am the only teacher 
today in this A ssembly so anything concerning e ducation will be on my shoulders. Mr. 
Speaker it is so sad that Hon. Amur is reacting and it is rightful for him to react in that 
manner because this report is very sensitive, because of that sensitivity bearing in mind that 
the Execut ive in charge who is also our Deputy Governor has not been around for a while and 
so it is not very easy for us to get a  very conclusive report when the responsible person  is not 
around because the Deputy Governor is...  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Amu r: A point o f clarification  Mr. Speaker . 
March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6  The Temporary Speaker : Yes. 
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker the office of the Deputy Governor is not an office that 
moves with the Governor when he travels .... 
(Applause ) 
 ...So we should not be told that if Mr. Speaker you are not around this Assembly 
will not perform, there is the Deputy Speaker, there is a Member from the Speaker ’s Panel. 
So Mr. Speaker  the excuse of telling us the Deputy Governor was out of the country does not  
apply in an institution  that is run  by many people and if we had been promised that this report 
would be here because as we speak some students have been chased  away  from University 
because of school fees . So Mr. Speaker wit h all due respect let us be given the right way of 
tackling problems because we cannot , this money was allocated during the financial year of 
2015/2017 today Mr. Speaker we are in 2018 . We want to know the real fate of 
Kshs.64M illion  that I had requested so that  we ca n give these burs aries back to the needy 
student s Mr. Speaker. We are talking about Kshs.64M illion  Mr. Speaker sir. Thank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker : Thank you. What is your concern Hon. Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  I think Mr. Speaker it is going t o be very fair if you give us time to 
raise our sentiments concerning the same here.  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker : You have the time . 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker . I think this is one of the luckiest  
Committee in this House that the CEC in charge is also the Deputy Governor and therefore 
we would be very happy to see that the fruits because he is not just o nly County Executive 
Committee Member, he is also the Deputy Governor and by virtue of that additiona l dignity 
the same should be reciprocated to this House and in that order . I think we do not need to be 
seen forcing this Committee to comply with our request here, I would rather ask the Speaker 
what are some of the measures to be taken for a Committee th at is not cooperative enough 
because we  are reaching there . It is not the first time that we a re standing here to raise this 
Statement or our sentiments it is the same issue that the Devolution Conference today now  
the common wananchi  are raising the quest ion direct ly at the podium . Please Mr. Speaker tell 
us a Committee of the House that is not cooperative what is supposed to be done ? 
 The Temporary Speaker : I will make a rule on the same. Hon. Ogutu? We are not 
debating it Hon.  Members , you  can go on .  
Hon.  Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I think someth ing i s wrong 
somewhere in this Committee ...   
(Applause ) 
…and if they cannot open up then we do  not know how we are  going to be helped Mr. 
Speaker . I happen to pass through the D epartment and enquire a bit about the bursary, they 
have forgotten about the 2016/2017 disbursement ; they are preparing for 2017/2018 . Mr. 
Speaker, there are Committees which have been put in place at the grass root lev el an d we are 
not even aware of this ; I think we are Hon.  Members  given the mandate by people and we 
should be respected, some thing should not happen in our Wards and we are not aware about  
it. So I think th ere should be seriousness  with this Committee and the D epartment as a whole, 
thank you.  
(Applause ) 
March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7 The Temporary Speaker : Thank you Hon.  Member I think those Members  from the 
said C ommittee you have heard what the Hon.  Member ha s said and I beg now to make a 
ruling on the same matter . It must be noted that we have the C EC, we have the Chief O fficers 
and some other staff , so whenever the C EC is not around there are some other concerned 
people that you can approach and have a detailed information to table before this House. So 
you won’t be coming here and giv ing the excuses of there being  no C EC each and every time 
you are asked to table the report over the Statement asked by the Hon.  Members . Hon.  
Members  allow me to grant the C ommittee another one week, come next week on 
Wednesday you should be tabling the report without further excuses . Thank you, yes Clerk?  
PREPAREDNESS OF THE COUNTY DURING  THE RAINY SEASON  
Yes Hon. Amur.  
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I want t o respond to the Statement 
that was requested by Hon. Nyiro in regards to rain , how preparedness we are in the rainy 
season . Mr. Speaker  after the Honorable  has raised that issue we directed the same to the 
Committee of Agriculture, Livestock, F isheries and Coop erative and today we are happy to 
say after your directive we did right to request the Clerk of the County A ssembly to write to 
the E xecutive Member and am happy now to read the respon se from the Executive Member.  
Mr. Speaker I wish  to the read the letter has c ame from the Executive Member which 
was addressed to the County Assembly Clerk dated 19th March , 2018 . It reads Mr. Speaker : 
(Hon. Amur read the letter)  
RE: DEPARTMENT PLANS DURING THE RAINY SEASON  
We acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 16th March, 2018.  
The department is properly  prepared  for the rains based on the activities that it has 
embarked on.  Mr. Speaker  these include: - 
1. Tractor Operations  
The Department has one tractor that has been ploughing since January despite having 
a total of 3500 acres of land in three  Sub-Counties (3 ,000 acres  - Kisauni, 300 acres  - Jomvu, 
200 acres  - Likoni). The tractor has only been  able to plough 700 acres. The Department has 
recognized the need to order more tractors an d has included the purchase of two more tractors 
in the ju st approved supplementary budget. The tender documents have been prepared and 
submitted to the Finance Department. The tractors will be purchased and used for the 
remainder of the season.  
2. Purchase of Seeds  
The Department requested the purchase of seeds and oth er climate smart equipment in 
early February. There ha ve been delay s in the procurement of the same due to the freeze on 
requests by treasury to facilitate preparation of the supplementary budget. The same was 
approved last week and the Director Supply Chain  Management has engaged a supplier who 
will supply the seeds and equipment in due course, the seeds shall then be distributed to the 
farmers.  
3. Public Baraza ’s and Demonstrations  
The Department extension  staffs have been in the field sensitizing the farmers on  early 
land preparation for the rains.  
4. Livestock Vaccination  
The Department has already requested supply of vaccines for the foot and mouth and 
other zoonotic diseases that are widespread during the rainy season. The Kenya Veterinary 
Vaccines Production In stitute has already is sued a proforma invoice to the Department for 
payment before release of the vaccines.  
March 2 2, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            18 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 8 Other  arrangements for the va ccination campaign are underway ; routine livestock 
extension is also ongoing. The D epartment is fully prepared to support the farmers as they 
prepare their land for the long rains.  
 
Signed , by the CEC  Member of Agriculture, Livestock,  Fisheries and Cooperatives , 
that is a response Mr. Sp eaker . that is how prepared the D epartment is . Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
The Temporary Speaker : Thank you Hon.  Amur for such a wonderful report, I think 
the Hon.  Member  who has requested the Statement is now well informed, C lerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon.  Members  there having  be no any other business the H ouse stand s to adjourned 
to next week  on Tuesday at 2:00 p.m.  
The House rose at 3:46 p.m. 
 
 
 
    
 
 