March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 20th March, 2019  
The House met at 2:51p.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  
 
(Silence)  
 Yes Clerk?  
 
STAT EMENTS  
REORGANIZATION OF MEMBERSHIP TO  HOUSE COMMITTEES  
 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias Samba I was informed that you 
had a statement ? Yes then proceed . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes thank you Mr. Speaker I am standing on Standing Order 41. 2 (c)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes proceed . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  I reques t a Statement under Standing Order 41. 2 (c) of this House from 
the Leader of Majority on when the Committee of the  House will be reorganized and Members 
appointed to Committee of their choices pursuant to Standing Order 154. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay the Leader of Majority . 
 
(Interruption)  
 

March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2   What is it Hon. Amur? I hope you are not the Leader of Majority . 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  No Mr. Speaker , that is what I want to say with all due respect the 
Lead er of Majority is committed somewhere but if he will allow I can take the message on behalf 
of the Leader of Majority and make sure that the message reaches the Majority Leader . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker ... 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  I think it is improper for the Hon. Member of Old Town to take 
responsibility that was never meant for him. I think we have House leadershi p; maybe the Chief 
Whip and the other leaders, yes am just suggesting in case …  
 
(Consultations)  
 
 But we have House ..., yes I know it is not political that  is why am insisting on House 
leadership not unless as the Speaker you give direction whoever will respond to that Statement 
not unless through your guidance. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The De puty Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Benard Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ningependa kusema 
ya kwamba tukiangalia hayo mambo ya Kamati  tuzingatie sana Finance na Public Accounts 
Committee  (PAC ) manake hizi Kamati mbili moja inaangalia n yengine … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na unapata Wanachama  wa PAC  ndio wale wale Wanachana wa Kamati ya Fedha  
utakuwa unamuangalia mwenzako namna gani? Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Benard Ogutu ; as far as the 
membership of Committ ees of the Assembly is concern ed it is a matter that derive from the 
parties so I think the Hon. Majority Leader being the Majority Leader of the ODM Party will 
communicate to the respective offices and respond to this Hon ourable  House.   
 Yes Hon. Tobias , what is  it? Use your mic rophone . 
 
ILLEGAL DUMPING SITE  AROUND MARY  CLIFF PRIMARY SCHOOL  IN TUDOR WARD  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon . Speaker my Statement request goes to the department of 
Environ ment I have got an issue at my Ward. There is  an illegal dumping site and all my effort to 
try it be cleared Hon. Speaker has not bor ne any fruit , I have gone to an ext ent even spending my 
own money . 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  So I would wish  to request a  Statement from the Department o f Environment if at all the 
department has got any programme and plans to clear the site and also to have a security plan so 
that it might not be  turned to an illegal dumpi ng site . The site is around Mary  Cliff Primary 
School on your way to Ka a Chonjo . Thank you Hon . Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Shebe Athman any response on issue 
raised my Hon . Tobi as. 
 
 Hon Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker , as the C hair of Environment I think the Hon. 
Member of Tudor is confused bu t because the way I know there  is no dump site in Tudor ; maybe 
the collection point . So what I will do Hon. Speaker am going to look at that matter immediately 
and then am goin g to give back a comprehensive Statement to this Honourable  House. Thank 
you Hon . Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Tobi as Samba, what is it ?  
 
 Hon Samba : Hon. Speaker I am not confused I think Chairman should always be 
attenti ve I said illegal dumping site , take that to note Hon . Chair . Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Renson Thoya ? 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I think I need to bring to your attention that this House we 
have been having the habit  of trying to bring the party and we want even to take our b usiness ; it 
is just this week that our oversight role was supposed to be decided please as much as we love 
ODM party in Mombasa please I want to say ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Hon. Renson you are reacting on which 
Statement ? 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  There was a Stateme nt related to Committee s of the H ouse; is it the ODM 
that said that some Members should have seven Committees and others two Committees? So am 
saying as we are ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) :  Hon. Renson Thoya I think  i have given a clear 
directive on that issue ; the Hon . Member who requested for a response ask ed the Majority  
Leader and I said that being the Majority Leader  of ODM party he will come with a 
comprehensive response to this Hon ourab le House, be it complying with whatever the Hon . 
Member said or otherwise but he has to make sure we follow o ur Standing order s and also 
fairness also to be considered .  
 Yes Hon . Athman Sh ebe? 
 
ACUTE SHORTAGE OF WATER IN  JOMVU KUU WARD  
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you Hon . Speaker ; under  Standing Order 41(2)(c) kindly 
there is a matter of great importance in my area ;  I would like the Chairman of Water and Natural 
Resources to take up this matter immediately because there is a prob lem of acute shortage  of 
water  in my area .  
 It has been a week and my people are suffering the re is no drinking water in Jomvu K uu 
am kindly urging the Chair to see how we a re going to look at that matter.  
 Thank you Hon . Speaker .  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) :  Yes, any Member from Water Committee? Yes 
Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho ? 
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Bwana  Spika ndio nimes ikia hizo haba ri 
kwamba huko sehemu za Jomvu Kuu hakuna maji lakini na  Changamwe  yote kwa jumla lakini 
kwa sasa naomba nipatiwe hii w iki pengine Alhamisi nitaweza kutoa jawabu .  
 Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon . Faith Mwende ? 
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr . Speaker . I would like the Committee to take it as an 
emergency because as we talk we have like tw o weeks now ; the former Changamwe West they 
are suffering there is no fresh water so through yo ur guidance you can direct the Committee to 
know before maybe that Thursday when to bring the response .  
 Thank you Mr . Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwa limu) : Yes Hon. Renson Th oya, are you a Member of 
Water C ommittee?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  I am a Member of the same Sub -County having the problem . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
  
 Hon. Thoya:  As much as the response is expected next week Thursday w e want  the 
Chairman to come up with mitigation measures ; we can see either they can provide water 
through water boozers , we want mitigation measures from now up  to that Thursday . 
 
  The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho ? Let Hon . 
Mgwisho first respond then I  will come back to you . 
  
 Hon. Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana . Mheshimiwa Spika aliyetoka kuongea pia ni 
Mwanakamati katika K amati hii ya maji kwa hivyo mimi kama nilivyosema kwamba nimepata 
hizo habari sa a hizi mpaka  tufanye uch unguzi na tujue kwamba tutakuja na jibu mwafaka siku ya 
Alhamisi .  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : There are two Members , what is it Hon . Athman 
Shebe ? 
 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Nafikiri Mheshimiwa 
Mwenza anasema afanye uchunguz i na sisi tunataka kupata sulu hu la dharura hatuwezi kungoja 
wiki moja na watu wangu wakafa kiu ! Tafadhali Mheshimiwa tupatie mitigation measure s 
utafanya nin i katika Wizara tujue tutapelek ewa water boozers  Jomvu na maeneo mengine 
ambayo yako na shida ya maj i. Maji ni uhai Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti si swala la mchezo .  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) :  Yes what is it Hon . Feddis Mbura ? I can see the 
seat is very hot , let Hon . Feddis first then you will respond . 
  
 Hon.  Mbura:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi ning eomba hii Kamati ya maji ina 
mchezo sana ikiwa mimi niko ndani ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na nasema hivyo kwa uchungu mwaka jana yote nililia kilio Mwakirunge  na mimi 
nikiwa Mwanachama  tumeonana na Chief Officer , tumeonana na Waziri  nimeomba wapeleke 
hata kama ni maji mara moja kwa wiki  hawajafanya , leo hii kuna dharura Changamwe kwa 
sababu kuna watu  na Mwakirunge hakuna watu ! Hilo jambo limeniudhi. Ahsanteni sana.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . When I heard a  Member who rose to 
complain about water shortage Mr. Speaker Sir in his area I found out that this is a very 
important matter that I sh ould stand and air my voice . Mr. Speaker Sir you will realize that in 
this House we have just fail ed to be  distributed water for around one or two days but it has been 
a very big problem .  
 Now when you c ompare to the situation in our Wards whereby we have gone three  to 
four weeks without water Mr. Speaker Sir this is a matter of a very grave situati on and therefore 
we need a very urgent measure to be taken . 
 I would like just to support the Member of Mikindani who said it is high time that the 
mitigation measures should be put in place so that whenever there  is shortage of water ther e is a 
temporary solution to curb the situation and therefore I think that the Chairman whom I respect is 
going to take this particular matter with a lot of seriousness to ensure that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Address the Chair please…  
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  …To ensure that water is well supplied in Airport Ward Mr . Speaker Sir 
apart from other W ards.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim. Yes Hon. Prischillah?  
 
 Hon. Mumba:  ...(Coughing)  Than k you Mr. Speaker . I think first I need some water here 
before I speak . 
 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 (Applause)  
 
 Am chocked and I need some water Mr. Speaker Sir please before I continue . 
 
(Hon. Noor and H on. Shebe Athman offered water to H on. Mumba ) 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Robert Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think you  should  allow me to make my 
contribution as I sit because I had a dislocation on my waist right now as I was trying to stand, 
seriously it  is a problem that  i have been having it for a lo ng time so allow me Mr. Speaker to 
speak as I sit, I have a problem on my lower back ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I understand th at you came to this Hon ourable  
House. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Nyiro:  It has just happen ed now, maybe my friend ca n bear witness…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  If you want me to try ... 
  
(Hon. Nyiro st ood) 
 
 It is a serious problem by the way am not joking I have a problem with my lower back ; I 
had a small acciden t when I was traveling to Nairobi recently  but I think I can now make my 
contribution.  Mr. Speaker I want to make my contribution as a Member of Water Committee , 
maybe my cont ribution will assist my fellow Members .  
 I want to bring to the attention of th is House that Mombasa as a County we do  not have 
water, we do  not produce water we depend on water from other sources from outside the County 
so let me inform the House first ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : I think Hon. Robert Nyiro s it with your 
Committee Members to deliberate on the water iss ues then bring back to this Hon ourable  House 
whatever that you want to address the House please . 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Hon. Nyiro:  …Although I want to give them mitigation measures they were requesting 
for…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yeah but just sit with your Committee and bring 
back a comprehensive report soonest by tomorrow afternoon because it is an urgent issue ... 
  
(Applause)  
 
 And...  
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  I am well guided Mr. Speake r but they should also visit the Mombasa Water 
Company for the information . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Thoya I can see you 
are in order number 7 and I received information;  can you inform the Honourable  House?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAI RPERSON COMMITTEE ON  LABOUR HON . THOYA ON 
INTIMIDA TION OF MEMBERS OF THE COUNT Y ASSEMBLY BY COUNTY  OFFI CERS 
 
 Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I know there  is a matter that was requested by 
Hon. Member related to intimidation of Members of County Assembly by County Officers that 
was brought by Hon. Athman Shebe before this House.  I wanted to say that we have been doing 
a lot of investigations and I want to tell this House that we are around 90  per cent  complete 
because today we invited the…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So you are yet to conclude ? Just come clear . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Yes there is information that  we are focusing  on, one officer to get payslips 
to complete this information. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
SELECTION OF THE SELECT COMMIT TEE 
 
 Hon. Members  take your seat ; Hon. Athman Shebe you have been up ever since 
yesterday so today jus t feel the comfort of your seat. Hon. Members the Motion on Selection of 
the Select Committee; the five Members of the Select Committee will come tomorrow afternoon. 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
March 20, 2019                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            19 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard  Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no other business the House stand s adjo urned until tomorrow 
at 2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:20p.m.  
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 