January  19, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 19th January, 2016  
The House  met at 2: 31p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi ): Kindly have your seats Hon.  Members. Clerk, can you 
confirm whether there is quorum?  
(Clerk confirmed quorum)  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
(Interruption)  
       I want to believe Hon.  Suleiman Boma is not on his feet to make any communication on 
behalf of the Chair… 
(Applause ) 
       Hon.  Members,  it is my humble and heartfelt  pleasure to welcome yo u back to the Fourth 
session of the First A ssembly of the Mombasa County Assembly. Indeed  this is an auspicious  
and momentous oc casion in the calendar of this A ugust House  where history will be made in the 
service of the great people of Mombasa. We  as the pioneer C ounty Assembly stand at great 
crossroads to  deliver on the promises and fruits of dev olution given birth by the new C onstitution 
which the great people of Kenya chose for themselves.  As we usher the New Year , we recall the 
previo us session where our County A ssembly debat ed and passed many Motions and B ills in 
fulfillment  of our mandate as a County A ssembly and in the service of the people . It is 
remarkable to note that last year this  August House  under my leadership debated and en acted 
over 30 which  are expect ed to impact positively on our C ounty and bring in the needed positive 
change to our people.  Hon. Members, ladies  and gentlemen,  yet, these and other achievements  
should not blind us to great  tasks and cha llenges ahead in the final two se ssions of our County 
Assembly . We need to re -dedicate ourselves and forge ahead with ever strong will to d o even 
more so that this great C ounty and her citizens enjoy the sweet fruits of devolution  as envisaged 
by our founding fathers. At  this (??) stage devolution still faces many challenges ; chief of which 
is lack of enough funds to meet the long unquenched thirst  and hunger for development of our 
people , delays in disbursement  of the same from the national treasury and internal barriers to 
access have in the past year hampered many of our operations to enable us effectively and 
efficiently deliver on  our mandate . Yet despite an d all we remain committed to mat ch ahead in 
our quest with enthusiasm and gusto ; we shall continue in our heroic drive  to serve our people 
and in our mandate to oversight our counterparts  in the C ounty  executive as stipulated in Article   
185 (3) Constitution.   
       Hon.  Members,  it is worth noting that devolution is maturing  each d ay and the parent must 
let go . As you m ay be aware, this year  marks the  end of the three  year transition period of 
devolved  government. We  expect a number of changes as the Transition A uthority folds up and 
unbundles the remaining functions of the Counties . Let us celebrate our achievements  to date, we 
acknowledge that many lessons have been learn t and milestones have been reached during our 
journey. Let  us congratulate  ourselves for keeping up the spirit and keeping the fire burning , let 
us re -dedicate ourselves to our work and to serving the p eople.         Hon.  Members,  Last but not 
least, let  us thank the almighty God for keeping us alive and healthy to see this day , all good 
praises be to God, the  creator and the sustainer of the universe.  
       I thank you all and again welcome you back to  the Mombasa County Assembly!  
January  19, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        God b less us all.  
(Applause ) 
MESSAGES  
(Interruption)  
       What is it Hon.  Dharwesh?  You know the only business we are transacting is 
communica tion from the C hair but because…  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Zainab S aid:  Nataka ku zungumza kitu kidogo, kama  itawezekana .  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : You are allowed to welcome other Hon.  Members  to the 
session.  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Zainab Said : Wataniruhusu mimi ni mama yao,  ahsante. Mimi nilikuwa 
nasema jamani ‘ elected ’ na sisi ‘nominated ’ tumekimya sana ; kuna mtu ametoka huko alikot oka 
akatutukania Rais wetu tukaita mtu wa magazeti  akaja tukaeleza haikutolewa na  ni  kwa nini ?        
Kitu cha pili haya maofisi ya ‘elected’ yote yataka yafungwe  ni ‘injury time ’. Sasa walipwe 
maden i yao alafu basi yafungwe haina maana,  mtasimama kwa majukwaa muulizwe deni liko 
wapi l a ofisi hamjalipa teremka chini . Kwa hivyo mkishalipa zile deni fungeni ofisi … 
(Applause ) 
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : What is it Hon.  Mumba ? 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Priscilla Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ; mimi kwanza nashukuru 
Mungu kwa kutupa uzima , kwa kutupa afya  kutoka mwaka jana Mungu  ametujalia tena 
tumekutana Bunge  mwaka mpya . Tunashukuru Mungu  tumepitia mitihani mingi lakini Mungu  ni 
mwema amet uleta katika ‘session ’ ya mwaka mwingine ambao tuliwaza , na tuko tayari kufanya 
kazi. Yangu mimi si makali kama mama Kaunti  alivyoyachafua lakini kitu ningeomba ni kuwa 
sote ni W aheshimiwa tushirik iane tusaidiane kikazi ; hakuna  ambaye aliye  bora kuliko mwi ngine 
lakini sote ni mara ya kwanza katika Bunge  la Kaunti. H ili ni Bunge  la kwanza kwa hivyo 
tunavyosonga tunazidi kujenga historia kwa sababu ugatuzi ulikuja kutuunganisha . Kitu n aomba 
ni kwamba tujitahidi katika Miswada  iliyo mbele yetu katika mambo tof auti ili tusiweze kurudi 
nyuma tuwe tu meweza kumevunja rekodi katika K amati zetu na Miswada  tuliyopitisha mwaka 
jana, na mwaka huu iweze kuongeza kidogo . Kwa hio nashukuru w aheshimiwa wenzangu , 
nashukuru pia kwa sababu ya uzima maana kuna wakati tulipata m apigo kadha wa kadha lakini 
twashukuru Mungu  kwa sababu sote tuko na uzima . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
        Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Ladies and gentlemen , allow the Hon. Speaker  to…, it seems 
the number is increasing, I  wouldn’t want to be accused of not being gender sensitive , Hon.  
Dharwesh and Hon.  Mumba have spoken and I will give a chance Hon.  Murfad and that will be 
the end of it. 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Hon. Speaker  Sir, being opening day I though t after your speech 
procedurally ; either the G overno r if he is around and then this sessi on comes to adjournment or 
any M ember w ho wishes to welcome us to the A ssembly is allowed but not any other issue . I 
think procedures should be followed , thank you.  
        Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) :  That is what has actually been done and that is what Hon.  
Priscilla has said even though the comments by Hon.  Dharwesh have reminded me the very 
sweeter part of the last session that is a ve ry intense contest because the Nominated and the 
Elected who wanted to vie . I want to believe Hon.  Dharwesh is not willing and ready to compete 
against Hon.  Amur Murfad, otherwise  as it is we allow the proceeding to continue as it appears 
in the  Order paper.  
ADJOURNMENT  
January  19, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3        Ladies and gentlemen this House  stands adjourned until tomorr ow 20th January  2016 
Wednesday at exactl y 9:00a.m. 
The House  rose at 2: 46p.m. 