February 13 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1                      
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purpose s only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1      REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
   THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 13th February , 2018  
The House met at 2:37p.m. 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker : Honourable Members we  may be seated.  Next order?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
  Hon.  Members , first and foremost I would like to thank the almighty God for 
preserving us for I see we are all in good health.  Today is the day we officially open our 
Second Assembly for the Second S ession. I trus t that you all had a wonderful rest during the 
recess and I cordially welcome you back.  
Hon. Members,  I wish to acknowledge all your efforts during the first session of this 
second County Assembly as is evident in the number of C ommittee sittings undertake n and 
the kind of statements and M otions brought to this House. It clearly shows a true quest in 
attending to the needs of our people.  
Hon. Members , let us not forget that we are here to serve a common purpose and that is: 
efficient service delivery to th e people of Mombasa in relation to o ur mandates as outlined in 
the Fourth S chedule of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.  In this regards l et us work in 
solidarity, for it is  the key to succe ssful regime .  
Hon. Members,  as you are all aware the County Govern ment is now fully constituted 
following the vetting and approval of the CECs and Chief Officers. As we await the 
completion of our County Supplementary Budget, I wish to inform you that we shall be 
expecting the County Fiscal Strategy Paper which will also  be accompanied by the Debt 
Management Strategy Paper for us to approve within 14 days after the submission by the 
CEC in charge of Finance.   
Hon. Members,  I kindly urge all of you to be mindful of the rules and procedures, 
customs and traditions governin g our working environment. Let us thrive to unde rstand the 
Standing Orders and l aws that stand relevant to our duties.  
Hon. Members,  kindly take note that change is very much the order of the day in this 21st 
Century and we are not immune to that pressure.  Because of this I kindly ask all of you to 
keep an open mind, understand that the needs of our people are likely to vary from time to 
time. In that, observe, analyse  and act upon, in order to accommodate these changing needs.  
Hon. Members,  in conclusion, it is my humble prayer that we, together, shall be a source 
of social stability, and political balance. That we shall undertake to be the custodians of the 
dreams an d aspirations of those who voted  for us and in so doing we shall work to deliver as 
per the ir expectations.   
With those few remarks,  
Ahsanteni sana na Mungu awab ariki na Mu ngu abariki hili Bunge letu.  
 
(Applause ) 
Ameen . Next order ? 
February 13 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1                      
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purpose s only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon.  Members  the Assembly stands adjourned until Wednesday 14th February , 2018 
at 9:00a.m. Thank you.  
The House rose at 2: 46p.m. 