February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 18th February, 2020.  
The House met at 10:20 a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker ( Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  
 
(Loud consultations)  
 
 Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Thank you Hon. Members, permit me to offi cially welcome you back to the F ourth 
session of this second Assembly. We meet again after being away for the long recess which 
commenced on Thursday, 5th December, 2020 in line with our County Assembly calendar. 
Hon. Members, we were to officially commence our Fourth session on Tuesday 11th 
February, 2020 as approved in the County Assembly calendar 2019. However we had to 
reschedule the commen cement date of the new session to Tuesday 18th February , 2020 due to 
the demise of the Second President of the Republic of Kenya, the late H.E Daniel Toroitich 
Arap Moi C.G.H.  Hon. Members, the County Assembly of Mombasa once again wishes to 
extend its hea rtfelt condolences to the entire nation, fa mily and friends of the former 
President. In this regard, I request that we stand and observe a minute of silence in honour of 
the late former P resident s’ service to this nation.  
 
(Members observed a moment of silence ) 
 
 Thank you. Hon . Members, the County Assembly is a House of rules and procedures. 
We are therefore required to operate within the confines of law under our standing Orders. In 
this regard it is important for the legislative calendar to be prepared . The County Assembly 
Business Committee once formed, should fast  track  the preparation of calendar , 2020 which 
will brought to this honourable H ouse for approval. The calendar will guide our activities as a 
legislature.  May I take this opportunity to cong ratulate Hon. Amriya Boy Juma for having 
been admitted to the Bar. She is now an A dvocate.  
 
(Applause ) 

February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Hon. Members, as I conclude I wish to once again welcome you for the Fourth 
Session of the Second Assembly and it is my hope that we will engage and have an  
interactive session devoid of any destruction. My hop e is that in this session more M otions 
and Bills will be processed by this Hon . House.  Hon. Members thank you and may the 
Almighty  God bless us all.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
COMMUNIC ATION FROM THE CHAIR  
REPLACEMENT OF CHIEF WHIP  
 
 Hon. Members , I received a letter from the Orange Democratic Movement on 27th 
January , 2020,  reference; replacement of Chief Whip. The party has sat and made a decision 
to replace Hon. Char les Juma Kitula as  the party’s M ajority Chief Whip.  As a Chief Whip he 
has not being effective in his position and on severally occasions failed to whip party 
Members toward party agenda to an extent of staging a walk out while the Assembly is on 
session.  The party has appo inted with immediate effect Hon.  Junior Wambua K yaka to be the 
new party’s M ajority Chief Whip at the Assembly.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Thank you for your cooperation ..., signed, Geoffrey Busaka . Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
MESSAGES  
 
 Thank you Hon. Members , again I received a message from the County Government 
of Mombasa, Reference ; nomination of Public Service Board Members, dated 16th December , 
2019.  According to the powers conferred to me by the County Government Act , 2012 section 
58, I hereby forward the  names of the nominated Mombasa County Public Service Board 
Members for vetting and approval before appointment as follows:  
 
1. Farida Abdalla (Chairperson)  
2. Liban Hirsi Hassan (Member ) 
3. Ruthyana Mumbua Ngundo (Member ) 
4. Abdulkadir Abdallah Ali (Member ) 
5. Zoharia R iziki Khamisi (Member ) 
6. George Mokua Obiria (Member ) 
 
 Yours faithfully, H.E. Hassan A.  Joho, the Governor. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
MOTION  
NOMINATION OF MEMBERS TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY BUSINESS COMMITTEE  
 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani the Ma jority Leader, 
please move the M otion?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speake r. Let me take this 
opportunity to move  the Motion on Nomination of M embers to the County Assembly 
Business Committee.  Mr. Speaker, that pursuant to provisio ns of S tanding order 152, this 
House approves th e nominations of the following M embers, nominated by the Cou nty 
Assembly Parties to be the M embers of the County Assembly Business Committee: - 
 
1. Hon. County Assembly Speaker  - Chairperson  
2. Hon. Leader of the Majority Party  
3. Hon. Majority Party Whip  
4. Hon. Ramla Said Omar  
5. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy Mohamed  
6. Hon. Moses Aran Oindo  
7. Hon. Ahmed Khamis Salim  
8. Hon. Faith Mwende Boniface  
9. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh  Baya  
10. Hon. Feddis Salame Mbura  
11. Hon. Amriya Boy Juma  
12. Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai, lastly which is;  
13. Hon. Robert Nyiro Mwaega  
 
 And I want Hon. Kib wana Swaleh Baya to second the M otion. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: Thank you Hon. Speaker. I second.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Kibwana. Hon. Members I now propose  
the M otion that by Hon. Hamisi  Musa Mwidani on nomination of M embers to County 
Assembly Business Committee be considered by this Hon . House in the same term s as 
moved.   
 
(Question proposed  and agreed  to) 
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. S peaker I want to emphasise the 
Members who were nominated this morning . These are M embers who really did well in the 
last session and I hope Mr. Speaker because this is a very important C omm ittee for having 
issues of the A ssembly . So Mr. Speaker ... (Technical hitch)  I am very grateful to have these 
Members be approved in this House. Thank you.   
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank Hon. Hamisi Mu sa Mwidani for you contribution. 
Yes Hon. Fadhili Makarani?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . I want to 
congratulate Hon. Junior Wambua for being appointed as Chief Whip. Mr. Speaker secondly 
I will  also want to congratulate the M embers who were appointed by the Party to run the 
Business Committee . 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  I would like to highlight Standing Order 152 (7) . Hon. Members the House Business 
Committee ; it is in our Standing orders that if a M ember is unable to attend meetings  it is 
given unto us as an Honorable H ouse to notify the Majority Leader and the Majority L eader 
will nominate a person who will attend s uch meeting s. As you know the House Business 
Committee is a Committee that transacts businesses in the House , so Hon. Members  we will 
like to see a vibrant House B usiness committee; a C ommittee that we have no rea son of no  
quorum so H on. Members please take note that we need as the Speaker said we need to see 
businesses flowing in this Hon . House and I am sure Mr. S peaker with the businesse s that we 
have pending and m any are coming Mr. Speaker the H ouse will be vibrant, full of businesses 
and Mombasa will be very comfortable. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Fadhili Makarani, the Deputy Speaker. 
Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker mine is just to emphasise 
the Committee that has just been approved in this Assembly ; you are the Chair of that 
Committee and now all eyes will be upon you , for those M embers who do  not attend it  is 
upon you now to make sure that those who do  not attend are replaced imme diately after the 
four sittings. I f they miss four sittings of that meeting Mr. Speaker we would like to see other 
Members being nominated to that Committee. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Murfad Amur. Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you so much. F irst of all let  me congratulate our new Chief 
Whip Hon. Wambua and I had suggested that  he be given a youthful Deputy …(Inaudible ).... 
(Laughter )....Anyway , the C ommittee that we are discussing about.. (Inaudible ) I would just 
wish to  give assurance as a House that the C ommittee led by the Hon. Speaker we are 
together and we sup port you and I would also urge M embers to.. .(Inaudible ) ..and this time 
round we use the whole year that we have that we can change our County. A nyway all the 
best and may God bless you all.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Tobias . Yes Hon. Junior . 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. K yaka): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika na na shuk uru Mungu 
kwa wadhfa ambao nimeweza kupewa na chama ili niweze kutekeleza wajibu wangu kama 
Majority W hip katika B unge hili , nashuk uru sana ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Alafu ningelitaka pia nizungumze kidogo kuhusu hii Kamati. Tunazungumzia ya 
kwamba ni K amati muhimu sana katika B unge ambao inapangia shu ghuli za B unge na ni 
jukumu ambao linahitajika kila mtu aweze kuja , kila M wanakamati ili tuweze kupitisha  hoja 
ambayo it aendelea katika B unge. Kwa haya machache , ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon . Junior . Yes Hon. Moraa . 
 
 Hon. Ngare: Thank you Mr. Speaker for granting me this opportunity to also give a 
word . First I want to apologise for walking in late , I was in an engagement tha t delayed me 
abit but here I am.  
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  I want to take this opportunity to congratulate one Hon. Wambua for the latest 
appointment that he has been given by the party ; and to say that I hope he will serve in the 
positio n and to hold without bias and with utmost commitment so that the business of the 
House will move smoothly . As the Chief W hip am sure he has read this mandate and he 
knows what it all entails so  Bwana  Wambua congratulations and I  also want to congratulate 
the C ommittee that has been nominated for t he House Business. W e hope that when you 
bring in more business for them to engage in and that they will also carry their duty as p er 
what they are mandated to do;  I wish them all the best and congratu late each an d every one of 
them, o therwise am wishing all the Hon. Members happy beginning of t his year.  Thank you 
so much.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you so much Hon . Milka Moraa. Y es Hon. 
Ahmed Salama . 
 
 Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika . Yangu ni kuunga mkono K amati 
iliyochaguliwa , napenda kusema kwamba wote ni wachangamfu na wote kazi wanaiweza na 
tuna matumaini pia wataleta matunda bora ndani ya Bunge hili. M waka jana walisema haki 
yetu, leo haki imeenda kwa Junior Wambua ! Mungu A kupe nguvu ili w atu wasaidiane ndani 
ya Bunge hili.  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Salama. Y es Hon. Mwamwiri . 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Bwana Spika. N iregeshe shukran zangu kwa 
Mwenyezi Mungu ali yeweza kutukutanisha tena kwa muhula mwengine wa kuendesha 
gurudumu la kuhudumia wananchi wetu . Pili Mheshimiwa Spika kwa niaba yangu na familia 
yangu na wapiga kura eneo langu la Likoni tun atuma risala za rambirambi kwa M heshimiwa 
hayati ali yekuwa R aisi wa Jamhuri  hii kwa miaka 24; ni masikitiko na huzuni lakini sote 
tumetoka kwa Mw enyezi Mungu na kwake tutaregea. K wanza nikosoe uteuzi wa K iranja wa 
Bunge ; nikiwa M wanaharakati na nikitaka msimamo ubainike ni jukumu langu kutetea haki 
za kibinadamu lakini pia haki za kijinsia na h aki za  waliotengwa katika jamii. M heshi miwa 
Spika chama chetu kilikuwa (??) basi kwa mapendekezo haya ; nafasi hii ingeenda kwa banati 
ama M heshimiwa wa kike...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Ambae. .. (Inaudible ) wadhfa w a kutosha katika J umba hili na kupewa tena nafasi 
nyengine ; hii ni ishara kwamba chama chetu kina ...(Inaudible ) na kinachuku a msimamo wa 
kuchuku a akili ndogo kutawala akili kubwa na ku weka watu kwa ufahamu.. .(Inaudible ), 
kupeana fursa... ushabiki wa vy ama, kuendesha Jumba hili. H iyo sio haki na kwa mtindo  huu 
ufanisi wa B unge hili la pili utaingia katika kab uri la sahau.  
 Kuhusu uteuzi wa K amati ya shu ghuli za B unge , niipe tu changamoto kwa sababu 
Kamati hii imekuwa ikihudumu kwa mda na imekuwa ikirudi kama ilivyo , ni hiv yo tu 
changamoto ya kwamba kwa awamu hii iwajibike zaidi na t uone biashara zikiingia katika 
Bunge hili kwa wingi na ule utamaduni wa baadhi ya watu kufanya ushab iki na kujadili 
Miswada katika k ikao mbali na Miswada hii kuja kwa Bunge ikome Mheshimiwa S pika. 
 Chini ya uongozi wako tunataka uwazi na kila M heshimiwa apewe fursa ya kupeleka 
shughuli zake katika Kamati na zifuate idhini ya kuingia katika Bunge hili ima ipite katika 
Bunge hi li ama ianguke hoja ile katika B unge hili .  Lakini sio watu wawili , watatu kwa uoga 
wao na ushabiki wa kivyama na akili zao ndogo kuua hoja za watu katika K amati pasipo hata 
kuingia katika B unge hili .  
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika na Mwenyezi Mungu atuongoze , atupe busara tuweze 
kuyafanikisha malengo ambayo wanan chi wametupa katika J umba hili. Shukran.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon . Mwamwiri . Yes Hon . Ibrahim Omondi . 
 
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for this golden opportunity. F irst of all I 
want to congratulate the Almighty  God to have given us this opportunity again to gather here 
today for this very important session that we are going to start today . Mr. Speaker, regarding  
the communication from the party as per the newly elected or appointed Chief W hip I would 
like to say that change is always for the good , it’s not for the worse  and we exp ect that the 
new Chief W hip will do us good  and he will bring changes in this Hon . House, he  will be 
able to move us forward  from where we were.  
 And again I  want to emphasis this th at the majority of the elected M embers in this 
House are from the party k nown as ODM and t herefore I expect that the new Chief W hip 
who has just been elected is going to always be faithful to the party and he is always going to 
serve the purp ose of the party in this House. A m saying so because we must have an 
organised move in this House ; we don’t want to be seen as if we are not able to do that , that 
we ought to do when we came to this House.  
 Number two , I want to also co ngratulate and also join other M embers to congratulate 
this newly appointed H ouse Business C ommittee that we are having today ; to me it is a good 
team and it can move us forward Mr. Speaker Sir and therefore I have faith in it . Mr. Speaker 
Sir, thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very  much Hon. Ibrahim Omondi. Y es Hon. 
Robert Nyiro . 
 
 Hon. Nyiro: Thank you Mr. Speaker. F irst and foremost I would like to thank the 
Almighty God for enabling us to be here a gain;  bearing in mind that we we re on a very long 
holiday and many things have happened , many people have been called to be with  the Lord, 
and we thank God that we are here. Again I want to believe that we are here for a serious 
business of the year because our people have high expectations from  us, so I just want to 
encourage every one of us to be very much focused and make sure that w e deliver  to the 
people that elected us.  
 Secondly from the discussion s; because I have not been here from the beginning is 
that our very able Hon . Senior Junior Wambua has been nominated and appointed to take 
over from Hon. Ki tula as the new Chief W hip. Indeed the party did  so good to pass  the baton 
to Hon . Junior ; and as M embers of the party we have to join hands and support the new Chief 
Whip and I would like to congratulate you Hon. Junior Wambua for your new appointment ! 
Indeed the year is good for yo u and the responsibility of becoming more and more enormous 
of you , so we expect a lot  from you and the party expects a lot  from you so give us 
leadership, we are pr oud of you, and we support you.  Thank you very m uch. 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank yo u so much Hon. Nyiro . Yes Hon. Mwalimu 
Mgwisho ? 
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii 
na mimi niweze kuchangia kidogo . Nachukua nafasi  hii kwanza  kupongeza Junior Wambua 
na hii K amati ya House Business ambayo  imeweza kuteuliwa hapa . 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Hii Kamati ndio roho ya Bunge hili. T unawaomba mushirikiane muweze kufanya 
yenu kwa uzuri ili tuone kwamba shughuli za Bunge letu zinaendelea kama kawaida, kwa 
hayo machache nashukuru nasema  ahsante s ana. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu. Yes Hon. Charles Kitula.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwanza 
tuweze  kuwapongeza W aheshimiwa kufika salama salmini twashukuru kwa nguvu za 
Mwenyezi  Mungu tumekutana an a kwa  ana sote tukiwa buheri wa afya. V ile vile 
Mheshim iwa Mwenyekiti pia nipongeze  taarifa iliyoletwa katika J umba hili , vile vile 
nimpongeze ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa W ambua kwa kupokea ofisi hii ya Kiranja wa Bunge 
kwa sababu … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na nimfahamishe  kwamb a ofisi ile ni ofisi ya chama, sisi ni W anachama na tutakuja 
wakati wowote na atuhudumie kama W anachama ; sio ofisi yake kama Wambua bali ni ofisi 
ya chama lakini tutakuja pale mara kwa mara tuweze  kujadiliana maswala yetu kama 
Waheshimiwa ili  kuweza kuelezana maisha yetu. L engine la mwisho Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ni kumwambia Mheshimiwa Wambua kwamba tuko hapa kwa ajili ya 
kuwakilisha wananchi na vile vile jukumu la kuw eza kuongea haki na ukweli hiyo …inavyo 
stahili . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula. Yes Hon. Hamida Noor . 
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. F irst of all i want to congratulate my fellow 
Member Junior Wambua for hav ing been given this position and i want to ask you to work on 
this position very well because we women were fighting for this position and unfortunately 
did not get it but i never want you  to be biased , but I  want you to look at us equally as 
Members of this Assembly . Secondly i want to congratulate the nominated M embe rs of  
House B usiness so that our business can continue in this House fairly , and as you are the 
Chairman of the C ommittee I hope everything is going to be smooth. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Hamida. Yes Hon. Shomari?  
 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Ahsante sana Bwana  Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Kwanza 
ningependa kumshukuru Mwenyezi  Mungu kwa  kuweza kuturudisha sote salama . Pili 
ningependa kuchukua fursa hii kuwapongeza na kupongeza Kamati ya House B usiness  
kuteuliwa leo;  tatu ninge penda kumpongeza Kiranja wa Bunge  mpya, nne ningependa 
kumpongeza Kiranja  ambaye ametoka namwambia kwamba alifanya kazi nzuri , tano 
ningependa kuzungumzia kwa jumla Waheshimiwa sote kwamba mimi kama Naibu Kiranja 
wa Bunge  nilikuwa  nafaa niwe Kiranja , alafu Mheshimiwa Wambua Naibu wangu.  Ahsante 
kwa hayo.  
 
(Applause)  
 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ali Shomari. Yes Hon. Ogutu Benard.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Bwana  Spika. Kwanza kabisa ningependa kushukuru kwa 
hii nafasi ili nimpongeze Mheshimiwa Junior  Wambu a kwa nafasi hii ambayo amepewa;  
nafikiri waliangalia umbo na u le uzoefu  ambao ako  nao. Kidogo  pia nipongeze wale ambao 
wameweza kuteuliwa ka tika  Kamati ya House Business  niwaambie waweze kufanya kazi ili 
Bunge liweze kuendelea mbele. Ahsante sana . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes t hank you Hon. Ogutu. Yes Hon. Maimuna . 
 
 Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwanza ningependa 
kumshukuru Mwenyezi  Mungu kwa kutujaalia kuweza kukutana hapa kwa afya na 
Insha Allah kwa uwezo wa Mwenyezi  Mungu tunaomba ya kwamba huu mwaka tumeuanza, 
tuuanze kwa furaha tuweze kufanya kazi pamoja tuweze kuhudumia watu wetu wa Mombasa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika tuko hapa katika Bunge  la Kaunti ya Mombasa na mimi ningeomba 
kuchangia zile hisia zangu, zitakavyo chukuliwa ni sawa lakini mimi kama Mheshimiwa wa 
kike tuna haki ya kugombania kitu  na tuna hak i ya kup ewa au kutopewa. Kwa hivyo u amuzi 
uliotoka mimi nasema ya kwamba mimi kama M aimuna nasema sikuufurahia, kwa sababu 
tuko kina  mama Waheshimiwa 12, tungeitwa na chama kama yule mmoja alifanya makosa 
tukaitwa tukiangalia ni jinsi gani tutapeana hichi kiti kwa mama . Lakini ishatokea, likitokea 
halina budi na mimi nasema kwa hi sia zang u zote, k unazo bado nafasi Insha Allah nzuri 
ningeomba chama iangalie kina mama W aheshimiwa kama wana haki katika Bunge hili 
waangaliwe kisawasawa…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Maana Mheshimiwa Spika sote ni binadamu, kufanya kosa si kosa, kosa ni kurejelea 
kosa, kwa hivyo mimi nimesema hivyo  na ningeomba kuunga mkono hii K amati iliyoteuliwa 
naiunga mkono iweze kutenda kazi. Mheshimiwa  Spika hapo nyuma kabla ya hii Kamati, zile 
Kamati za mbele zilizotengezwa mimi niliona hakukutendeka usawa , kuna wengine walipata 
Kamat i mbili, kuna wengine walipata K amati tatu…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika niko chini ya himaya yako, wewe ndie mzee wa boma 
hili, katika kugawa tuangalie usawa, mimi sijasema Mwenyekiti  yeyote  atolewe lakini katik a 
hizi Kamati tuwe sawa. K ama tumeamua kila M wanachama  ni saba , kila mtu ana haki ya 
kuwa na saba ; Mheshimiwa Spika tu nakuomba sisi W aheshimiwa wa Bunge hili huu ni 
mwaka mwengine 2020  na tushirikiane tufanye kazi pamoja, yaliyopita si ndwele tugange 
yajayo  yaliyopita yashapita.  
 Tungeomba tushi kane mkono kwa mkono sote kama Waheshimiwa  tuweze kufanya 
huduma kwa watu wa Mombasa, bila sisi ku shikana wananchi chini wanaumia. K wa hivyo 
mimi sina mengi isipokuwa niko hapa ki haki Mheshimiwa Spika na hisia zangu 
nimezizungumza, ikiwa ni memkwaza mtu mtu anisamehe k wa hivyo nimemaliza hisia zangu.  
Ahsanteni s ana. 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Maimuna Mwa wasi. Yes Hon. Kibwana 
Swaleh.  
 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker first and foremost i 
would like to appreciate and thank God for giving us another opportunity  to be in this House 
in  the year , 2020. Hon. Speaker i want to relay my appreciation to the former Chief Whip 
who has been serving us well , it’s high time…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Speaker i also want to congratulate  my brother Wambua for taking this 
opportunity given by the party and we hope that Junior Wambua will learn  from  the mistakes 
that our former C hief made so that we ca n avoid ...because this is normal  and party position s 
are very important , also in every A ssembly even the National party position  if you tow the 
line of the party you will be ok ay and in every A ssembly even the national party positions are 
very important so i wish apart from the pa rty reality you will also serve us well . Hon. Speaker 
i also want to congratulate officially our sister Hon. Amriya for being ad mitted to the B ar, i 
think  now we have a Lawyer that i myself am also going to engage, i have small cases around 
here…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 I can ask for her services, i think am also going to learn some of us apart of being 
Lawyer s, we can be E ngineers at our old age and Hon. Speaker i want also to appreciate your 
leadership  Mr. Speaker . You have shown your leadership  qualities w hich is very important  
as you are aware this is a political House Hon. Speaker…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 And you have played your role well, you have balanced the issues and now i can also 
say something when i come out of this Hon. House Hon. Speaker and also the House 
Business so i urge Members being also a Member of the House Business, the House Business 
normally needs  Motions and B ills from  the Members, it is not us who create business it is us 
Members through commitment, through  active C ommittees that we normally derive b usiness . 
Hon. Speaker , so i challenge this year to make these  Committee s active, most o f Committee s 
are not active because there is  no facilitation, even going for site visit s there is nothing that 
even the transport  is very difficult for a C ommittee to g o without lunch … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 So this sometimes demoralize s the C ommittee and we have been talking qui te much 
about this Hon. Speaker; s o i think this time the financial year 2019/2020 ...i think the 
Committee should be looked upon so that we make these C ommittee very active because we 
cannot  have busines s when the C ommittees are not active . Hon. Speaker so i would like to 
ask through your leadership Hon. Speaker to scrutinize this budget and see how much  has 
been allocated to this C ommittee for us to work in a conducive environment . For those few 
remarks Hon. Speaker , i think you are going t o support this ...your leadership and also support 
one another so as to make th is Mombasa County a good place.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana. Yes Hon. Moses Aran . 
 
 Hon. Aran:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. K wanza ningependa kumshukuru  
Mwenyezi  Mungu ametuwezesha , tumetoka likizo tukarudi salama.   
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  Pili Mheshimiwa Spika kabla nianze k umpongeza Mheshimiwa Junior na K amati ya 
House Business  ningependa kwanza ku kupongeza Mheshimiwa Spika kw a sababu tumeona 
hili Bunge ni  Bunge la… sisi wanasiasa limekuwa na changamoto lakini umeweza kutuleta 
pamoja Mheshimiwa . Kwa hivyo Mwenyezi  Mungu Akubariki na azidi kukupatia hekma…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 La pili Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumpongeza ... namuita  babangu Mheshimiwa 
Junior Wambua, chama imeona impatie  Kiranja wa Bunge  na pia najua atafanya kazi nzuri, 
rafiki yangu, ndugu  yangu Mheshimiwa Kitula ningependa kumwambia ajipe moyo ni hali ya 
maisha . Mimi pia nilikuwa hapo nilitolewa na maisha iliendelea, kwa hivyo lazima maisha 
yaendelee…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na Mheshimiwa Jun ior kwa N iaba ya chama mimi ni kiongozi wa vijana wa ODM  
wa Kaunti ya Mombasa ; ningependa kwamba usisitize mambo ya monthly contribution , ile 
contribution  yetu watu watoe. Na fanya utafiti vizuri hii chama inahitaji pesa usilale, 
usizembee lazima watu waendelee kutoa pesa  utupatie sisi wanachama ili  tufanye kazi yetu 
vizuri. Ningependa pia kushukuru K amati ya House Business , mumefanya kazi nzuri na 
naomba Mwenyezi  Mungu atupatie hekma zaidi ili  tuweze kuhudumia wananchi . Ahsanteni 
Mungu A wabariki.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Moses Aran. Yes Hon. 
Amriya Juma Boy. Congratulation again Hon. Amriya Juma Boy for having admitted to the 
bar... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Congratulation s again on your achievement Hon. Amriya. Karibu . 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for the congratulation m essage 
from your opening speech and  i thank you again for the congratulation message ! Mr. Speaker 
i wish to pass my greeting s from the P resident of the Judiciary Mr. David Ma raga; I received 
a special recognition on 13th of February , it is because of bei ng a Member of this Hon. 
House....  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker he also passed special greetings to Mombasa County. Secondly Mr. 
Speaker  I wish to congratulate the Hon. Member, Hon. Wambua . This is a tussle and task 
ahead of him and I wish to give him a special congratulations message and I know he is up 
and equal to the task Mr. Speaker. And also to the Members of the House Business 
Committee I also want to appreciate my fellow Memb ers; kindly Mr. Speaker I wish to 
remind my fellow Hon. Members that now this is 2020, the bar has been set so high, the 
expectations are very high on us . We should try as much as possible  to do some work on 
legislation and  policy making so that the Mombasa people can feel the Mombasa County at 
work Mr. Speaker...  
 
(Applause)  
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 So the expectations are very high on us , I can tell for sure that the expectations are 
now across the country not just from Mombasa. So that is a reminder for this year that we be 
up to the task and we pull up our socks. Otherwise , thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you again Hon. Amriya. Yes Hon. Ramla Said?  
 
Hon. Ramla Said:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Natumai  mumetoa  (Inaudible ) njema 
kutoka ...(Inaudible ) mumefanya wajibu wenu wa jamii, wafanyi kazi tushikamane tufanye 
kazi kwa roho nzuri. Pia Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumpongeza Hon. Wambua kwa hiki 
cheo na natumai atafanya kazi nzuri lakini tungefurahia pia kupata nafasi  fulani kwa 
wanawake. Nina imani wakati mwengine  tutapewa . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ramla. Yes Hon. Everlyne Onsongo?  
 
Hon. Onsongo : Thank you Mr. Speaker. First of all I thank the Almighty Father for 
giving us the chance again this year to come into this House and secondly, I would like to 
congratulate the Hon. Member who has been chosen as our Majority Chief Whip of this 
House. I con gratulate you, work hard and make the House to be a full House.  I also 
congratulate Hon. Kitula for  working hard with Hon. Members  because he is also a Hon. 
Member but he must work for us giving us messages and everything for the two and half 
years it is n ot an easy job. So I congratulate him for that , may God still bless you and lift you 
up because you are still a young person. .. 
  
(Applause)  
 
And according to today’s Motion I also agree with the nominated Member s of the 
House Business that have  been chose n for this House. First I congratulate our Hon. Speaker 
for being a leader and to make the House be full. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
My hope and m y request is that this time let us get the House Business in advance, let 
us get the Business in advance for the Hon. Memb ers so t hat if you come to the House...  
 
(Applause)  
 
You know what to talk about or know what you want to do. So I appreciate all those 
and I congratulate everybody who has come because it was a very hard task outside there and 
you worked for the people of  Mombasa very well I have not heard of any quarrel or anything, 
you are all congratulated and respected. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Everlyne Onsongo. Yes 
Hon. Mwaka Mwaludonda?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mwanzo nataka 
kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu ambae ameturegesha tena tukiwa na afya tele na furaha.  
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 Pili nataka kumpongeza Mheshimiwa Junior Wambua kwa kuchaguliwa  Kiranja wa 
Bunge  ingawaje ilikuwa tunatarajia angalau Kiti hiki twaweza kupata kama kina mama. 
Lakini pia vile vile kwa uchaguzi wa chama hivyo kwamba kiliteuwa kushikilia na  kuweza 
kupokea utumishi wake.  Langu kubwa zaidi ilikuwa nakuomba Mheshimiwa Spika 
utuangalie na sisi kina mama kwa sababu naona viti vingi hapa viko na kina baba. Kwa 
kusema kweli na mimi pia kama alivyo ongea Mheshimiwa Maimuna hisia zangu nazitoa na 
uchungu , pia kwa ndani kwa sababu nikiangalia  viti vingi viko na kina baba, W enyekiti 
wanaume.  Ukiangalia kama Wenyeviti  ni kina mama watatu  peke ya ke ambao wako na 
Kamati. Kina mama sisi wengine ni Manaibu wengine ni Members.  
Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika wewe ndio Baba wa Nyumba hii, utuangalie kwa jicho la 
huruma kwa sababu Nyumba ni mama pia vile vile na mama ikiwa pia ana  uchungu, baba 
nawe pia utaishi na uzuri.  Kwa hiyo mimi naomba utuangalie vile viti vingine vilivyobaki 
ambavyo kwamba na sisi tuweze kuvipata iwe kuwe na usawa.  
Kwa hayo machache nashukuru Mwenyezi Mungu atuwezeshe tuweze kuanza Bunge 
letu na furaha na yale yote ambayo yalikuwa yako, M wenyezi Mungu ayaondoshe, 
atuondoshe shetani mchafu ili tuweze kuweza kukaa kikao hiki cha muhula huu mzima. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwaka. Yes Hon. Zahora Mwaka?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Zahora : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza kabisa ningependa 
kumshukuru Mungu kwa kutuwezesha sote kufika hapa. Binafsi nilikua na changamoto 
Disemba niliweza kufanyiwa upasuaji lakini kwa sasa namshukuru Mungu, Alhamdulillah . 
Vile vile wahusika wa Bima jamani jitahidini mpaka sasa naumia kwa sababu naendelea na 
matibabu . Pili, ni ngependa kumpongeza Mheshimiwa Amriya Bo y Juma kwa kuwa Wakili 
rasmi, kongole...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Vile vile ningependa kumpatia kongole Mheshimiwa Wambua kwa kuteuliwa kuwa 
Kiranja wa Bunge  mpya, kama Mwenyekiti tunasema mbele pamoja. Vile vile kama wa 
mama tunaomba basi hata kama mumetunyima hicho tupeni basi Naibu Kiranja wa Bunge ... 
 
(Laughter and applause)  
 
Isitoshe ningependa kumshukuru Mheshimiwa Kitula kwa muda wake alioweza 
kuhudumia  kama Kiranja wa Bunge , tunashukuru kwa huduma zako ulizotufanyia katika 
miaka miwili iliyopita maana yake si jambo rahisi ulikuwa ukitukumbusha hapa na pale 
katika jumbe zile ambazo zinastahili.  
Kwa hivyo tunashukuru kwa huduma zako ulizotufanyia, gurudumu litaendelea kama 
vile Mheshimiwa Moses Aran amesema. Vile vile ningependa kuipongeza Kamati ya House 
Business  wajitahidi katika kuhakikisha ya kuwa Biashara za Bunge hili zinasonga. Kwa hayo 
machache Mheshimiwa Spika nasema lakini wale wahuduma wajitahidi.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwaka. Yes Hon. Prischilla?  
 
Hon. Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu 
kwa wakati huu ambao ametuwezesha kuwa na uzima n a afya tukaweza kuenda likizo na 
namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu tena kwa kuturegesha Jumba hili tukiwa sote tuwazima na 
afya.  
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 Maana uzima ni mwenyewe Mwenyezi Mungu anae  tulinda, maana ninakumbuka 
Bunge lilopita wakati kama huu mara nyingi tulikuwa mara tuna majonzi tukiwa tumepoteza 
wenzetu. Kwa hivyo hapa tunasema Mwenyezi Mungu ametupa faraja ya hali ya juu kwa 
hivyo tumshukuru kwa hilo.  
La pili ninasema pia ni ahsante  kwa sababu baada ya vita ni faraja; n inasimama hapa 
kumpongeza Mheshimiwa Junior Wambua kwa uteuzi wako na mimi nikiwa mmoja ambaye 
nilikuwa bingwa wa kuanzisha vugu vugu la kuambiwa kieleweke, na kikaeleweka siku ya 
leo. Lakini kitu mimi namshukuru na na kuomba Mheshimiwa Spika ninasimama hapa kwa 
sikitiko moja tu ambalo ninamuomba kulingana na uwezo wako kama vil e Mheshimiwa 
Maimuna alivyosema. Tufikirie sisi W aheshimiwa kina mama hata kama tutakua hatuna huu 
wadhfa  ambao tumeupata, Mheshimiwa Spika twaku omba kwa unyenyekevu tukiwa ndani ya 
hili Bunge haswa nikizungumza nikiwa nina machungu mengi ni kwa sababu sisi kina mama 
ni viongozi kweli lakini ni viumbe dhaifu katika maumbile tunahitaji wakati mwengine tuwe 
na faragha. Hatuna chumba ambacho kuna choo  cha faragha  cha kina mama, cha 
Waheshimiwa , tunakuwa tuko katika hali ya uwazi , kwa hivyo tungetaka tufikiriwe tuwe na 
faragha ya hali ya juu.  
Nikisema hivyo kwa sababu I have been a victim  na sizung umzi ati kuwa nina uoga 
ama kuwa na wasiwasi, nimekuwa victim  kama mama; n afikiri nilitoka ndani ya hili Jumba 
na nikaweza kuenda kwa afisi ya Kiongozi  wa Wengi Bungeni  hali niliyokuwa Mhes himiwa 
Spika n afikiri ingekuweko ni shock  kwake. Mtu aliweza kunipata pale alikuwa ni 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili lakini nilijaribu  kwa juhudi zangu zote ili asie lewe kuna kitu gani 
kinaendelea n iliweza kuavya mimba nikiwa katika afisi ya Mheshimiwa Naibu wa Kiongozi 
Wa Wengi Bungeni . Kwa hivyo ni kitu kilinisononesha sana ingelikuwako tuko na c humba 
chetu na afisi yetu kama Waheshimi wa kina mama;  ile ni siri ya kina mama na hakuna mtu 
anayetaka kupata jambo lile. Hio ndio ilikuwa ya kwanza ndani ya miaka 25 ya ndoa yangu. 
 Kwa hivyo iliniuma  na nin aona ni wakati mwafaka tufikiriwe kama kina mama tuwe 
na faragha.  Pengine akina mama wen gine wangenisaidia  wakati huo nilipokuwa katika hali 
ngumu , kwa hivyo tusiangalie  wadhfa  tu peke yake Mheshimiwa Spika, tu angalie umuhimu 
wa sisi kina mama kuwa na faragha yetu...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Kwa sababu ni muhimu sana. Sisi ni viumbe lakini tuna upungufu wetu ambao 
Mwenyezi Mungu ametuumba nao ; nashukuru Mungu Mheshimiwa Spika alilichukulia lile 
jambo kwa hali ya juu maana yake hata ilikuwa hata cover  yetu ilikuweko haiwezekani na 
nikaweza kupelekwa kwenye emergency  na akaweza kutoa authority  yake niweze k uingizwa 
kwa upasuaji mara moja na nikasaidika. Lakini nilipata jambo moja la aibu ambalo ilikuweko 
Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Wa Wengi Bungeni  si afisi ya kina mama;  nakuomba kwa 
unyenyekevu nikiwa ndani ya hili Jumba fikiria hilo jambo na utupe afisi ambayo itakua na 
choo cha faragha  ya kina mama na mahali ambapo tutaweza kuweka siri zetu hapo ndani. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you again Hon. Prischilla Mumba na kwa niaba 
ya Kaunti tunasema pole. Karani wa Bunge na fikiri hili jambo si jambo geni tumelizungumza 
mara kadha sio mara ya kwanza limekuja ; kwa hivyo ningeomba Bwana Karani wa B unge 
ulichukulie hili jambo kwa dharura  wakati tukiitisha mkutano wa Bo di na najua tuko na 
Wanachama wa Bodi tulishughulikie jambo hili  kwa haraka . 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14 Kuna afisi zingine pia hapa watu wanakaa hata hawastahili kuwa kwa hizo afisi. Kwa 
hivyo tafadhali Bwana Karani  lishughulikie hili jambo.  Yes Hon. Mary Naliaka?  
 
Hon. Naliaka : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for having granted me this opportunity to 
at least utter a word in this first s itting of this session. Mr. Speaker Sir, as my fellow 
Members have put it, I also want to congratulate Hon. Wamb ua for having being nominated 
by the Party to lead us the C hief Whip for this Hon. House a nd with this I believe that Hon. 
Wambua this is not a task that is going maybe to make you not to do your mandates 
thoroughly because you are.. .because you  are mandat ed as a M CA of Chaani to legislate to 
this House, to represent them and to oversight and so I believe you are not given this to only 
sit there and rule. So please do your mandate at liberty , the party has given you this mandate 
to be at liberty, to do it w ith a lot of ease . And to my Honourable  former Chief Whip Mr. 
Kitula, I would like to congratulate you also and to thank you, because you  have shown 
bravery, you  have been brave today and not weak, you  have show n us that you  are ready to 
be just a Hon. Member and to rule this work without that post, it is not going to change the 
way you  will work in this House.  
To my fellow Hon. Members, I wish to welcome you this day, am happy to see all of 
you back and am praying that  from this day onward, because we  are remaining with very 
few..., I believe it  is only two years, because the six months on top is when we will only be 
part of politics here and there, but I believe we have only two good years to work for the 
people of Mombasa County.  
So please my fellow M embers let us represent the people of Mombasa County, let us 
be here because they have elected us to be here to represent them and let us not be here 
because sometimes we tend to say that we are here, we are d eserving maybe…, but please let 
us be here beca use we were chosen and we are ready to  do what brought us here. As for my 
able Speaker ... Hon. Hatimy , kindly please ...I thank you because you  have been good to all of 
us but another thing  I would like to ask you this ... 
 
(Loud consultations)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order! Order! Hon. Members . Yes, Hon. Naliaka?  
 
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 Hon. Naliaka:  It seem s like people want to air out their views on what we have and 
because of this opportunity  I would l ike to talk to you Mr. Speaker S ir, that you are a parent 
to all of us, that  is how I see you. S o please whenever we even cross you do  not just receive a 
word fr om a particular group, even if m e Naliaka i c all you attend to my call because you do 
not know what that call is about . With those few remarks , I thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Naliaka . Yes Hon. Shebe Athman?  
 
 Hon. Shebe Athman:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti kwa kunipa fursa hii 
kwa  kuweza kuchangia. Kwanza kabisa shukrani z angu za dhati ni kwa Mfalme wa Mbingu 
na ardhi, ambaye katujalia kumtizabudi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, na kutujalia vile  vile 
tukaweza kukutana hapa . Si mape nzi yetu wala ujanja wetu, k wa hivyo shukrani  hatuna budi 
kumrudishia Rabuka; p ili Mheshimiwa Mwenyeki ti nikitandika jamvi na waraka uliousoma 
ilikuwa imechelea kidogo . 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  Mimi kwanza napenda ku rudisha shu krani zangu za dhati na kongole  kwa aliyekuwa 
kiranja wa Bunge hili la pili katika  Kaunti ya Mombasa. Ama kwa hakika ni kinaya tu  Bunge 
letu kuwa wale wan ajitolea kufanya kazi kwa moyo mmoja, kuweka ubinafsi kando, 
waangalie maslahi ya wa nanchi na Bunge letu la Mombasa  inakuwa kinaya kua hao 
wataweza kupatiwa kishogo . Sijui manake najaribu kutafakari sababu gani k apita nashindwa 
Mhe. Mwenyekiti , lakini kuba nana W aswahili wanasema wasaa ni ngwenje.  
 Mimi shukrani zangu tu za K iranja aliyekuwa Mhe. Kitula kukuambia Mheshimiwa 
kuwa isikufanye kuwa wewe utapunguza waraka wako ama kujitolea kwako kuhudumia 
wananchi na Bunge hili pamoja na Kaunti nzima ya Mombasa. Huenda ikawa ni heri  kwako 
kukujua Mhe. Mwenyekiti; kwa hivyo hiyo itakuwa changamoto kwako kuhakikisha kuwa 
una fursa nyingi sana ya kuweza kutoa mchango wako na nashukuru Mhe. w etu Spika, 
Mungu amempa hio hekima yote ya kusikiza  watu h ata yule mnyonge ambae hana sauti ya 
kuweza kutoa mchango wangu katika Bunge hili  na ukahudumia wakaazi wetu wa Mombasa 
kwa hali ulijitolea kwa amani.  
Pili Mhe . Mwenyekiti, kwangu kwa K iranja aliyechaguliwa mpya, yangu ni 
changamoto tu, kwa sababu hivi vi atu vili wekwa juu na K iranja aliyekuwa, ama kwa hakika 
ni uchanganye miguu yake miwili aweze kutoshea kiatu kimoja ... 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 Mhe. Mwenyekiti ni kumpatia  Kiranja ambaye amechaguliwa na Bunge hili, 
inaon yesha na yeye mwenyewe katika roho yake a najua, guu limeupanda mti mbovu. W acha 
niseme ukweli Waheshimiwa W enyekiti wenza bana ..., Mhe. n i rafiki yangu, ni mzee wangu 
ni bwana (??) lakini katika mchakato mzima wa ku wajibika Mheshimiwa Spika,  nakuomba 
saa yoyote nitakuwa sako kwa bako na yeye nikiangalia pia, je kazi ita fanyika vile itakavyo 
fanyika? S imtaki kumkatia tama kwa sababu pia yeye ni kiongozi shupavu ; ana ujasiri kwa 
hivyo katika maswali mazima ya kin gereti Mhe. w a Chaani viatu vinakusubiri, vyataka 
makini wewe kuvivaa viatu hivi vis ije vikakubana ukavivulia njiani Mhe. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Tatu Mh eshimiwa Spika, kwa hekima yako  nafikiri Kiranja aliyekuwa K iranja 
amekubali matokeo;  Waswahili  wanakuambia ukichekwa  lia kubali matokeo Mhe. 
Mwenyekiti l akini hapa nina imani Mheshimiwa wa Jomvu  Kuu nilileta hoja mwaka jana ya 
kuhakikisha zile K amati na wengi hapa wanalia hoi Mhe. Mwenye kiti. K una wengine wako 
katika K amati moja ama mbili na imekuwa changamoto ya kuweza kuwajibikia hasa , kwa 
hivyo wasaa umefika Mhe. Mwenyekiti nina imani ile hoja yangu Karani wetu i ko katika file 
na kabla uweze kuzingatia hizi K amati za Bunge, manake wakati ule wasaa Mhe. na hekima 
yako nimeona ilikuwa imeletwa  kabla wakati wake ile hoja. K wa hivyo naf ikiri wasaa 
umefikia hizi Kamati za B unge kuweza kufa nywa hivi ili tuweze kuwatunza; ki nywa chako 
Mhe. Mwenyekiti na uongozi wako  mimi siku  zote nataka nikitoka katika Bunge hili iwe 
Mhe. w a Jomv u Kuu na Spika wetu ambaye  amesimama kwa ahadi na u adilifu iwe it akuwa 
kinguvu  nguvu.  
 Kwa hivyo hii hoja niliyoileta naomba uzingatie ili Waheshimiwa kama kina Kitula 
ambaye walijitolea kihali na mali kuhudumia tuweze kuhakikisha kuwa w angewekwa katika 
nyanja zengine  na ana uwezo wa kuwa zaidi ya k inara anawadhirisha hakuna Mhe. a mbaye 
hawezi kuwa. Kwa hivyo ombi langu Mhe. Mwenyekiti kwa ile hoja niliyoileta mwaka ule 
uweze kuipatia mazingatio ili Bunge lion yeshe kuwa linatuza watu wa bidii, linatuza watu 
ambaye hawana ubinafsi, linatuza watu waliojitolea kwa hali na mali. 
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16  Sina mengi Mhe. Mwenyekiti narudisha shukrani zangu za dhati na vile vile 
nawakaribisha Waheshimiwa wenza mwaka mpya huu natumai  mambo yatakuwa mapya, 
sura ni zile zile tu ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Mimi nasema kuwa mambo yatakuwa mapya kwa sababu huu ni mwaka mwingine, 
sura ni zile zi le kwa sababu Mhe. Amur atabaki Amur tu pale. A hsante sana Mhe. 
Mwenyekiti kwa kunipatia nafasi ya  kuchangia.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very muc h Hon. Athman Shebe, yes Hon. 
Rosemary?  
 
 Hon. Mueni : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity . I want to kindly 
thank you first for being there for us whenever we need you, even if sometimes we are very 
wrong you are always there for us , thank you very much. I would like to thank Charles Kitula 
for a job well done when he was the Chief Whip in this House ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 He is a nice person and am sure he  is going to learn from the mistakes if there were 
any (Inaudible )... I want to wish you all the best. As for Hon. Wambua I want to thank you 
for being appointed as the Chief Whip of this House and am sure you are also  going to  do a 
good job , thank you Mr. Speaker. I would also like to highlight something  that was brought 
in  by one of the  senior Members of this House , Hon. Maimuna specifically; that  we want to 
be in leadership in this House , you think about it and appoint us when the time comes . There 
are people who  do not have deputies here …(Inaudible )... give us those positions Mr. 
Speaker ; we are able , so at your conveni ent time consider those matters. O therwise we are 
very happy with your leadership ; thank you Mr. Speaker for listening to us whenever we 
come to you.  Thank you very m uch.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Rosemary  Mukavi , thank you Hon. 
Mem bers.  Hon. Members just a kind  reminder, tha t the County Assembly Business 
Committee is to begin today Tuesday 18th February aft er this morning sitting at the 
Committee room . Yes, Hon. Hamisi  Musa Mwidani can you reply?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. P ia 
namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu na Wanachama  wote kwa kuweza ku ipitisha hii Kamati, ni 
Kamati ya muhimu sana na pia kumshukuru Mhe. ndugu yangu Mhe. Kitula, kwa uzalendo . 
Kwa sababu hivi viti  vyetu Bwana Wambua hali ndio hiyo…lakini ikija mimi na wewe  
twakubali matokeo, kwa hivyo nashukuru amekubali matokeo na mwenzako anakubali 
matokeo anaangalia pahali gani pengine palikuwa na taabu ndio upate kupare kebisha.  
 Kwa hivyo nashukuru Waheshimiw a na naf ikiri mumezungumza mengi,  
Waheshimiwa wa kina mama naf ikiri taratibu ambazo Mwenyezi Mungu akatujalia 
atazifuata, kwa sababu hata hii tumerekebisha leo ni sheria si kwamba tumeileta tu kwa 
kichwa chetu na namshukuru Bwana Spika alijua kwamba muda w etu wa hii K amati 
imekwisha na ilikuwa lazima iletwe kisheria.  
February 18, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17  Hivyo basi  hata zile zengine kisheria mda ukifika nitazileta, manake s itaki kuon yesha 
kwamba nina ubaguzi wowote na Insha Allah najua kweli Bwana Spika zilipoundwa, kidogo 
hatukuweza kuzichorea lakini wakati  huu vile niko mimi kama Kiongozi wa Wengi Bunge  
nitahakikisha interest za wanachama zimechu kuliwa vizuri sana katika zile K amati.   
 Kwa hayo mengi nawashukuru na Insha Allah 2020 uwe mwaka wa kuon yesha 
maendeleo  kuanzia kwa Bunge mpaka kule kwetu mitaani. Kwa sababu tumebakisha muda 
wa miaka miwili, wengine sisi tushayazoea ; kazi zangu mimi najua nafanya vipi lakini 
wenzenu nyinyi vijana mlioko muweze kurudi tena na tena. Mimi yangu hii ni ya mwisho, 
nashukuru Alhamduli llah na pia namshukuru Bwana Spika unavyotupeleka, kwa sababu 
haijatokea toka hii revolution  ianze .  
 Kwa hivyo Spika ni kwa dhati wafanya jambo na akili na ubinadamu, hivyo  basi 
nashukuru Mwenyezi Mungu utupeleke hivyo hivyo  mpaka siku ya mwisho kila mtu ahame 
akatafute mambo mengine, wakurudi arudi, wakubaki haya bahati mbaya, lakini yote ni 
mambo ya Mwenyezi Mungu. K wa hivyo nawashukuru na Insha Allah matakwa yenu na vile 
nitayas ikia vizuri nitayachukulia na yawe  kipao mbele ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Majority 
Leader. Hon. Members I now put a question, that the Motion by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani 
on Nomination of Members to the County Assembly Business Committee be moved upon by 
this Hon. House in the same term s as moved . 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Applause ) 
 
 Yes C lerk? Next order please?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 18th of February , 2020 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11:37a.m. 
 
 
 