February 12 , 201 9                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
   
       COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 12th February, 2019  
The House met at 2:30p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Good afternoon Hon. Members you  may be seated. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Good aftern oon again Honourable Members.  
 Honourable Members , let me start by thanking the Almighty God for protecting us 
through the recess period and enabling us to assemble here today on this opening day of this 
Assembly.  
 Honourable Members , allow me to official ly welcome you back to the Third Session 
of the Second Assembly. It is my hope that after the long recess we are well rejuvenated and 
ready to embark on the journey of transforming the li ves of residents of this great County of 
Mombasa.     
 Honourable Mem bers,  during the second part of the Second Session, you worked 
diligently and shown dedication while discharging your mandates of representation, 
legislation, and oversight.  
 Honourable Members , however, I want to challenge each one of us to do more than 
we have previously done. This entails moving forward with the same zeal and commitment 
that you have displayed over  time in undertaking your constitutional and statutory duties.  
 Honourable Members , as we embark on this New Year, I would like to politely 
remind you of the importa nce of your work as honourable Members. This Assembly exists 
primarily for one reason only, and that is to solve the problems of our people.  
 Therefore, it is my sincere hope that we continue to portray Mombasa County 
Assembly with deco rum and the decency it deserves as we try to deliver to the constituents 
we represent.  
 Honourable Members , we are also embarking on another session which I believe will 
be more eventful than the previous one. In this regard, I would like to urge you all to br ing 
Motions, Statements and Bills to this Assembly.  

February 12 , 201 9                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  It is my hope that by so doing we will be responsive to people’s needs. I would also 
like to urge you to u tilize the various legislative Committees we have. Moving forward, it is 
my belief that the delibe rations coming out of the Committee activities will form part of our 
legislative agenda.  
 Honourable Members,  as you are all aware, we have started the second half of the 
financial year 2018/ 2019. This again is the time that you are expected to engage you rselves 
in the County budget process as outlined in Section 125 of the Public Finance Management 
(PFM) Act, 2012. To this effect, the Executive is expected to submit the County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper  (CFSP)  2019 by 28th February, 2019 for tabling in the House.  
 This Paper will offer us the opportunity to discuss and approve the sector ceilings for 
the strat egic priorities for the County government that will be the basis for the preparatio n of 
the County Budget FY 2018/ 2019.  
 Honourable Members , as I conclude I wish to on ce again take this opportunity to 
officially welcome you all and it is my hope that we will engage and have an interactive 
session to the benefit of Mombasa residents.  
 Honourable Members , thank you  again  and God Bless Mombasa.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Yes Clerk.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Honourable Members , this House stand adjourn ed until Wednesday 13th of February 
at 9:00p.m... 
 
(Clerk consultation ) 
 
 ...Sorry 9 :00a.m. 
The House rose at 2: 39p.m. 