September 6 , 201 7                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report  is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 6th September , 2017  
The House met at 10:44a.m. 
(County Assembly Clerk (Mr. Salim Juma) enter ed the C hamber in a procession  
accompanied by three Table Clerks)  
 
 PRAYERS  
 (Clerk of County Assembly (Mr. Juma ) presided )  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Clerk of County Assembly  (Mr. Juma) : You may be seated . 
Hon.  Members , It is with utmost pleasure that I welcome you to the first sitting of the 
Second Assembly of the County Assembly of Mombasa. This Second Assembly  term will be 
for a five years period. I take this opportunity to congratulate you on your election and 
nomination to be Members  of this County Assembly. As we all are aware, the process that 
you have un dergone for you to be able to si t in this August Hous e is an intricate one and 
hence congratulations , for making it to this Second Assembly are in order.   
Hon.  Members , pursuant to Standing order 3 and I quote , ‘Whenever a n ew County 
Assembly is elected, the Governor by notice in the Gazette shall appoint th e place and da te of 
the first sitting of the n ew Assembly, which shall be not later than 14 days after the 
elections ’. In line with this S tanding order, His Excellency the Governor vide Gazette Notice 
No. 1 dated 29th August , 2017, convened the Second Asse mbly to held be on Wednesday, 6th 
September , 2017. I hereby read the contents of the Gazette notice as required by Standing 
order No. 3 (2) ; ‘Pursuant to Standing Order 3(1) of the Mombasa County Assembly 
Standing Orders, It is notified for the information  of the Members  of County Assembly and 
the general public that, I Hassan Ali Joho, the Governor of Mombasa County, appoint that the 
first sitting of the Second Assembly shall be held at Mombasa County Assembly Building on 
Wednesday, 6th September , 2017 at 9:00a.m, dated, 29th August , 2017 ’. 
Hon. Members , our Standing orders in 3(2) b requires that I lay the names of persons 
elected and nominated as Members  on the Table of the County Assembly , and I hereby 
proceed to read the names and lay the lists for both  elected and nominated MCAs as 
published in the Kenya Gazette by IEBC vide gazette notices no.8240 dated 22nd August , 
2017 and gazette notice no 8380 dated 28th August , 2017 respectively.  The elected MCAs 
are; 
1. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani  - Port Reitz 
2. Fa ith M wende Boniface - Kipevu  
3. Ibrahim Oyugi  Omondi - Airport  
4. Benard Ochieng  Ogutu - Changamwe  
5. Junior  Wambua Ky aka - Chaani  
6. Shebe Ath uman Salim - Jomvu Kuu  
7. Kibwana Swaleh Baya - Miritini  
8. Juma Re nson Thoya - Mikindani  
9. Fahad  Kassim Abdall ah - Mjambere  
10. Musumba Raphael B wire - Junda  
11. Robert Nyiro M waega - Bamburi  
12. Fed dis Salame Mb ura - Mwakirunge  
13. Lucy Chizi Chireri - Mtopanga  
14. Ali Moham ed Shomari - Magogoni  
September 6 , 201 7                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report  is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 15. Maimuna Salim Mwawasi - Shanzu  
16. Charles Juma Kitula – Frere  Town 
17. Salim David Kalume - Ziwa la Ng’ombe  
18. Kizito Okoth Opeya - Mkomani  
19. Abrar i Moha med Omar - Kongowea  
20. Francis Kombe Nzai - Kadzandani  
21. Hamisi  Musa Mwidani - Mtongwe  
22. Mwalimu Hamad i Mgwisho  - Shika adabu  
23. Ahmed Salama Omar  - Bofu  
24. Athman Rama Mwam wiri - Likoni  
25. Mwaka Bakari Mulundonda  - Timbwani  
26. Murfad Abdallah Amur - Mji wa Kale /Makadara 
27. Tobia s Otieno Samba -Tudor  
28. Ali Omar Shariff  - Tononoka  
29. Prischillah Mem a Mumba – Shimanzi /Ganjoni  
30. Ah med Khamis Salim Hamis i - Majengo  
The nominated Members  of County A ssembly are ; 
31. Ramla Said Omar  
32. Mohamed Moha med Hatimy  
33. Mary Evelyn Osongo  
34. Moses Ar an Oindo  
35. Am briya Boy Juma Boy  
36. Leila Mug hazo Nyache  
37. Milka Muraa  Ngare  
38. Rosemary Mueni Mukav i 
39. Mary Naliaka Wafula  
40. Hamida Noor S heikh Ali  
41. Fatuma Swaleh Mote  
42. Mwaka Zahora Juma  
We shall now proceed with the next order. Clerk?  
ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS  
We shall now proceed with the second order which is Administration of Oath.  
Hon. Members , pursua nt to Art icle 74 of the c onstitution, before assuming a State office, or 
performing any function of a State office, a person shall take and subscribe the prescribed 
oath or affirmation. The procedure for swearing in will be conducted in accordance with the  
Standing Order 3 (3) which provides for order of precedence as follows;  
a) Members  with the longest cumulative period of service in the County Assembly , 
including local authority existing prior to establishment of County Assemblies; then ,  
b) All other Hon.  Mem bers in alphabetical order.  
For purposes of this swearing in, the alphabetical order to be considered shall be the 
surname of the Members . During the administration of the o ath you r name will be called out 
by a Table Clerk as per the o rder of precedence wh ich is attached to the o rder paper, you will 
then be required to move  to the podium escorted be one Member, hold a religious b ook by  
your right hand and raise it (A s per your belief) and take the o ath of office as I  will direct.  
After taking the o ath, you  will be required to leave the podium and you will be 
directed to sign the Oath Book and Certificate of Oath aft er which you will resume your sea t 
to give way for the next Hon.  Member  to be sworn in. The list that will be used to administer 
the Oath is att ached to the Order paper.  I now proceed to administer the Oath, Table Clerk ? 
September 6 , 201 7                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report  is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 (The Table Clerk c alled out the names of each Member to proceed to the podium to take the 
Oath of office ) 
1. Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani  
2. Hon. Amur Murfad Amur  
3. Hon. Mohamed Moha med 
4. Hon. Mwawasi Maimuna Salim  
5. Hon. Baya Kibwana Swaleh  
6. Hon. Chireri Lucy Chizi  
7. Hon. Kalume Salim David  
8. Hon. Makarani Fadhili Mwalimu  
9. Hon. Mote Fatma Swaleh  
10. Hon. Mumba Priscilla Mema  
11. Hon. Opeya Kizito Okoth  
12. Hon. Kyaka Junior W ambua  
13. Hon. Omar Ahmed Salama  
14. Hon . Abdalla Fahad Kassim  
15. Hon . Ali Hamida Noor Sheikh  
16. Hon . Boniface Faith Mwende  
17. Hon . Bwire Musumba Raphael  
18. Hon. Juma Am briya Boy  
19. Hon . Juma Mwaka Zahora  
20. Hon . Khamis Ahmed Khamis Salim  
21. Hon . Kitula Charles Juma  
22. Hon . Mbura Feddis Salama  
23. Hon. Mgwisho Mwalimu Hamad i 
24. Hon. Mukavi Rosemary Mueni  
25. Hon. Mulundonda Mwaka Bakari  
26. Hon. Mwaega Robert Nyiro  
27. Hon. Mwamwiri Athman Rama  
28. Hon. Ngare Moraa Milka  
29. Hon. Nyache Leila Mugh azo  
30. Hon. Nzai Francis Kombe  
31. Hon. Ogutu Benard Ochieng  
32. Hon. Oindo Moses Aran  
33. Hon. Omar Abrari Mohamed  
34. Hon. Omar Ramla Said  
35. Hon. Omondi Ibrahim Oyugi  
36. Hon. Osongo Mary Evelyn  
37. Hon. Salim Shebe Athman  
38. Hon. Samba Tobias Otie no 
39. Hon. Shariff Ali Omar  
40. Hon. Shomari Ali Mohammed  
41. Hon. Thoya Juma Renson  
42. Hon. Wafula Mary Naliaka  
 
(Clerk of County Assembly (Mr. Juma) then  administered the Oath of Office to each of the 
Members  of County Assembly ) 
I                                           , do swear that I shall always truly and diligently serve the people 
and the Republic of Kenya in the office of County Assembly Member of Mombasa County; 
September 6 , 201 7                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report  is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 that I shall diligently discharge my duties and perform my functions in the said office, to the 
best of my judgment; that I shall at all times, respect, uphold, preserve, protect and defend 
this Constitution of the Republic of Kenya; and that I shall do right to all manner of persons 
in accordance with the Constitution of Kenya and the  laws and conventions of Parliament, 
that I shall do justice to all. So help me God . 
(All the 42 Members of County Assembly  took the Oath of Office as prescribed)  
County Assembly Clerk  (Mr. Juma ): Congratulations all. Hon. Members  is there any 
Member  who h as been left out?  
(Silence ) 
So everybody has been sworn in.  Table Clerk , next order ? 
ELECTION OF HONORABLE SPEAKER  
You will n ow proceed to elect the Speaker.   
Hon. Members  you have taken the O ath of office and hence the law now permits you 
to transact busi ness of the Assembly. The first business that you are required to transact is the 
election of the Speaker.   
Hon. Members , pursuant to Article 178 of the Constitution, Section 7 of the County 
Government Act,  2012 and Standing order 5 , the Office of the Spea ker fell vacant when His 
Excellency the Governor published the first sitting of the Second Assembly vide Gazette 
notice No.1 dated 29th August , 2017 which I had earlier read out to you.  
I thereafter proceeded to gazette the vacancy in the office of the Sp eaker vide gazette 
notice no. 8413 dated 30th August , 2017. I also advertised for the position of the Speaker in 
the Nation Newspaper dated 31st August , 2017 and People's  Daily of the same date. 
Interest ed persons for the position of s peakership were infor med to collect nomination papers 
for election to the position of the Speaker from the office of the Clerk and submit the same 
after being duly filled by Monday, 4th September , 2017 at 9:00 a.m.  
The number of persons who picked the nomination papers were tw elve (12). The 
number of persons who returned the nomination papers by 4th September , 2017 at 9:00 a.m, 
which was the deadline was one in number, Aharub Ebrahim Kha tri.  
(Applause)  
Mr. Aharub Ebrahim Kha tri of Id N o. 239485374 voter no. 5244372028 was thus an 
unopposed candidate for Speakership. His nomination was proposed by Hon . Hamisi 
Mwidani, MCA Mtongwe Ward and seconded by Hon . Mohamed Hatimy MCA, Nominated. 
The nominee as was required availed the following documents;  duly filled nomination form, 
application letter, curriculum vitae, copy of n ational identity card, copy of c learance from 
Credit Reference Bureau  (CRB) , Independent Electoral Boundaries Co mmission (IEBC) 
clearance, tax c learance form from Kenya Revenue Authority  (KRA) , Higher Education 
Loans Board (HELB) c learance, clearance c ertificate from Ethics and Anti Corruption 
Authority  (EACC) , Certificate of Good Co nduct and academic certificates h e did avail .  
Standing Order 11 provides that if there is only one candidate who has been duly 
nominat ed for election as Speaker at the expiry of the nomination period, that candidate shall 
be declared forthwith to have been elected Speaker without any ballot or vote being required. 
Hon. Members , pursuant to S tanding Order 11 , I declare one, Aharub Ebrahim  Khatri of Id 
no. 239485374 as the Speaker  - elect of the Second Assembly of County Assembly of 
Mombasa.  
(Applause)  
Sergeant -At-Arms  and the two MCAs who proposed and seconded the nominee I 
direct that you usher in the Speaker  - elect to the Assembly.  
(Sergeant -At-Arms, Hon. Mwidani and H on. Mohamed Hatimy exit ed the Chamber ) 
(Silence ) 
September 6 , 201 7                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report  is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 (Mr. Speaker -elect  (Hon. Khatri ) was escorted into the C hamber  by H on. Mwidani and Hon. 
Mohamed Hatimy ) 
(Mr. Speaker -elect Hon. Khatri)  proceeded to the podium and  took the Oath  of office  as 
prescribed )  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I, Aharub Ebrahim Khatri, having been elected as 
Speaker of the County Assembly of Mombasa do swear/solemnly affirm that I shall always 
truly and diligently serve the people and the Republic of Keny a in the office of Speaker of the 
County Assembly in Mombasa County; that I shall respect, uphold, preserve, protect and 
defend this Constitution of the Republic of Kenya; and that I shall do right to all manner of 
persons in accordance with the Constituti on of Kenya and the laws and conventions of 
Parliament without fear or favour, affection or ill health.  So help me God . 
(Applause)  
Clerk  of County Assembly  (Mr. Juma) : Congratulations Hon . Speaker. H on. 
Members  the S peaker will now take charge . 
(Consultati ons) 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) took the Chair)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members  you may sit .  Distinguished guests,  Hon.  
Members  of the County Assembly of Mombasa,  ladies and gentlemen,  I would like to thank 
the Almighty God for the great favour he  has given me.  Hon.  Members  may I thank you for 
electing me as your Speaker. It is with great humility and a deep sense of duty that I take the 
Chair as Speaker of the County Assembly of Mombasa. I am grateful to all of you as you 
have made this possible.  Allow me to congratulate the Governor of the County Government 
of Mombasa, His Excellency, Hon.  Hassan Ali Joho for his re - election.  
(Applause)  
I also wish to congratulate the Deputy Governor of the County Government of 
Mombasa , His Excellency, Hon.  Willi am Kazungu Kingi.  As we move forward, I would like 
to assure the Governor and the Deputy Governor of our support as the County Assembly.  I 
also wish to congratulate the Senator and Women Representative of Mombasa County, Hon.  
Mohamed Faki and Hon.  Asha Mo hamed Hussein , and all elected leaders.  
(Applause)  
I believe that this County will hugely benefit from their leadership both at the Senate 
and the National Assembly respectively.  
(Applause)  
Hon.  Members , I wish to congratulate all of you on your victories . The residents of 
this great County have accorded you a great responsibility of serving them. Therefore let us 
maximise our efforts towards that end and I trust that we will all deliver.  
Hon.  Members , I am aware of the duty that is ahead of me. I promise that I will 
always do my best to serve this Assembly faithfully, honourably and effectively.  
Hon.  Members , I do believe that devolution requires a vibrant County Assembly that 
can effectively perform its functions of representation,  legislation and oversig ht. It is 
therefore upon us to make sure that this County Assembly promotes devolution while at the 
same time protecting the gains that have already been made.  
Hon.  Members , the residents of this County are looking up to the County Assembly 
and County Gove rnment for solutions to the problems that they face on a daily basis.  
Our people expect us to help provide jobs for the unemployed, improve access and 
quality of education, healthcare and generally give them hope. By so doing, this County 
Assembly will be responsive to the needs and aspiration of its residents.  
Hon.  Members , this County Assembly which is part of the County Government 
belongs to the residents of Mombasa. We must at all -time exercise honesty and accountability 
September 6 , 201 7                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report  is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 to meet the needs of the people.  I ask for your cooperation so as to make this County a 
success.  
Hon.  Members , you have done me a great honour. The people of this County have 
done all of us a great honour. Now, let’s work to change the lives of the people of Mombasa.  
(Applause)  
I have fa ith that with God on our side we will deliver.  
(Applause)  
Finally, please allow me to assure you that I will perform all my daily duties in 
accordance with the Constitution, the laws and the Standing Orders.  
Thank you and God Bless Mombasa.  
(Applause)  
Clerk please guide us. Clerk , next order?  
Clerk  of County Assembly (Mr. Juma) : Election of the Deputy S peaker.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Clerk , please continue.   
ELECTION OF HONORABLE DEPUTY SPEAKER  
Clerk  of County Assembly (Mr. Juma) : Hon. Members  on the 31st August , 2017 a 
notice was placed by the Clerk on the notice Board, Mombasa County Assembly Building 
notifying Members  of County Assembly who are interested in the position of Deputy Speaker   
to pick nomination papers from the office of the Clerk and sub mit the duly filled forms by 4th 
September , 2017 at 9:00 a.m.  
Hon. Members , pursuant to Article 178 S ub article  2 b and section 9 sub  section 4 and 
5 of the County Government A ct, 2012 the County A ssembly is empowered to elect a 
Member to act in the absenc e of the S peaker who is the Deputy Speaker, Members  were also 
informed  about this matter via a text message . From the register maintained at the office of 
the Clerk by the close of the aforesaid deadline , four MCA s had picked the nomination forms 
and only one submitted the duly filled nomination papers by 4th September , 2017, 9:00 a.m. 
Hon. Fadhili Makarani Mwalimu,  MCA Port  Reitz Ward was proposed by Hon. Kibwana 
Swaleh of Miritini Ward and seconded by Hon. Fatma Swaleh Mote, Nominated  MCA. Hon. 
Fadhili Mak arani Mwalimu having met all the requirements and unopposed, I hereby declare 
him the Deputy Speaker  - elect.  
(Applause)  
Hon.  Speaker, kindly proceed to  the podium  to administer  the Oath of Office to the 
Deputy Speaker  - elect.  Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makara ni... 
 (Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) exited his C hair and proceeded to the podium to 
administer the Oath of office to Deputy Speaker -elect Hon. F adhili Mwalimu Makarani ) 
(Deputy Speaker -elect ( Hon. Makarani)  took the O ath of office  as prescribed ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. M akarani) : I, Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani , having been 
elected as Deputy Speaker of the County Assembly of Mombasa do swear/solemnly aff irm 
that I shall always truly and diligently serve the people and the Republic of Kenya in the 
office of Deputy Speaker of the County Assembly in Mombasa County; that I shall respect, 
uphold, preserve, protect and defend this Constitution of the Republic o f Kenya; and that I 
shall do right to all manner of persons in accordance with the Constitution of Kenya and the 
laws and conventions of Parliament without fear or favour, affection or ill health.  So help me 
God. 
          Clerk  of County Assembly (Mr. Jum a): Congratulations . 
          Deputy Speaker (Hon. M akarani) : God Bless . 
(Applause)  
 (Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) resume d his seat ) 
(Applause)  
September 6 , 201 7                 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report  is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
          Hon.  Members , the H ouse stands adjourned until Tuesday  26th September , 2017 at 
2:30p.m.   
The House rose at 1 :35p.m. 
 
       
 
    
 
 
 
 