February 8, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
SPECIAL SITTING  
 
Tuesday , 8th February , 2022  
The House met at 11: 05a.m.  
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
            The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Honourable  Members y ou may  be seated.  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Good morning again Hon ourable  Members! Hono urable Members , I feel hono ured to 
welcome you back from the long recess which commenced on  Thursday  the Second day of 
December , 2021 and ended yesterday Monday, the  Seventh  day of Feb ruary , 2022. I trust you 
had a wonderful and fruitful break which  accorded  you ample time to be with your families and 
also interact with your  electora te. I also want to believe that you all commenced the year well ; I 
thank the Almighty God for keeping us s afe and granting us opportunity to meet again 
refreshed  and eager to discharge our constitutional mandate for the benefit of Mombasa people.   
Hono urable  Members , today  being Tuesday, the Eighth day of February , 2022  we resume 
our regular sittings  which  mark the commencement of the Sixth and final Session of the Second 
Assembly.   I urge that we embark on this last Session of this Assembly with vigor  and 
enthusiasm  that our duty demands.  Hono urable Members,  you will recall that prior to the 
Assembly commencin g its long recess in December , 2021  there were pending businesses  from 
various Committees. For instance, there are  two reports that were committed to the Committee 
on Education, Information  Technology , and Mombasa Vision 2035, and Committee on Trade, 
Touri sm, and  Investments . These r eports were The Mombasa County ICT Policy and 
Mombasa  Industrial  Park respectively ; I implore upon the Chairpersons of these and other   
Committees to fast -track all pending business before their Committees especially  the proposed 
legislation, reports, among  other business so that our out put as an Assembly   may have an impact 
in the positive transformation of Mombasa County. I also  encourage  Members to be proactive 
and generate business such as Motions, Bills that  will have a posit ive impact on our people.  
Honourable Members,  as you are all aware, this is an election year with the General Elections 
scheduled for   9th August, 2022. Consequently, this has affected the budgetary timelines of 
the County .  

February 8, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 For instance, the Mombasa County  Appropriation Bill , 2022 and the Mombasa   County 
Finance Bill , 2022 which are ordinarily to be passed by the Assembly on or   before 30th June and 
30th September respectively will now be considered and are to be  passed by the Assembly on or 
before 31st Marc h, 2022.  Honourable  Members,  indeed we are still living in extra -ordinary times, 
particularly  with the persiste nce and variation of the COVID -19 pandemic. I therefore urge you 
to strictly  adhere to the regulations guiding this Assembly and those of the Ministry  Health  and 
by so doing, we will be able to tackle and prevent the spread of this scourge.  Honourable 
Members , it is my hope that in the remaining period, we will bequeath this Second 
Assembly  with a rich legacy worth emulating by successive Assembli es. This is because 
as Members  you have tirelessly grown your capacity to execute your mandates 
of Representation , Legislation and Oversight. I would also like to remind you that as  leaders  we 
should always adhere to and be guided by Chapter Six of the Con stitution  of Kenya 2010 on 
Leadership and Integrity.  Honourable Members , as I conclude, this is to remind you that even as 
campaign season is gaining  momentum  by the day, we still have our constitutional duties that we 
must perform and which are scheduled  to end as per the Mombasa County Assembly Calendar 
for the Sixth Session. It is also our responsibility to preach and uphold peace, embrace 
our diversity  as Kenyans, tolerance and unity. Let us desist from divisive politics and  instead  
engage in construct ive conversations that would add value to the lives of our  people  and 
generations to come.  Hono urable Members I thank you and wish you well.   Ahsanteni ! 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk , next order please?  
 
MOTION  
APPROVAL OF MEMBERS OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY B USINESS COMMITTEE  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani , the Leader of Majority party, ple ase move the 
Motion . 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg 
to move the following Motion that  pursuant to the provisi on of Standing O rder 152, this 
Assembly approves the  appointments of the following Members, nominated by the C ounty 
Assembly Party to be the Members of the County Assembly Business Committee;   
1. Hon.  Aharub E. Khatri-Chairperson  
2. Hon.  Hamisi Musa Mwidani -Vice Chairperson  
3. Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu  
4. Hon.  Junior Wambua  
5. Hon.  Ramla Said 
6. Hon.  Hamida Noor 
7. Hon.  Moses Aran 
8. Hon.  Ahmed Khamis  
9. Hon.  Faith  Mwende  
10. Hon.  Feddis Mbura 
11. Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh 
12. Hon.  Amriya Boy Juma  
13. Hon.  Francis Nzai 
February 8, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 As a Member and I wish to call u pon Hon ourable Amriya to second the Motion. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
Hon. Amriya  Juma : Thank you , I rise to second.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri): Honourable Members , I now propose a question that the 
Motion  by Honourable Hamisi Musa on Approval of Members of the County Assembly  Business 
Committee be considered in this House. 
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes, Honourable Hamisi  Musa Mwidani?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mheshimiwa Spika  hii ni Kamati   inaweza 
kupanga kazi  ya biashara ya Bunge . Kama t unavyoju a  kwamba tulikuwa kwa  mapumziko   kwa  
hivyo sheria inatupa ni lazima tutengeze Kamati hii ndiyo Bunge li weze kuendelea ; kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa   yangu ni kuona  nimesoma wanachama wa Kamati  wa hii Kamati na hii ni 
taratibu  ambayo pia inaweza kup ewa nguvu na chama . Kwa hiyo B wana Spika ningeomba 
Memba  tuweze kuunga   hii Kamati  kwa sababu ya ku weza  kutekeleza wajibu  wetu  kama 
Wabunge. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Thank  you Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani . Yes, 
Honourable  Charles Kitula? Please make your contribution . 
 
Hon. Kitula : Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii ku weza kuchangia hoja 
hii. Mheshimi wa Spika  langu kuu ni ku weza kusema tu naf ikiri  kuna utata  katika Kanuni za 
Bunge  zetu  na zinastahili  kurekebishwa ; hata tukiangalia katika Bunge  la Kitaifa  anaposimama 
Kiongozi ambaye anasoma hoja kama hii ambayo inamhususu yeye moja k wa moja huwa ni 
Mwanachama mw engine anastahili kusoma hoja hiyo na uta ratibu  ambao unaotazamwa katika  
Bunge la Kitaifa haiwezekani ati wewe  ni Mwanachama unapitishwa siku kama ya leo we we 
unasoma hoja alafu mtu anaye unga mkono ni mtu ambaye pia ni Mwanachama wa Kamati  ile! 
Kwa hiyo hiyo si utaratibu na kulingana na  maoni yangu mimi napinga vikali.  Ahsante  sana.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri):Thank you Honourable  Charles  Kitula, maybe  if you can 
recall the Standing Order? 
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Ni Standing  Order gani Mheshimi wa labda ndiyo utueleze . 
 
[Consulta tion] 
 
Thank  you. Yes, Honourable Junior  Wambua ? Please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Wambua : Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika. Nafikiri tuko wazima na tumetoka katika 
mapumziko marefu na tumefanya kazi nzuri sana wengi tuliweza kukutana huko mashinani. 
February 8, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Mheshimiwa Spika , Kamati ambayo imeletwa na kiongozi wa waliowengi , naona 
imekamilika kisawa sawa, naona ni watu ambao wanakuja katika Bunge, wanachangia katika 
Bunge na wanajibika katika Bunge n aona wataweza kuendelez a Bunge kisawa sawa. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Khatri): Thank you Hon. Junior Wambua. Yes Hon. Solomon 
Ngugi.  
 
 Hon. Solomon Ngugi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Ni shukurani za dhati niregeshe 
kwa Mwenyezi Mungu kuwa wenzangu we nza wako hapa nashukuru tukiwa wazima 
tumekwenda likizo wengine wametembelea sehemu zao za makazi. Mimi nataka niuunge mkono 
hoja hii na hii kamati uliyochaguwa tukiangalia kwa uzuri nikaona kuna uislamu umetendeka, 
utaratibu umefuatwa wa kutosha, waliocha guliwa naona wana hekima za kutosha za kuendesha 
Bunge hili. Mimi sina mengine ya kuongezea ila ni hayo ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
 
 The Hon. Speaker:  (Hon. Aharub Khatri): Thank you Hon. Solomon Ngugi. Yes Hon. 
Lucy Chizi.  
 
 Hon. Lucy Chizi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Langu nitamshukuru Mwenyezi 
Mungu aliyetulinda kutoka mwaka jana mpaka tukaona huu mwaka, tunampa shukurani sana. 
Mheshimiwa Spika hoja iliyoletwa mbele yetu ninaiuunga mkono isipokuwa Chief Whip  wetu  
yuwataka atudhalilishe  hapa s oteni ni tunawajibika ndio maana tumechaguliwa katika Bunge 
hili. Hakuna yeyote ambaye ni mbaya…  
(Applause)  
 
  Sote ni wazuri na hawa ambao wamechaguliwa Mheshimiwa Spika tunaamini watatenda 
kazi kulingana na ile Kaunti yetu ambavyo inasema . Ahsante sana.  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Lucy Chizi. Yes Hon ourable  Ahmed 
Salama.  
 
 Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi langu ni kuunga mkono hii 
hoja iliyoletwa leo na  Mheshimiwa Hamisi Musa Mwidani  na kusema l ile la ukweli tukiangalia 
orodha vile ilivyo,  angalia nambari ya kwanza hap a naona Mheshimiwa Aharub Khatri, 
Mheshimiwa Musa Mwidani, Mheshimiwa Fadhili Mwalimu na wengineo wote. Hio  ni timu 
ambayo ni ngangari nai unga mkono na itafany a kazi vizuri. Kwa hivyo nataka kusema ya 
kwamba nawatakia kila la heri katika kazi yao. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Hamis i Musa Mwidani please 
reply to the Motion.  
  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Mhes himiwa Spika . Pia ningetoa 
shukrani kwa wahe shimi wa wote ambao wameweza kui unga mk ono hii hoja. Na Pia ningeomba 
Kamati tuwe na wakati m zuri wa kuweza kuitekeleza hii Kamati kwa sababu ndio uti wa 
mgongo wa Nyumba hii. Kwa hivyo Wanachama  nawashukuru sana kwa mchango wenu na 
kuweza kupitisha hii hoja. Ahsante sana.  
February 8, 2022                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  
[Applause ] 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani. Hon ourable  
Members , I now put a question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Hamisi Musa on Approval of 
Mem bers of the County Assembly Business Committee  to be adopted in this House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
Yes Clerk , next Order please.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 8th February , 2022 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11 :25a.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 