February 9, 2021                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 9th February , 2021  
The House met at 11:00a.m. 
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated . 
[Silence ] 
 Yes Cl erk, next Order please?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Thank you again Hon. Members. Hon. Members, I trust you are well. I take this 
opportunity to welcome you back from the long recess which commenced on Thursday, 3rd 
December, 2020 and ended on Monday, 8th February , 2020. You have had ample time to interact 
with your electorates and now you are ready to continue with your legislative , representati on and 
oversight roles.  Hono urable Members, during the recess period we had two special sittings on 
22nd January , 2021 and 26th January , 2021. We have therefore met as an Ass embly in 2021. We 
commence the County Assembly calendar for 2021 today bei ng Tuesday 9th February , 2021 as 
per the Mombasa County Assembly Standing O rders.  
 Hono urable Members, as you are aware this being a new session in our legislative 
calendar 2021, there are some business which have to  be prioritize d such as reconstitution of the 
Count y Assembly Busi ness Committee which is as per Standing Order 152 of the Mombasa 
County A ssem bly Standing Orders. Any other Committees which need to be reconstituted due to 
expiry of their period in accordance with the Standing Orders should be reconstitute d. 
 Honourable  Members, COVID 19 is still here with us and we must be at th e forefront in 
adhering to the Ministry of H ealth guidelines on the deadly virus. As an Assembly we are 
committed to ensuring t he environment is safe for our Members and staff and all our visitors.  
 Honourable  Members, I must applaud you for the exemplary leadership that you 
exhib ited during the passing of the F inance Bill , 2020. You took your time to scrutinize the Bill 
and by the time you were passing it, you ensured that the residents of Mombasa  views and 
sentiments were taken into consideration , especially now that the economy is still grappling with 
effects of COVID 19.  

February 9, 2021                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  I must also applaud our  able Governor , His Excellency Hon ourable  Hassan Ali Joho for 
assenting to the Finance Bill , 2020. It is a clear i ndication that he is alive to the plight of majority 
of Mombasa residents who are to recover from global economic slump.  My prayer has been that 
a lasting solution to this pandemic will be found and that we there will global revamp from the 
adverse effects  of Corona.   
 Honourable  Members , at the start of every session we expec t two documents; one being 
the County Fiscal Strategy P aper to be submitted by 28th February as per Section 117 of the PFM 
Act. When the document will be submitted, kindly scrutinize through di ligently and point  out 
any areas of conce rn. Se ek clarification if need  be as this will enable  your understanding of how 
the C ounty runs it is affairs. The County Fiscal Strategy Pa per provides for insights into County 
revenue and expenditure. It  also sets ceiling for sectors ; given that we are the people’s eyes, let 
us play our representation mandate to the best of ability.                                                            
 Honourable  Members , second is the Debt Management Strategy Statement to be 
submitted on or before 28th February. This document is of great importance as we seek 
progre ssion i n our County. Financial constraint is an enemy to progression ; therefore,  it is my 
humbl e hope that this document shall provide for appropriate measures that  will ensure the debts 
remain at a sustainable level.  
 Honourable  Members, as you are aware  Mombasa County has been proposed as the final 
venue to the host the Third  Edition of the County Asse mbly Sports Association (CASA) games , 
2021. Given that as a County we suf fered challenging economics times due to C OVID 19, this 
will aid in the road to economic recovery as it will propel domestic tourism in the County. We 
therefore appreciate this opportunity. Sports are a powerful  tool for the promotion  of inclusion 
and devel opment of positive self -image. May the CASA , 2021 games bring about meaningful 
interaction and enhance our social interactions with other Counties Assemblies.  
 Honourable  Members , may I also bring it to your attention that on 28th January , 2021, I 
received a letter  dated 26th January , 2021 from the independent Electoral and B oundaries 
Commission  (IEBC) on transmission of the (Constitutional Amendment) Bi ll, 2021 to the 
County Ass emblies which I proceed to read.  
RE: TRANSMISSION OF THE BBI (CONSTITUTIONAL AMEND MENT ) BILL, 2020  TO THE COUNTY 
ASSEMBLIES  
Reference is made to the above matter.  
The Independent  Electoral and Boundaries  Commission  (‘The Commission’) received  a 
draft Bill to amend the Constitution by Popular Initiative pursuant to Article 257 of the 
Constitut ion of Kenya , 2010 dub bed Building Bridges Initiative . The said Initiative was 
promoted by Hon. Dennis Waweru and Hon. Junet Mohamed.  
In compliance with Article 257(4) of the Constitution  of Kenya, 2010 , the Commission 
undertook a verification exercise to  ascertain whether the Building Bridges Initiative is 
supported by at least one million registered voters.  
The Commission through interim verification of data captured as of 19th January , 2021 
has confirmed and is satisfied that the initiative has been supp orted by 1,140,845 
registered voters.  
This is therefore to notify you that the initiative has met the requisite threshold  as 
provided in Article 257 Sub Section  4 of the Constitution of Kenya , 2010 pursuant to 
Article 257 Sub Section 5 of the Constitution of K enya , 2010. The Commission  hereby 
submits a copy of the draft Bill BBI Constitution A mendment , 2020 to your County 
Assembly for consideration within three months from the day therefore.  
February 9, 2021                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 In conformity  with Article 257 Sub Section 6 , you are required to submit the decision of 
your County Assembly to the Speaker of the National Assembly and the S enate within 
three month s from the date of this letter. Chebukati C hairperson . 
 The letter was signed by the Chai rperson , Wafula Chebukati.  
 Honourable Members , the draft Bill is to b e tabled and considered within three months of 
the date of receiving from Mombasa County Assembly , thereafter the decision  of the County 
Assembly is to be conve yed to the Senate and the National Assembly . I trust we shall fast-track 
the process and conclude the matter expe ditiously . Honourable  Members , we are in the last year 
before we go for elections so i urge you all to preach peace and love to electorates and also to 
ensure tha t you  will leave a mark in the Second Assembly in terms of legislation  that you have 
passed, how well you have represented your electorates and you have effectively exercised your 
legislative authority.  
 Last but not least , as we take the walk towards common goal s; that  is serving the people 
of Mombasa, I wish you all nothing but the best, May Go d bless you. And I welcome you all to 
this session.  Thank you.  
 Honourable  Members , I have another communication to communicate which is a sad 
communication but we all know that Hon. Members that we have lost our brother Hon. 
Moha med Hatimy and I would  like to ta ke this opportunity to announce that following  the 
demise of Hon. Moha med Hatimy that occurred  on Saturday 14th of November , 2020, h e was a 
Member of the County Assembly Pursuant  to Section 177 of the Constitution . So, I hereby 
declare his seat vacant . 
 Thank  you Hon ourable  Members , I would just like to urge on this issue na nitazungumza 
kwa Kiswahili ndugu zangu waheshimiwa , nafikiri sote hap a tuna masikitiko na tunaju a 
tumepoteza ndugu yetu Mohamed Hatimy na kiungo muhimu sana katika hili Bunge letu hata 
kama wengi ne wetu tulikuwa na tofauti nae  lakini tunaju a kuna umuhimu mwingi sana 
tumepoteza kwa kumpoteza huyu ndugu yetu. Na yote hayo ni maamrisho ya Mwenyezi Mungu, 
kwa hio  Mwenyezi Mungu anaju a zaidi. Lakini leo sisi ambao tuko hapa na tuko hai, ningeomba 
ndugu z angu tujaribuni hii nafasi  ambayo tumepatiwa leo tumemaliza miaka mitatu sisi 
tumechaguliwa kama viongozi katika Bunge hili na tumebakisha mwaka mmoja na nusu.  
Tujaribuni vile tunavyoweza kusaidia hawa ndugu zetu wa Mombasa maana yake tuko na 
majukumu, h ata sisi kesho utakuja kusikia mwengine ametuacha, mwengine yuko duniani ama 
baada ya miaka mitano utasikia wengine hawajarudi tena kweny e hili Jumba. Lakini kesho 
mbele ya Mwenyezi Mungu tutakuwa na majukumu.   
 Kwa hi yo, tujaribuni ndugu zangu, tafadhali nawaomb a waheshimiwa tuchuku e mfano 
wa ndugu yetu Mohamed Hatimy ambaye tulikuwa na ye hapa na tunaju a alikuwa akipigania 
sana kutetea watu wa Mombasa na leo hayuko na sisi yuko mbele ya haki ya Mwenyezi Mungu. 
Hivyo basi  sisi tuliobakia hapa katika hili Bunge tujaribun i, tujaribu kutetea haki za ndugu zetu, 
mama zetu, watoto wetu maana yake yale mambo tutakayo kuyafanya hapa, kesho ndio yatakayo 
kuja kusaidia watoto wetu.  
 Hivyo basi , tuwekeni tofauti zetu kando tukifika katika hili Bunge tusiitane yule ni wa 
huyu sijui ni wa m rengo fulani, tuangalie interest  ya yale yaliyo  tuleta katika hili Bunge ili 
kusaidia watu  wetu wa Mombasa. Kwa maana tumebakisha mwaka mmoja na nusu, tutakuja 
kujuta nawaambia tena ndugu zangu. Leo tuko katika hili Bunge, kesho hatutakuwa hapa lakini 
tutak uja kujuta maana yake tukiwa kule nje tutaona vile yale mambo yanavyofanyika, tutasema 
lau tungekuwa tunaweza ule wakati tuko katika hili Bunge tungeweza kurekebisha, na wakati ni 
sasa ambao tunao uwezo.  
February 9, 2021                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        1 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Kwa hi yo, kwa nini tungoje kesho tuko nje za ofisi tuanze k ujuta? Kama tuna  uwezo 
turekebisheni tuhakikishe mama zetu, baba zetu, watoto wetu watakuja kulindwa na hii Serikali 
yetu ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa.   Kwa hayo machache ahsanteni na Mungu awabariki nyote.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk, next Order please?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members , this House stands adjourned until 9th February , 2021 at 2 :30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11 :21a.m. 
 
 
 