April 10 , 201 8                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor 
Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 10th April , 2018  
The House met at 2 :42p.m. 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
The Speaker : Hon. Members we  may be seated.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE  CHAIR  
Hon. Members,  First and foremost I would like to thank the Almighty God for 
preserving us , for I see we are all in good health.  
Hon. Members,  once again I am reminding you that we are here to serve  a common 
purpose and that is;  efficient  service del ivery to the people of Mombasa in relation to o ur 
mandates as outlined in the Fourth S chedule of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.   
Hon. Members,  I kindly urge all of you to be mindful of the rules and procedures, 
customs and traditions governing our worki ng environment. It is of importance that we 
unde rstand the Standing Orders and l aws that stand relevant to our duties.  
Hon. Members,  in conclusion, many ha ve been said and done,  I humbly pray that we 
shall work with the same spirit and enthusiasm to consol idate our mandates and deliver to the 
highest of our people’s expectations.  
With those few remarks,  Hon. Members , Mungu awabariki ! Ahsanteni s ana. 
(Applause)  
Yes Clerk ? 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
ESTABLISHMENT OF DATA BANK FOR ALL THE BRI GHT AND POOR STUDENT S IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon. Hatimy , please give the notice of M otion.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker  I take this o pportunity to 
give a notice of Motion under the M otion of , establishment of databank for all the bright and 
poor students in the  County. Mr. Speaker sir I beg t o give notice of the following M otion.  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved the notice of Motion)  
THAT AWARE that the bright students from poor family backgrounds who score 70 per 
cent or the total mar ks in the Kenya Certificate of Pr imary E ducation (KCPE) fail to join 
form one in every year for lack of school fees;  
Mr. Speaker Sir FURTHER AWARE THAT Article 53(1)  (b) of the C onstitution 
guarantees every child the right to free  and compulsory basic education;  
April 10 , 201 8                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor 
Page 2 Recognizing the need to id entify bright students from poor backgrounds  and support 
them in pursuing  and completing their studies  in public secondary schools;  
Recognizing Mr. Speaker that the need to identify bright students from poor 
backgrounds and support them in pursuing and com pleting their studies in public 
secondary .   
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy paused)  
I think Mr. Speaker we need to amend the notice and I do hereby apply for a leave to be 
granted so that the body of this M otion is amended.   
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy resumed moving the M otion)  
CONCERNED THAT if the trend is not checked bright students from poor families will 
be left out of the learning process hence ruining their future;  
I therefore urge this Assembly to resolve that:  
The County g overnment to establish a public databank o f all bright and poor students to 
be in the custody of the County  Director of E ducation and such information b e 
disseminated and made available to the p ublic including the respective Constituency 
Development F und Committee and such other institutions that may be willing to support 
such students.  
Mr. Speaker I apply for a leave because I don ’t want to come and table this M otion then 
to be told that there are some words which are not in this notice , so I need you to grant me 
permission. Mr. Speaker thank you  and I beg to move. Thank you sir . 
The Speaker : Thank you Hon. Hatimy, permission granted. Next order ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 11th April , 2018 at 
9:00a.m. 
The House r ose at 2 :50p.m. 
 
 
 