March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 21st March, 2019  
The House met at 2:46p.m. 
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Good afternoon. Let us pray.  
(Prayers)  
 Have yo ur seats. Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON  AGRICULTURE , LIVESTOCK AND 
COOPERATIVES HON . WAMBUA ON DISTRIBUTI ON OF LIVESTOCK IN T HE COUNTY  
 Yes Chairman Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries, Livestock and Cooperatives, 
Hon. Junior Wambu a Kyaka?  
 Hon. Wambua:  Yes Mr. Speaker Sir.  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone . 
 Hon. Wambua:  Mr. Speaker Sir…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just a minute.  
(Mic rophone  testing)  

March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Hon.  Wambua: Mr. Spea ker Si r I wish to give the following S tatement on 
Distribution of Livestock within the County  in response to concerns raised by Hon. Charles 
Kitula on Tuesday, 21st February , 2019.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir below are the groups and criteria used to determine the l ivestock 
breeding stock.  Extension is demand driven. Farmers or goups of farmers visit livestock 
offices in the entire Sub -Counties as well as the County h eadquarters to seek the information 
or knowledge on the type of livestock they would like to keep, th en trainings follow.  
 The general criterion for distributing livestock to groups is as follows;  
1. The group  must have been trained on the l ivestock production.  
2. The group must have bought the equipment to use when feeding the livestock and 
watering.  
3. Some memb ers must be alrea dy be rearing the same kind of l ivestock.  
4. The group must have a proper house for the animals.  
5. What is given is breeding stock so group members or individual farmers must be 
ready to pass on off springs to other members. For goats they pass on six  months 
kids, rabbits they pass on three  months kids and for poultry they pass on day old 
chicks.  
6. The group must be registered with Social Services.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir,  
Specific criteria for Dairy Goats  
 These are distributed in the peri urban Sub -Counties to group members who have 
land to grow fodder, then the first female kid is supposed to be passed on to other members. 
Members given had to construct the houses and plant fodder crops.  Goats given so far since 
devolution are 90 dairy goats as shown  in the table.  I hope everybody has his copy, s hould I 
go ahead and read?  
(Members said they had the copies ) 
 Okay. Names, W ard, contact person and phone numbers .  
1. Upawa, Shanzu Ward  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Juni or I underst and each and every 
Member has a copy so there is no need of reading the names of the beneficiaries...  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Wambua:  Thank you.  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : ...So there is no need of reading the nam es 
of the beneficiarie s unless M embers have got queries  or they want to react on that S tatement 
or your report , so let some M embers to react on your report. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 (Background consultation)  
 Let Hon. Bwire  react.  
 Hon.  Bwire:  Mheshim iwa Spika najaribu kumfahamisha Mhe shimiwa 
Mwanakamati wa Kamati hii ya kwamba umetoa agizo kwamba kila mtu anao ujumbe huu 
kwa karatasi sasa ni reactions  kutoka kwa Wanachama . Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti nafurahi 
sana kwamba I dara hii inaweza kufanya kazi chini ya Waziri na nilipopata habari hiz i 
Mheshimiwa nimeweza kupigia watu wawili ambao wanasemekana kutoka Junda kuulizia 
endapo kwa kweli walipata mradi huu wa sungura na wamekiri ya kwamba walipata sungura 
hao watatu watatu. Ila Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti shida ninayo tu ni hizi hela zilizotumika 
kununua hawa sungura 300 zimetumika Kshs.1, 485, 000 ! Ukipiga hesabu yako Mheshimiwa 
Spika utapata kwamba sungura mmoja alinunuliwa Kshs.4950 , wengine wetu tumefu ga hawa 
wanyama tukiwa tungali vijana kabla uzao haujaingia na mimi kwa ufahamu wangu kama 
yuko sungura ambao unaweza kumnunua kwa bei gali zaidi ni Kshs.600 , huo ndio ufahamu 
wangu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Kwa hivyo licha ya kwamba nakubaliana kwamba Idara hii ina nia ya kukuza 
wafugaji lakini hizi hela zilizotumika kununua hawa wanyama Mheshimiwa Spik a hata 
ukamwambia kipofu ambae hajawahi ona sungura maishani mwake lakini akimpapasa kwa 
ule udogo wake atakueleza kwamba hii pesa ni nyingi sana kwa sungura mmoja . Hivyo basi  
mimi naitilia shauku sana idara hii jinsi ili vyotumia hiz i pesa zake kununua haw a mifugo;  
mimi Mheshimiwa Spika ni hayo tu nimekua nayo, hii ripoti hainifurahishi kabisa hususan 
hizi hela zilizotumika . Kwa hivyo mimi ningeliomba Kamati chini ya W enyekiti wa 
Mheshimiwa mzee wangu rafi ki yangu Junior Wambua irudi imuulize W aziri na ofis i yake 
kamili na tunataka sisi Mheshimiwa Spika hata ikibidi watuleke pale ambapo walinunua 
hawa sungura. Hizi tunasema kwamba hatutaki pesa ya mwananchi wa Mombasa itumike 
kiholela holela…  
    (Applause)  
 Hatutaki w atu waje wafanye biashara na il hali wana pata mishahara , tunataka pesa 
ya mwananchi itumike ndio tubaki na  akiba  hata twaweza tena fanyia shughuli zingine. 
Ahsante sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Tobias use the 
microphone  infront of you.  
 Hon.  Samba: Yes thank you Mr . Speaker. First of all let me thank the Hon . 
Chairman for Agriculture , at least for the first time we are given a report even though it is not 
convincing, not satisfying but at least he has tried. Hon. Speaker on lighter note as my fellow 
colleague raised  alarm on the prices of the products you will see even when it comes to 
poultry, one poultry as indicated here goes for Kshs.1400 and I do not think whether they are 
giving grown up birds I think they are giving out chicks. So I have never seen where a day  or 
three days old chick cost Kshs.1400 and I woul d wish to urge these Committee M embers or 
the Committee Chairs it seems that the Committee maybe we do not understand the role that 
you are supposed to play it is even unfair for a Committee Chairman to bri ng this report as it 
is. Does it mean that they did not see for themselves or what were they doing?  
 And it is a norm of this House Hon. Spea ker that most of the Committee M embers 
you find that instead of questioning the Executive Department concerned you  will find that 
they side with them . 
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  But in the process of you given this report and then you just car ry this report and 
bring it to M embers since we need a report ! Hon. Speaker it is high time even if we need to 
take these Chairmen for a training so that  at least they may know the back of the County 
Assembly lies in the Committees not even the Plenaries , no. In the Committess that is where 
everything is done so I would urge my friend Hon. Wambua next time at least do not bring 
for us a report where even y ou yourself when you are  reading it you are doubting it,  I would 
also request tha t the programme itself is good but you find a mechanism where you can reach 
mwananchi  to the  grassroot  you see the essence of devolution was to devolve everything to  
the grass roots,  these are not the only group s that need ed all these products we have several 
groups but at least make it known through your Department. Thank you Mr. Speaker for my 
contribution.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Athman?  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Nikijaribu kupiga 
msasa ripoti iliyoletwa mbele yetu na Mwenyekiti mwenza wa Kilimo mimi mwenyewe 
nikiwa M wanakamati wa Kamati hii Mheshimiwa nimeona kuna baadhi ya mushkil tu, 
baadhi ya matumizi ya pesa na  vile vile pia maeneo ambayo yanasemekana sungura hawa 
walipelekwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimejaribu kuangalia eneo langu la Jomvu na vile vile 
nikathibitisha kuwa sungura…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Athuman  I understand you are  part 
and parcel of that Committee and from the report that is before the House we are not seeing 
any report that says that you are against that report that has been brought by the Chair.  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti samahani ikiwa ni thibitis he au 
nimethibitisha ripoti hii kwanza hu wa tuwe tumekaa ndio utajua nimekubaliana nayo ama 
sijakubaliana nayo. Kwa hivyo mimi nimepata ripoti hii takriban dakika 30 tu zilipopita 
tukiwa tunapata cha mchana kwa hivyo niko na haki…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deput y Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Athumani , just have 
a seat I will return back the report so that the Committee sits on it and we are returning the 
report to…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon.Thoya:  Pale mahali watarekebisha  ni wapi? Sio ati kuiregesha tu .  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwam wiri what was the 
concern? I think he will be the last person to react from this repo rt. 
 Hon.  Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti n ikitangaza msimamo mimi pia ni Mwanakam ati katika K amati hii na haya 
yaliyoko hapa ndio ukweli tuliopata kutoka kule na sisi kama Kamati tulikua na masuali 
mengi mpaka ikatulazimu tuite akiwemo afisa mkuu wa Idara hii na Mkurugenzi wake . 
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Na katika yale majibu aliyotupa hatukuweza kugeuza manen o ilibidi tuonyeshe 
idadi ama kima cha senti kilivyotumika kwa kila mgao ; mfano tumezungumzia tu sungura 
peke yake huku pia kwa kuku Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mwaka wa kifedha wa 2017 kulikua 
na walakini japo mwaka  huu wa 2018/2019 walirekebisha. W alinimakisha  walinunua 
kifaranga kwa Kshs.1400 na mwaka huu tulionao wamenunua baadhi ya vifaranga kwa 
Kshs.635 kidogo huko kumekua na mwangaza lakini kule nyuma pia kulikua na bei za 
kiutapeli utapeli.  
 Mheshimiwa haya tulipoyadadisi kwa kina tulipata kuelekezwa ya kwamba shida 
inatoka kwa idara ya kupeana zabuni wao wanapeleka mapendekezo na market rate  lakini 
katika Idara ya zabuni wao huleta ma supplier  wakaleta kwa mgao na fedha ambazo wao 
wamepitisha na kuzilipia. Kwa hivyo labda Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa uongoz i wako 
naona ni wakati mwafaka hii idara ya zabuni ama Procurement  katika Wizara yetu ya Fedha 
iweze kumulikwa kwa ruhusa yako kwa sababu sisi tume shughulika na K amati lakini pia wao 
wamekua wakilia ya kwamba wanaletewa bidhaa kwa bei ambazo sizo za kisawa  na hawana 
kauli ya kuuliza sasa ni jukumu kama Bunge tumeileta kama ilivyo ili Bunge ione ijue shida 
iko wapi na kwa muongozo wako tuweze kufuatilia shida hii na kuitatua…  
(Applause)  
 Lakini sisi kama Kamati si kwamba haya hatukuyaona, tulikua na shida na yo na 
mpaka tukalazimu maafisa wahusika waje na katika kuzungumza kwao walipeleka shida hii 
katika idara ya fedha ya kwamba kitendo cha zabuni ndicho kilicho weka bei hizi japo wao 
kama Idara hawako radhi nacho lakini  majukumu yetu ni  ya kusema ndio au la.  Kwa hivyo 
maelekezo yako Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti itak ua suluhu ya hizi shida ambazo K amati nyingi 
zinapitia. Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I think I was giving 
direction on this issue I had said we are returning back t he report to the Committee because 
there are a lot of emerging issues that they have to look upon on the whatever that the Hon . 
Members are not satisfied with from distribution, the purchase and e verything. I will also ask 
any M ember from Public Accounts C ommittee you will make a follow up on the purchasing 
of these animals and also PAC to bring a report in a week’s time , we need a report to this 
Honourable House. Yes Hon. Thoya what is it because I have already ruled on that issue?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you I  appreciate your ruling but as much they are retiring to 
look at this report it is much better you give us opportunity to ventilate so that wajue ni 
mahali gani wanaenda kurekebisha kwa sababu ukweli ripoti inawarudia lakini pia mimi 
ningepewa nafasi katik a sehemu ya ugawanyaji wa mbuzi … 
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya the Committee will s it so when 
they s it just forward whatever that you think is not right in this report so that they rectify 
please. Infact Hon . Members this is  just a response but when they return it back to this House 
we will need to come as a report and follow the proper way so that Hon . Members can debate 
on it. I am denying you chances of debating on this issu e because it is just a response, s o we 
would like  the Committee when  it comes back it has to lay a P aper on this Honourable House 
so th at their report can be debated o n this floor. Maybe when it comes and it is approved then 
the Committee will have the day but if it is being disapproved they will have to  look upon the 
report. Yes Clerk let us proceed.  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 STATEMENT  
 Majority Leader is not around so it will come next week same time. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
 Yes even the Majority Leader is not around to come next week.  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON ENV IRONM ENT HON . SHEBE ATHMAN ON 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMEN T IN THE COUNTY OF MOMBASA  
 Hon. Shebe Athumani?  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Yes thank you Hon. Speaker. Mr. Speake r I wish to give the 
following S tatement on the situation of the solid waste management in the County o f 
Mombasa. Let me begin by Junda Mr. Speaker , I think Honourable Members have already 
done the nee dful by making sure that every Member has a copy of my S tatement so let me 
proceed by Junda, Junda has been cleared as of 28th February 2019…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Hon. Athumani we are in order Number 10 
Garbage pile up in Airport Ward.  
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker. The statement Hon. Speaker wa s 
prepared generally for whole W ards but if I am going to answer the Airpor t Ward on 25th 
July, 2018 the Department cleared KERRA and also Saratoga –battery  with 61 trips so illegal 
dumping still is on going. On 8th March , 2019 they did eight  trips to clear the Saratoga but up 
to date they have not yet finished still there is wor k going on in Saratoga . Hon. Speaker so 
that is per as the Airport Ward.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. I can see the Hon . 
Member from Airport Ward.  
 Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for the chance granted. Mr. Speaker Sir 
I have just listened very carefully to the response this particular Statement concerning the 
collection of garbage in Saratoga Airport Ward. This S tatement that is just been read by the 
Chairman, I can confirm that this S tatement is not true. It is not true at all this is not what is 
on the gro und; Mr. Speaker S ir is here saying that, the word cleared means that they removed 
everything , that is the meaning of clearing and therefore they said after they had cleared  there 
was an illegal dumping that started immedi ately.  You can see that one is escape-goat taking 
place t hey are tr ying to run away from the truth; Mr. Speaker S ir, the truth is that this 
dumping site has taken around two years. It has never been removed , they  tried to remove but 
they removed almost an  eighth of the bulk and that is why I requested that this Department 
must come out clearly on how they are going to remove this garbage from that particular 
place but with this one I disagree total ly Mr. Speaker S ir. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mw alimu) : Yes Hon. Athuman Shebe.  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Hon. Shebe  Athman : Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member has to appreciate one thing ; I 
took a personal initiative to go there myself and the magnitude of that garbage there, honestly 
Mr. Speaker, it cannot even be removed in two m onths time even if we are going to dispose 
all the necessary machinery because at the moment in my department I have only 12 trucks 
and the garbage there it has been there since two years back so the Hon. Member has to 
appreciate the fact that there is som e work going on. Hon. Speaker, I took a personal 
initiative I went there myself…  
(Applause)  
  I went to Kongowea ..., so he has to appreciate something is being done but if he 
wants to be specific  when will be this garbage going to be removed Hon. Speaker, 
unfortunately I will not be in a position to give that time frame or rather the time frame.. . 
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So the work is still going on there?  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Yes! Yes Hon . Speaker i t is not cleared because the wo rd I 
think there is an error here , you Know spe aking of cleared at the moment y esterday I was 
there despite the busy schedule at the Assembly but I know I have to go there and see for 
myself I communicated to the director the team was there  that garbage ca nnot be removed , I 
am telling you even for two months, there is a hill there! There is  a hill Hon. Speaker so Hon. 
Member please appreciate the fact that there is something being done, please. Thank you . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON ENVIR ONMENT HON . SHEBE ATHMAN ON REMOV AL 
OF GARBAGE PILEUP IN  KONGOWEA WARD  
 Yes Hon. Shebe Athuman?  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Hon. Speaker , in Kongow ea I think there are two 
issues ; Hon. Member from Kongowea about kwa Karama and the Kongowea Market . Hon. 
Speaker I also took an initiative because the Hon. Member was really on my neck on this 
issue, I went to Kongowea Market and Karama as the Statement read K wa Karama was 
cleared in January h owever illegal dumpi ng still continues there. The clearing exercise began 
again on 20th February, 2019 and continued on 24th, 25th and 27th February , 2019 with a total 
of 34 trips completed.  
 In March the clearance was done on 5th, 9th, and 13th, 16th and 28th with 27 trips 
completed; s peaking about Kon gowea M arket Hon. Speaker, in the month of February there 
has been a collection done on 1st 6th,13th and 20th February , 2019 with total of 36 trips being 
done in March on clearance with 5th, 9th, 11th 16th, 18th, 19th and 20th Hon. Speaker with a 
total of 70 trips being completed.  
Recently two trucks are being repaired at the moment they have been allocated to 
Kongowea and Kwa Karama but Hon. Speaker as I told earlier I went there myself really 
there is a lot of waste in Kongow ea Market and still two trucks are not enough . Hon. Speaker 
i have just con curred  with Hon. Member so that we can allocate another two trucks for 
Kongowea Market and the other one for the outskirts of Kongowea W ard s till work is still 
being done there. Tha nk you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Abrari?  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
natumai hii itakuwa mara yangu ya sita kuregelea kuzungumzia juu ya taka.  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  Mheshimiwa Spika tunavyozungumza sasa hivi mimi n imepitia na Kongowea kwa 
Karama na nimechukua picha niko nazo kwenye simu yangu sasa hivi nikiwa na nguo hiz i 
hizi. Mlima wa Kongowea uko! Takataka ziko gari zilizopelekwa Kongowea ziko  soko la  
Kongowea na hapa maswala ni mawili ; swala la kwanza nikutoa ja a la Kongowea kwa 
sababu liko k atikati ya mji, l iko katikati ya vitongoji vyote na takataka zote za Nyali 
zinamwaga ndani ya Kongowea na naona idara  husika imechukua sana kuangalia hasa soko 
la Kongowea kuliko mji wa Kongowea.  
 Kwa hivyo naregelea tena ku sema sasa naona imefika mahali nikikoma ambao 
wananchi wenyewe naona itakuwa hawana budi wachukue hatua  kwa mikono yao. Kwa 
sababu sisi kila siku tukiregelea tuna kuja kuzungumza takataka zimetolewa zimetolewa 
zimetolewa lakini ningeomba ndugu yangu tukito ka hapa twende n aye guu kwa guu mpaka 
Kongowea K wa Karama aende akaangalie mlima ulivyo. Hizi ripoti za kupewa kwa sababu 
huyo al ioandika ripoti hivi hivi nilimpi gia simu akaniambia hivi hivi l akini nikaamuelezea 
pia njoo Kongowea hasa uje uone hali halisi  ya Kongowea ilivyo.  
 Kwa hivyo nakuomba Mwenyekiti wa Mazingira kama utakuwa una muda tukitoka 
hapa tuandamane guu kwa guu mpaka Kongowea kwa Karama ukaone hali halisi ilivyo ndani 
ya Kongowea. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu )left the C hair) 
(The Temporary Speaker( Hon. Bwire )in the Chair)  
 
 The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Chair?  
 
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Mwenyekiti . Nimemsikiza kwa 
umakini mno sana Mheshimiwa wa Kongowea na amekubali kuwa kuna k azi inafanyika 
lakini kazi yenyewe ni mithili ya tone la maji katika bahari . Kwa hivyo nimejitolea 
tukimaliza kikao hichi cha B unge nitaandamana moja kwa moja na Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
niende nika angalie ukubwa wa ile kazi ilio po pale halafu nitatoa  njia mu afaka  ama mawazo 
kwa idara  husika tuangalie tutafanyaje. Ahsante . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Samba of the s ame note? Yes ? 
 Hon.  Samba:  When Hon. Omo ndi was raising an issue  concerning the removal of the 
garbage we thought that maybe he has a  personal issue or interest and the Hon. Chair assured 
that something was done , even as he sits here he is not convinced , now it brings more 
questions than answer s when the same Member also is raising an issue ! Could it be that Hon. 
Chair is misleading the  House because everything he says the l aw does not allow him to go 
alone , he need s to be accompanied by the Members so maybe he should now change the 
tactics of him going alone and go  with the Committee Members at least maybe Committee 
will also be standing  in for him b ecause I am afraid I am waiting for my report maybe which 
will probably come next week may be, I will be a victim of the same...  
(Applause)  
 So maybe he change s tactics ; he has more efforts but his efforts  are not good enough 
since two M embers are complaining , that is my take Honorables. Thank you . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Samba . I think with Hon . 
Chair Athuman Shebe you have two issues to tackle ; that of Hon. Omondi and Hon. Abrari , I 
will therefore direct that you si t down as a Committee to plan to have a site visit as a 
Committee not as a Athuman Shebe then coordinate with your department to ensure that you 
bring suf ficient reports.  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  Hon.  Shebe  Athman :  Most obliged Hon. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes Clerk ?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS  HON. MUMBA ON BLOCKED DRAINAGE SYSTEM AND MANHOLE A T WAYANI , 
BOKOLE AND BOMU CATH OLIC CHURCH  
 Yes Hon. Prisc hilla Mumba ? 
 Hon. Mumba : Than k you Mr. Speaker . This is about blocked drainage system and 
manhole at Wayani, Bokole and Bomu C atholic Church. I spoke to the E ngineer about this 
drainage problem ; as you know this is a problem which does not even occur in only this 
Bomu Catholic i t occu rs almost a cross the 30 W ards and we have this problem so he told me 
that the work has started to unblocking this manhole but he will arrange me a cha rt to show 
how the work has already starte d from every Ward to W ard to unblock. So this is what 
engineer told me today when we were talking on the phone , he told me he will give me that 
chart so that I can table it may be by next week to show how they have sta rted this work 
unblocking from Ward to W ard. Although this one has said about the Bokole issue but I do 
not know what the E ngineer will bring to me, if it is starting from the Bokole or may be it has 
started from another Ward to come to another W ard then I am waiting for his report for this 
unblockage in the drainage systems in the W ards.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Omondi?  
 Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, since this matter is touching on my area 
Aiport W ard I just want to give my words to it that the E ngineer who is purported ...who is 
saying that  he is preparing to give us a recor d on how he has started actually  is doing this 
work. First of all when he got this report I am sure that he might have got ten this report at 
least four,  five days before Mr. Speaker Sir and acco rding to my knowledge he was supposed 
to write a very comprehe nsive satisfactory report to us to respond not to give him words and 
even as the C hair has said. The Chair has said that…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order M ember! Order! I think the 
Chairperson has communicated that you  will be given a comprehensive S tatement and a cha rt 
to show how the work will be done in each and every W ard. So for today according to her is 
that they communicate with the E ngineer but there will be a response on the same , we all 
know the weak nesses of the s aid department s o there is no need to cr ucify  the C hairperson of 
the said Committee...  
(Applause)  
 So let us kindly wait for the next week for the responses from the Chairperson as she 
has requested. Kindly please! Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERS ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS 
HON. MUMBA ON CLEANING OF MAGONGO MAINLAND TO A KAMBA HANDICRAFT  
 Yes Hon. Prisc hilla Mumba?  
 Hon. Mumba : Thank you Hon. Speaker . This one also the Engineer after I talked to 
him h e also told me that he has been  with the Ward Administrator of this Ward because of 
this problem . 
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  Because it has been coming on and on and I think it was even just the other day and 
there was ruling that we have a sitting with Labour C ommittee because of the respon se that I 
had brought  in this House about the Akamba han dcraft , this drainage system cleaning. So 
there was a problem of payment of the youth s who used to do this work so there was a ru ling 
here that we sit with the Committee of L abour and we discuss or maybe know the way 
forw ard on whether the youth s were paid for the work to continue or what will be done after 
that, a fter the two sitting of the two C ommittee s. But the two C ommittees have not yet sat so 
that we can bring to this Hono urable House  the proper respon se, so atleast  we have to be 
given time because I think this week it has been a hectic week and as we understand there 
was up and down so we cannot  meet  the two Committees because of this. So please  kindly 
this House give us this time so that we can complete this as the  two C ommittee s and we bring 
a proper report in this House, thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you and I think you have just 
requested on behalf of the two C ommittees though the ruli ng was done some more days back, 
so you ought to have sat down and discuss ed them, kindly please do it  so that next week 
Thursday you bring the response. Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON TRANS PORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS 
HON. MUMBA ON THE COUNTY D ISASTER PREPAREDNESS  DURING THE RAINY S EASON  
 Yes Hon. Priscilla Mumba?  
 Hon. Mumba : Thank y ou Mr. Speaker . Again the County d isaster preparedness 
during the rainy season. My Transport, I nfrastructure and Public W orks M inistry does  not 
have a stand for this, this was a special C omm ittee appoint ed by the Governor. S o I have to 
get the special people who are appointed for this work to respond to me and as I understood 
although the Chair was Waziri so I have to get t he Waziri  himself to produce the se Members 
because they do not belong to transport and infrastructure . This is a special department or 
special appointees who are supposed to do this partly when there is this disaster then they 
depart. So please also Mr. Speaker bear with me until I get this proper answer.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwi re): Hon. Member I think the responses we 
normally get from the department, is t hat right? And if there is any Sub -Committee or rather 
Sub D epartmen t that is attached to the core D epartment you ought to h ave the response from 
the main D epartment which is t he Department of Transport and I nfrastructure . So kindly 
work hand in hand with your CEC Member and th e Chief O fficer you have a back log of work 
to do because you still have so many pending  responses and the interest of  mwananchi  must 
be given first priori ty. 
 Hon. Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : What is it Hon ourable ? 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . On the same because of the  emergency   
responses we know the rain season is  very near I think since it is Ad hoc Commit tee which is 
appointed from the office of the G overnor it will be good if you commit to the Majority 
Leader to enquire  or to know what plans do they have or wh ich is this Ad Hoc Committee 
which is call ed from the of fice of the Governor. Thank you  Mr. Speak er. 
(Loud consultation)  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you, you see I have  just heard today 
that it is a C ommittee which was appointed by the Governor. I have just heard it today so 
meaning it is not under t he Transport and I nfrastructure?  
 Hon. Mumba : No! 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Then it will b e communicated to the 
Majority L eader. Thank you . 
(Applause)  
 Yes C lerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON EDUCA TION COMMITTEE HON . OMONDI ON THE 
STATUS OF BURSARY DI SBURSEMENT IN THE CO UNT Y 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omo ndi? 
 Hon.  Omondi:  Okay thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. I will start with the bursary before I 
talk a bout milk program. Mr. Speaker S ir the issue of bursary was deliberated in this House 
very compressively and the Speaker  did rule that we  call upon the CEC concern ed to come 
and explain for himself. T he C ommittee sat and agreed that actually the procedure have 
already started , we have already written the letter and we are waiting for him to respond but 
we do  not want this issue of bursary t o be coming time and again I think it is ti me for us to 
stop it, i t comes to an end so that we know and that is why it is important that himself the 
CEC himself to come and explain this matter because it ha s been coming one time and again 
every week Mr. Sp eaker bursary! Bursary!  
 This time Mr. Speake r Sir let him come and then explain ; we h ave already done that 
with the C ommittee and we are sure that we are going to get proper respon se which again I 
will then communicate to this House and it will also be i n line with the school milk program.  
I think when he come s he will be in proper position to explain about this school milk program 
and also this bursary issue . Thank y ou. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. M ember  where do you intend to bring 
the C EC M ember ; is it before the C ommittee or before the Committee of W hole House .  
 Hon.  Omo ndi: Thank you  Mr. Speaker Sir, we plan to bring him before the W hole 
House , the C ommittee because that is how the…  
(Interruption)  
(Applause)  
 That is what we plan Mr. Speaker S ir but in case of any changes then I will again 
communicate to this Hon ourable  House.      
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon .Bwire) : Yes, Hon . Wambua ?  
 Hon. Wambua:  Bwana Spika Mwenyekiti tunashukuru sana kwa Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti wa Elimu kwa sababu ma mbo mengine Wenyeviti  wanapitia na shida zengine 
ambazo wanakuja kupata hapa zinafaa zitatuliwe na CECs , naona ni mzuri sana wakati CEC 
wa Elimu atakapo kuja hapa maswali yote ambayo tumekuwa tukiuliza kwa basari 
yatatatuliwa . Ahsante s ana. 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Thank you . Hon Samba.  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12  Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon . Speaker , thank you . The issue of bursary has been an 
itching issue and it has been quit e long now , I think it  has been over one and a half year since 
we started debating the whole issue of b ursary . Hon. Speaker can the C hairman and the 
Committee confirm to us that this time around we will have the CEC because I think thi s is 
now the eighth, ninth time , can he confirm today that that next time we are having the CEC 
for D epartment of Education , ICT,  MV2035 ? He should confirm to us , reason being that 
Hon. Speak er we cannot be requesting for S tatement over a 100 times and then we have the 
power that we can do anything f or sake and the purpose of wana nchi.  
 So my humble request to the Hon . Chair c an he confirm to us that the necessary 
procedures and measures have been done , have been put in place to make sure that we will 
have the CEC for Education ? Thank you Hon . Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I had expected Hon . Chairman to tell us 
that as a C ommittee they have already invited the CEC on a certain date so that when we 
communicate to this House you communicate exactly so that records are taken so  I would 
wish you to tell this House maybe as a C omm ittee you have invited the CEC M ember to 
come either today tomorrow or next month so that I make a ruling on the same.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr . Speaker S ir. I would just lik e to respond to the Hon. 
Members who have sai d that we need to confirm as a C ommittee if indeed the CEC has been 
summ oned to this House out or this Whole H ouse. Mr. Speaker I just want to emphasiz e on 
this that the work of the Committee the mandate of the C ommittee is to play an oversight role  
and if Mr Speaker remember we are not going physical let me just finish ... 
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : What’s your point of information 
Honourable?  
 Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr . Speaker S ir, I think your question was just very simple 
and clear , let the Hon . Chair just confirm not to explain to us the function of his Committee . 
Thank you.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr Speaker Sir, I would like the Hon . Member to quote where  i  am 
restricted to Mr . Speaker S ir not to explain the matter because am the Chair Mr . Speaker S ir... 
(Interruption ) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Order! Hon . Mem ber Order! Order! 
Resume your sea t! It is clear in the C onstitution  that the mandate given to the M ember of 
County Assembly is oversight, representation and l egislation so everybody knows that 
oversight is a role of all the M embers present her e and I think we should not waste a lot of 
time as the Chair I just directed you to tell us whether you have invi ted the CEC Member for 
a Whole H ouse meeting or not so that I make a ruling knowing whether you have 
communicated to his office or not , so kind ly stick to those guidelines.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr . Speaker S ir, the procedure is on I have said and I  
will communicate back to this H ouse; I have said that the procedure is on we have already sat 
and we have already working on the plans to ensure th at the CEC comes Mr Speaker Sir. 
Thank you.  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 (Mem bers rose in protest ) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Order! Members sit down ! Is there any 
other Committee M ember on Education ? Any M ember who can confirm these words from 
the Chair whether you have tha t programme , whether you have sat down and arranged for the 
same , can any M ember testify, are you  a Member?  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Yes.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Okay .  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Thank you Mr . Speaker . To be honest we have not set the date but 
we ar e on the process of finding or doing site visits so that when the CEC come s to the 
Committee of the W hole House we will have the eviden ce to table . We have the rotation to 
visit the ECD schools and the old  ones and the modern one s, the repo rt which was dec lined 
this week ... 
(Interruption ) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes Hon. Member.  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Actually today we have started the site visit we do  not want to bring 
the... 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Site visit on what ? 
 Hon.  Mwende:  The EC Ds because we were also confirming the milk programme 
on that same statement number 15 . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes, I agree with you Hon . Member but 
the issue at hand is tasked most on bursary and I think that what Hon . Member who is a lso 
the Chairperson of the saidC committee was discussing ...  
 Hon.  Mwende: Mr Speake r I guess we are guided by the Order P aper.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) :  Yes? 
 Hon.  Mwende:  Order number fifteen (15) it  talks about the bursaries disbu rsement 
and the s chool make .  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : And am also strictly on my guidelines as 
the Chair because the Chairman was first tackling the bursary issue and that  is why he was 
unable to give the full response . Kindly sit down , order M ember! Sit down my question was 
because he was to invite the CEC M ember over the bursary issue so I was just asking whether 
as a C ommittee you have already communicated to the of fice of a CEC M ember who also 
doubles up as the Deputy Governor on when he will be appearing b efore the Whole House 
am communicating Hon . Members ...  
(Loud Consultations)  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  If the C ommittee sat down and discussed then you are unable to tell this House what 
you discussed , you must be serious if you sat down as a C ommittee and discussed th en you 
are u nable to tell this H ouse what you discussed whether you had already secured a date with 
the CEC Member  or not . 
  Hon. Members kindly am assuming that you never had such plans that  is what am 
assuming as a Chair and allow me now to give the direction of the  same it might favour you 
as a C ommittee . Kindly Chairman and your C ommittee am giving  you another chance , invite 
the CEC Member in your C ommittee that is over the bursary issue but the other one you may 
respond I have no problem with that but over the bur sary. 
 Before you invite him before the Whole House meeting he  is a Deputy Governor he  
is the second in command kindly invite him in a meeting and we need the response next week 
on Thursday whether you ha ve already secured a chance with him , talk to him br ing the 
response before this House . Are we in agreement Mr . Chairman ? Kindly please . 
 Hon.Omondi:  Okay Mr . Speaker Sir. 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you Hon . Member you were saying 
something on a s chool milk programme .  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Thank yo u Mr . Speaker as per our schedule for site visit we are 
completing our site visit s on Tuesday so will be  able to sit with the relevant D epartment on 
Thursday.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : What is it Hon . Athman.  
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you Hon . Speaker . I think there is a Chairman here , 
the Chairman has delegated to the Member because there is a Chairman , has he delegated t he 
responsibility to the M ember?  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Order M ember! Order! Order! you are 
interest ed in havin g the feedback as a M ember and whatever you are asking for whether there 
is a letter to confirm that Chairman has delegated that only happens only when the 
Chairperson is absent but the Chairperson is with us whoever  is responding is a Member of 
the said C ommittee they might have their own local arrangement s on who will answer one 
who will answer two .  
 Order  Member ! And you cannot contravene the law and there is no where on th e 
law where it has said that a M ember cannot answer even if the Chairperson is around...  
(Applause)  
 So many times Hon . Member when the Chair speaks you sit down , so many times 
Hon. Members we have seen the Chairpersons present but delegating to a Member of the said 
Committee so there is no contradiction of the same and I  have asked wh ether there is a 
Member with any information to give this House apart from the Chairman so she  is just 
acting within the directive of the Chair .  
 Kindly  please let  us not prolong this issue we still have so many businesses to 
transact . Yes Hon. Faith.  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr . Speaker for protecting me . So by Thursday we will 
bring a very comprehensive report because we would have gone to the grassroots . 
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  We will  get all the facts and sa t down with the relevant D epartment who are in 
charge so that they may answer the question s according to our findings wh ich we will find 
from the grass roots . Thank y ou Mr. Speaker , so on Thursday we will bring the report.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Okay the point is taken . Yes, Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
 Yes, Hon Pri schilla Mumba ? 
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr Speaker . I beg the House to give me by next week to 
respond because this was a  question which we had to get the result altogether when we had 
Engineer Keno to give us the resul t of every road or maybe every constructio n which is going 
on in the 30 W ards. So I told the E ngineer to bring me the programme of the 30 W ards I did  
not want only for one W ard be cause I had a meeting with the Engineer with my C ommittee 
so it is a report which has to be compiled , I did  not want on ly one W ard or maybe one road 
these are very serious issues and it has come more than twice , thrice about these roads . So I 
was with the E ngineer with my C ommittee and he was to bring the reports of all the roads  on 
25th we were supposed to be with the E ngineer so maybe we will get the response then I will  
table it by next week in this H ouse. Thank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Thank you Member but just to add on that 
do not wait for the report of other W ards that have not presented their S tatements , first come 
first serve if there is a Member with a S tatement be responding to those S tatement s than 
waiting to respond to other S tatement fro m other Wards that other M embers have not 
received , kindly please so maybe we give you to next week and I be lieve next week you w ill 
not ask for more time you will be presenting  those reports . Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CASB  MEMBER HON . MURFAD AMUR ON ACCESSIBILIT Y OF 
INFORMATION IN THE C OUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 Hon. Murfad Amur is not with us but it can be table d next week . Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT B Y CHAIRPERSON COMMIT TEE ON JUSTICE AND LEGAL AF FAIRS HON. 
AMRI YA BOY ON UNLAWFUL DETENTIO N OF MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC BY THE C OUNTY 
INSPECTORATE  
 Hon. Amriya Boy . 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Thank you Mr . Speaker . The floor  be highly honoured I 
appreciate you giving this opportunity for me to give my  response because it appears it  is a 
scarce opportunity now adays a right to speech as a .... 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Order Member order!  You stick to the 
point!  
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Okay neverthe less that was on a light note .  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16  Mr. Speaker my submission as the Chairperson of Justice and L egal affairs is that 
when this Statement was brought in by Mr . Kitula last week and your brother Mr . Fadhili on 
the Ch air gave instruction for the Hon . Member to bring the Statement in writing because it 
was a bit equivocal and ambiguous because he was talking about and I remember Mr . 
Speaker rising on my feet to seek clarification on the same because he was talking about  
unlawful arrest at the w eighbridge .  
 Now am seeing from the Statement it  is a unlawful detention , so that is why your 
brother directed that he gives a written request to the Committee for purposes of having an 
equivocal response . In deliberation Mr . Speaker how ever having said that I also had an 
opportunity to consult with the same Hon . Member and he promised through phone because 
he is in Nairobi he promised to bring the written  Statement to Committee Clerk tomorrow 
God willing . So Mr . Speaker on that n ote I seek leave from your end to gi ve us another one 
week for the Committee to give a fruitful deliberation on the same . Thank you Mr Speaker . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Renson Thoya . 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Mwenyekiti . Nafikiri Taarifa  huombwa na mtu 
mwingine kwa Kamati lakini hili jambo limeweza k unipata mimi na ilikuwa naomba Jumba 
hili liweze kuruhusu Kamati ya uwajiri na maswala ya kijamii kuweza kuitwa Afisa Mkuu ili 
kuweza kujua ni vipi Sub County  ama Ward Administrator  wamew eza kuhusika k wa kina 
katika shughuli hii ya Fagia Bunge . Kwa s ababu ni hivi leo tu Bunge ni hivi leo tumeweza 
kupata kwamba vijana kule Mikindani  wameweza kushikwa kwa sababu walikatakata zile 
vitabu za  kutia sahihi  za Fagia Bunge na akatuma mtu kutoka kule ofisi ya Sub-County  
Administration  kuja kuhidhinisha kuwa  wapelekwe Kortini ama wasamehewe . Kwa hivyo 
ilikuwa naomba idhini ya Nyumba hii aweze kuitwa Afisa Mkuu wa kitengo cha  Ugatuzi  na 
Sub-County Administrator  kwa jina Abwao ambao yeye ndio ametumwa ili kujua k wamba hii 
ni biashara ya Kaunti ama ni nini kinachoendelea . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Hon. Member th e issue you have just 
raised i s a very critical issue and also needs to be accompanied with evidence and I think this 
House needs to do a follow up whether the citizen s of this County you  have mention ed are 
arrested and this Hon ourable  House demands to know through the Chair the reason as to why 
they have arrested , if the business going on through mashi nani is a County business and also 
you see we cannot just put it as the way people the way people may t hink but we are taking it 
as a H ouse and I want it to be on record . Yes I wish to hear  some reaction to two or three 
Members then I will make a ruling . 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Point of Order Mr . Spea ker!  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Yes, what is it?  
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Mr. Speaker , I know the Speaker is always blind but we are 
lacking quorum in the House to proceed.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Order Member ! We have just said th at the 
issue raised by the Member is very critical and we need to ...we should not treat it ...I will 
therefore order the yes, Serjeant –At-Arms to kindly confirm to me whether there is a 
quorum . Order Member!  
(Consultation)  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17 (The Clerk confirmed l ack of  quorum)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Order Members ! With the custodian to the 
law though I had not made a ruling of this due to lack of quorum so we will not make an 
issue but I want to give directions Hon . Thoya  you are the Chairman on Labour , Order ! Am 
making a ruling on the same we cannot discuss it we have no quorum, a third should be 14 
Members and I think we are less than that . So kindly Hon. Thoya and your Labour 
Committee do the necessary you can as well reach the CEC, Member on D evolution and seek 
more information over the same . Due to lack of quorum Hon. Members am sorry that you see 
it is recorded and we cannot just assume…  
(Loud Consultations)  
 Allow me to make a ruling on the issue of quo rum I have just instructed the Serjeant- 
At-Arms to confirm whether the House is in order to transact its busines s and therefore I 
directed the Serjeant-At-Arms to ring the bell for five minutes then we come back to 
deliberate on the same . 
(Applause)  
(Quorum Bell rung) 
(Loud Consultations)  
 Yes thank you Hon. Members for coming back I see now the House mood, we are 
ready now to go on with the business since the quorum is okay . 
(Applause)  
 Now there was an issue on the floor over the people who are said to have been 
arrested and there happens to hav e an intervention of the Members official from this County. 
As I was saying Hon. Members we must have the evidences to support whatever we raise 
here in the House since this is a House of rules and regulations there must be evidences to 
support your allega tions , and as I have said before we need to take a very quick action on the 
same. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti Mheshimiwa aliyetangulia kuleta hoja hii ama suala hili linalosibu mashinani 
amekuwa waz i na ameomba Kiti chako muongozo na pia ameweza kunukuu baadhi ya 
majina ya watuhumiwa ya kw amba waitwe waje wahojiwe kwa sababu Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kwa mtu aliyekamatwa na asipopelekwa mahakamani ukiitishwa ushahidi 
tunautoa wapi?  
 Pili Mheshimiwa Mweny ekiti kwa mtu anayehusika kupeana posho ama mshahara 
kwa watu ambao wanaofanya zoezi hili mashinani na mshahara huu hauna petty cash  wala 
hauna payslip  ya kwamba kuna s ahihi  ya afisa katika idara husika , ushahidi huo tunautoa 
wapi? Lakini kwa kuwa tuna b aadhi ya majina ya watu ambao tunajua wanahusika moja kwa 
moja ni kanuni tu ya natural justice  ya kwamba waweze kuitwa na kupewa nafasi ya 
kujieleza wanahusika vipi katika hili? Hususan tupate kufahamu kama hili zoezi ni biashara 
ya Serikali Gatuzi kwa sab abu tumeona ba adhi ya hao wawakilishi katika Sub County  na 
Wodi  wakiposti mpaka katika mitandao ya kijamii na kutilia pondo zoezi hili linaloendea . 
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18  Kwa hio  kivyovyote vile ni furs a mwafaka ya wao kuitwa katika Kamati masuala ya 
sheria na haki hali kadhalika Kamati ya Ajira na halmashauri ama haki za waajiriwa waje 
wajitakase na kufafanua ki unaga ubaga yanayojiri katika suala h ili na vile vile tujue kama ni 
Serikali Gatuzi ndio inafanya biashara hii , migao hii ama bajeti ile inatoka katika vote gani? 
Kwa sababu tunaf ahamu na ma  fulana  yame  printiwa , kuna vitabu vimechapishwa  mulku wa 
vitabu, tunajua kuna Makarani ambao wanaendesha zoezi hili na taarifa  iliyoko ni kwamba 
kila Wodi iko na makarani 50 kwa ada ya shilingi 1000 kwa siku , kwa bajeti ya shilingi 
150M ilioni  kila siku  kwa zoezi la siku 14 . 
 Kwa hi o kama ni biashara ya Serikali Gatuzi tujue pia mgao huu unatoka katika bajeti 
ipi? Kwa sababu mashinani kuna dhiki ikiwemo shida ya maji , jana Waheshimiwa 
wamekuwa wakilia hapa ndani na pesa inafujwa katika zoezi lile hivyo basi  tunataka ufa saha 
na ukweli wa haya ama vyenginevyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti pia unayo  fursa kwa Kiti 
chako kutoa amri ya kuundwa Kamati maalum kulichunguza hili kwa kina na katika 
kulichunguza hili wanayo  fursa ya kufanya kazi kwa ukaribu na ofisi ya DCI na ofisi ya DPP 
kuweza kupata ufasaha wa mambo haya na kuyafikisha kikomo ... 
 
(Applause)  
 Mheshimiwa Spika serikali gatuzi yetu haitakuwa ikichekeshwa ama ikipigiwa 
mifano mibaya , ni lazima waka ti umefika ya kila mhusika kuwajibika na zaidi ni Bunge hili 
kuwajibika na kuwajibisha  wanaohusika na kwa waliopewa majukumu ya kuendesha ofisi za 
wananchi.  Mheshimiwa haipendezi kwa mtu kushikwa kwa mtu kushikwa kwa kuwa anadai 
haki yake ya kutembeza jitabu na hajalipwa japo kazi yenyewe si halali si sahihi lakini kwa 
kuwa ameambiwa aifany e utalipwa ni haki alipwe na kukamatwa ni kunyimwa haki yake na 
waliohusika katika hili tukipata ushahidi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tutaomba ruhusa yako 
tulipizie wananchi wetu kisasi. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Ogutu d o not reverse the rules and 
traditions of the House, you do  not reverse the rules of the House do what is necessary. Yes 
Hon. Samba? Hon. Samba?  
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker thank you so much . The issue that the Member has raised 
Hon. Speaker we should not preten d that we do  not know the genesis of all this , we are very 
much aware where it all began and we know there  is no proof that we require , we cannot turn 
our eyes; we are not blind.  
 The genesis of it all we are aware and those who are full y involve d are the Sub 
County Admini strators and Ward Administrators we should not lie ; there are the ones our 
youth  (??) for granted. Hon. Speaker I would con cur with Hon. Mwamwiri that at least a task 
force be formed , we have powers, the powers that has been bestowed on us is just the same as 
that one of High Court and we can summon everybody, anybody we wish that he has got any 
information that might le ad us to what we want and Hon. Speaker they should not also take 
advantage of our youth s because of lack of employment they sh ould not take advantage of 
our youth ...  
(Applause)  
 There are so many programs that are lined up for our youth s but Hon. Speaker if it 
comes to now tackling the real issues there are nowhere to be seen and as I would like and 
wish to state here let us stamp o ur authority, let us set a pace, let us give direction.   
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19  Hon. Speaker the powers that has been bestowed on this House I do  not think whether 
apart from the Constitutional powers after Constitutional powers it is our powers so as my 
fellow colle ague has reque sted this thing does  not need even to take one week because there 
are those who are in custody as we speak they were demanding for their rights, they were 
given duty to carry and unfortunately the employer fail ed to oblige now since they feel that 
they have s ome powers than the ordinary  mwananchi . I think we should not turn our eyes to 
this issue it needs immediate and urgent measures since those youth s are desperate now and 
desperate time needs desperate measures. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes Hon. Wambua?  
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika mambo ambayo 
yanatendeka mtaani ni mambo mabaya sana hapa tunazungumza kwa urahisi lakini yanatishia 
sana kwa sababu wale vijana ambao wamepewa hiyo kazi ni vijana ambao ha wana makosa , 
wengine ni vijana wetu na wengine hatujui wametoka wapi? J ana kulikuwa na mgogoro 
katika Wodi yangu mpaka ilienda sana mpaka wanataka kumpiga huyo Sub County 
Administrator  kwa sababu anangojea pesa pale, hawakutafuta Junior Wambua wampige kwa 
sababu analipa wanajua yule ambaye anawalipa . Ni vizuri sana tuletewe yule mtu mhusika ili 
akaweze kutueleza vizuri sana kwa sababu mambo haya yanatufanya sisi sote tuwe hatuamini 
kila mtu haamini yule mwenzake . Administrator  ni watu ambao wametolewa sehemu z engine 
wameletwa katika sehemu zetu hawajui sisi tunaishi namna gani? Lakini wakati 
wanapotekeleza hayo mambo wanatoka hapo wanaenda kwa haki na us awa ambayo iko na 
ofisi katika Wodi yangu wanawaambia wawasaidie katika kuandikisha kura ushahidi tuko 
nayo u metum wa katika mitandao yote ambayo tunatumia sisi.  
 Kwa hivyo Taarifa  ambayo imeletwa na Mheshimiwa Thoya ni Taarifa  ambayo 
inafaa sana tui jadili  katika ukumbi huu ili tuweze kujua ni nani ambaye analipa? Na analipa 
na pesa kutoka wapi? Ni pesa ya Kaun ti ama ni pesa yake mwenyewe? Kwa sababu wale 
ambao wanatajwa na haya mambo wanahusiana na haya mambo kwa njia moja ama nyengine 
na ili tusilete vita kwa sababu ikiendelea mpaka siku hizo 14 hapa kati kati huenda hao 
wanalipwa wakapigwa na wananchi halafu i takuwa ni japo ambalo si zuri katika Kaunti yetu 
ya Mombasa.  
 Kwa hivyo kwa hayo machache nasema huyo mtu ambaye atakuja hapa tumhoji a je 
haraka iwezekanavyo ili tuweze kumalizana na hayo maneno. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I want also to add my voice on what my 
colle agues have said . Mr. Speaker Sir first of all I think if am not wrong last week I gave a 
Statement , I actually requested for a  Statement on this I remember very well and the Speaker 
did rule that because I was in question we wanted to know who are people funding? Who are 
the funders? Who are funding these people? And where is this money or funds coming from? 
I remembe r I asked very clear ly and again Mr. Speaker Sir the Ward Administrators were 
mentioned on that particular day…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members you consult in a low tone 
there  is a Member on the floor . 
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 20  Hon.  Omondi: …and the Ward Administrators Mr. Speaker Sir were mentioned that 
particular day and I remember the Speaker ruled that the CEC for D evolution to actually 
bring in this House a Statement touching on those issues but today when I was going through 
this Orde r Paper I have not seen anything touching on that and that  is why you see Mr. 
Speaker as this matter delays it has again gave back to another issue whereby now the youth s, 
that the innocent youth s that were being used innocently are now being sacrificed, they are 
not being given their dues because this issue was an illegal process and it had no any 
program .  
 Mr. Speaker Sir now we want to deal with the goons, the goons I can call them goons 
because they did not follow the right procedure , who sponsors and also know where did this 
money come from? And that response we were supposed to get it today so I do  not know 
what has happen ed Mr. Speaker Sir. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Faith?  
 Hon.  Mwende: Ahsante  sana Bwana Spika . Bwana Spika maneno ambayo 
yameletwa mbele ya hili Bunge ni maneno ya kweli ambayo yanaendelea katika mitaa yetu 
na vijana wengi ambao wametumiwa ni vijana ambao wametoka mitaa yetu na wanaweza 
kuja kwetu wanasema mimi nimepatiwa tu kazi na sijui ni ya nini? Nimeambiwa tu 
nikusanye s ahihi  mwisho wa siku nitalipwa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la aibu sana ambalo linaendelea katika Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa ; kama public officer  kama Ward Administrators  wanaweza potosha wananchi 
watembee na vij itabu wakichukua s ahihi  pasipo kuwaambia wanachukua s ahihi  za nini? 
Mheshimiwa Spika vile ninaongea niko na ushahidi wa kuona vijana ambao wanazurura 
wakichukua s ahihi  kutumia maneno wakisema wametumwa na Gavana wetu yaani ni maneno 
ya kupotosha  na ni j uzi katika Seneti tuliona Gavana alijitoa katika haya maneno .  
Kwa hivyo kama public officer  Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la dharura ambalo 
linafaa ku fanyiwa kazi  kwa haraka sana, patengenezwe Adhoc Committee  waangalie kwa 
kina ni nini ambayo  inaendelea kwa sababu itachafulia Kaunti yetu jina na kuna watu 
wataenda kuumizana.  Saa hizi tunavyoongea watu wa Changamwe vyenye Mheshimiwa 
Wambua amesema watu wote wa Changamwe wamekusanyika kwa Sub County 
Administrator  pale Chaani Social Hall na wali enda mp aka kwa Haki na Usawa kusaidiwa 
kukusanya sahihi .  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hatujui wako na interest gani katika hili zoezi? Labda 
wanataka kusimama of which  wakati wa siasa haujafika kwa vile kama wewe ni public officer  
hufai kujihusisha na si asa kivyovyote vile. Mheshimiwa Spika vile tunaoongea saa hii 
wameanza kupata amri wasiongee na ma MCAs ; Ward Administrators  kwa hivyo ni mambo 
ambayo yanafaa kuchunguzwa kwa haraka iwezekanavyo kwa vile inatuzuilia vile tunaweza 
kufanya kazi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you.  
(Silence)  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Hon. Speaker…  
(Interruption)  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 21  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire): Hon. Member just dress properly, you will 
lose nothing by dressing properly and I think that will be the last person to comment then I 
will give directives .  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika iko shida kubwa 
mashinani na isipoangaliwa kutatokea vita vikubwa sana ; wale Ward Administrators  ambao 
wako mashinani wasifikire sisi tulipig iwa kura na ma imamu na ma  Pastors  tuko na watu 
ambao walitupigia kura na wanapoona tunadhalilishwa wao pia wanashikwa na hasira. Kwa 
hivyo kabla haijafikia huko tunaomba hili Jumba lichukue haya maneno with a lot of 
seriousness  ili lile zoezi kama kuna Administrator  ambaye amehusika akae nje manake tuko 
na kazi nyingi ambayzo wanatakikana wafanye , saa hii hakuna maji ...  
(Applause)  
 Hayo hawaangalii, takataka zinatajwa hapa kila siku hawaangalii kazi yao ni kutafuta 
vita na MCA na mimi nasema wazi kwamba mimi n iko taya ri kwa vita manake mimi si Imam  
wala Pastor  kwa hivyo kama hivyo ndio wanatakiwa wafanye tuko tayari kufanya hivyo.  
Mimi naomba hili Jumba lichukue, litoe mwelekeo ili hichi kitu kiishe manake sisi tutaenda 
physical  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
 The Tem porary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You do  not issue threats in the Hon ourable  
House Hon. Member. I have heard the concerns from the Hon. Members I must admit that 
any exercise can take place ; it might be an organization, it might be anybody who can have 
his or her own initi ative of collecting signatures but the involvement of the public officers in 
an exercise that has  nothing to do with the County government its unlawful ...  
(Applause)  
 And I will therefore direct the Commi ttee on Legal and Justice to give legal advisor to 
the County Secretary and the Department of Devolution plus the Committee on Labour to 
ascertain the allegations . We will not form an Ad hoc Committee since there are those 
Committees that can take that mandate and kin dly work hand in hand with the County 
Secretary and the CEC on Devolution as early as next week Tuesday when I will be askin g 
for the responses from those Committees.  
(Applause)  
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Most obliged Mr. Speaker . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Mark my words we have no problem with 
the exer cise itself it might be an initiative of an NGO or a personal initiative but our concern 
is on misuse and involvement of public servant /office r who is paid by the tax payer , that is 
unlawful so kindly bring the response and the names of those public servant s that have been 
involved in one way or another in such unlawful exercise. Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
(Interruption)  
March 21 , 2019                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offi cial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 22  I have already made a ru ling, a point of order on which ? Yes kindly we are out of 
time and I have only one minute . 
 Hon. Samba:  Okay one second . 
 The Temporary Speake r (Hon. Bwire) : One minute . 
 Hon. Samba:  Okay Mr. Speaker thank you . I would like to seek a Statement from the 
Member in charge of religion ; whether she is aware as a representative of religion  that most 
of the Churches which used to worship in the halls within the schools are nowadays bad and 
which measures  they have or does she have to make sure that during Fridays when our 
Muslims brother worship they have enough parking spaces. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : I think no need to respond today , Hon. 
Member you will bring the response next week on Thursday.  
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Spika mimi yangu ni Taarifa  nataka kutoka kwa 
Mwenyekiti  wa Kamat i ya Uchukuzi  kuhusu barabara yangu ya kutoka Maternity mpaka 
Bicmam  ambayo im eharibika na Mwanakandarasi  alipewa kazi mwezi wa tisa mwaka jana  
nataka nijue imefikia wapi sababu mvua inakaribia.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you it has been taken care  of Hon. 
Members. Yes?  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Mr. Speaker am standing under Standing Order 41 2 (c), and I would 
like to know from the Chairperson Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works if she is aware 
of the condition of the  road from Holy Ghost Catholic Church to Maternity when will it be 
repaired because according to what I know the contract was be ing given last year. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Point taken. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members there being no any other business the House stands adjourned until 
26th of March, 2019 at 2 :30p.m. 
The House rose at 4 :25p.m. 