February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 16th February, 2017  
The House met at 2: 38pm. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Members you may sit down. Yes Clerk . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CH AIR 
 Members I have a communication . 
 Good afternoon . 
 In today’s sitting, I would like to take this opportunity to present to you, two very 
important documents for purposes of adoption by the County Assembly.  
1. STRATEGIC PLAN 2015/2020 FOR MOMBASA COUNTY AS SEMBLY  
 
The Strategic P lan is an i nformation  tool aimed at guiding the internal stake holders,  that is 
County Assembly Service Board,  Membe rs of County Assembly and Staff  to achieve its 
mandate.  
 
It also forms a basis thr ough which performance indicators  are developed, monitored and 
evaluated.  
 
Needless to over -emphasize, the Strategic Plan also ensured that the ambitions of the 
citizens of Mombasa County are realized by providing directions in performance of key 
roles as provided under Article 185 of the c onstitution of Kenya  which includes but not 
limited to: - 
 Legislation  
 Representation  
 Oversight  
       The Strategic Plan further charts out a course for the future, by outlining the Assembly’s;  
       Vision, Mission and Core Values.  
       During the lif e of the plan, the Assembly aims to pursue strategies that will provide    
       sustainable local g overnance.  
       In our endeavor to achieve a Strategic P lan for the County Assembly of Mombasa, we  
       ensured that a ll major internal stakeholders w ere involved from the Speaker, County  
       Assembly Service  Board, all Members of County  Assembly and the entire staff were                                                                
engaged and actively participated in the development and validation  of the plan.  
        Also a Strategic Plan Consultant was engaged in order to provide professional guidance in 
achieving the documents.  
2. HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES AND PROCEDURE MANUAL  
 
The Human Resource Manual has been formulated with the aim of guiding t he County 
Assembly  Service Board, Management and e mployees in making decision on daily 
operation in a systematic and standardized manner.  
 
The Manual defines the term and c onditions of employment for County Assembly Staff.  
 
February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  2 Further, it also describes benef its and the rights due to and the obligation and responsibilities  
required of employees of the Assembly.  
 
Indeed it forms a basis upon which the working culture will develop.  
 
As we release these superbly comp leted publication s for this Assembly, please al low me to 
convey our profound gratitude and heartfelt appreciation to all the Members of the County 
Assembly, Staff and USAID -AHADI for the tireless effort made towards achieving this 
dream.  
 
Over and above we wish to note with happiness that the partners hip borne between the 
County Assembly and USAID and AHADI beared some fruits with the publication of these 
useful documents.  
 
Every M ember will be issued with a copy of Strategic Plan and the Human Resource 
Manuals will be issued to the departments of the Assembly.  
(End of communication from the Chair)  
Thank You!  
 Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
 Yes Hon Fadhili.  
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika tukijua kuwa mpaka 
leo hii mgomo wa madaktari unaendelea, kusema kweli wananchi wanapata dhiki.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama mbele ya Nyum ba hii kutaka kujua kutoka kwa 
Kiongozi wa Walio  wengi ama K iongozi wa Walio  wachache ili wa weze kutuambia ni mikakati 
gani serikali ya Kaunti inafanya il i kuweza kusaidia wananchi wetu.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika imech ukua sasa tak riban siku zaidi ya 75 madaktari wakiwa wako 
katika mgomo na mpaka sasa hivi hatujaona tamaa yoyote ya madaktari kurudi kando na 
mazungumzo yanayoe ndelea na kesi zilizoko kortini . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Mwadziwe, What i s it. 
 Hon. Mwinga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the speaker who is talking right 
now is confusing;  according to the O rder paper statement which is given is really different from 
what we can see from the O rder paper . 
 So I don’t know whether he has t wo statements or it is the same statement Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili, what is it Hon Amur?  
 Hon:  Amur : Thank you Mr. Sp eaker.  Mr. Speaker Hon Fadhili deferred the first 
statement because he is in consultation with d epartment of transport that's why he did not report 
the statement until further notice , so the question that Hon Fadhili is talking about is an issue that 
is of very important at the moment. Thank you . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili  there is a concern  here that 
what is in the O rder paper is not what you are talking about, so it has been asked do you have 
two statements . 
 Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi ningependa M heshimiwa aangazie yale 
ambayo ninayazungumza kwa sababu labda ku likuwa na typing error .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimezungumza yale ambayo yana umuhimu na yanaathiri watu 
wetu ndio maana hii nyengine ilioko hapa nimeona ni afadhali ikae kando lakini nizungumzie 
February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  3 haya ambayo yanajiri ndani ya K aunti yetu na Kenya nzima kwa  ujumla ambayo mpaka sasa hivi 
Rais wa Taifa, Rais wa Jamhuri hii ya Kenya bado amenyamaza hajasema hata neno moja na 
wananchi wanazidi kuumia . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni janga ambalo watu wetu, wakenya wetu wanaumia na mimi 
naomba kupitia kwa wale viongozi  ambao nimewataja watupe habari kwanza ya serikali ya 
Kaunti inafanya mikakati gani? Maana kila mtu anajipanga kivyake kando na kuwa huko Kenya 
nzima.  
 Na vile  vile Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa kutakua na msukumo maana hivi sasa tumeona 
korti imewacha wazi watu  waende kwa mazungumzo ikiwa pia kuna vile serikali ya Mombasa 
Kaunti pia itaingia katika mazungumzo yale . 
 Ningependa Kiongozi wa W alio wachache pia atueleze ikiwa K aunti itaingia katika 
mazungumzo yale ili kuweza kurahisisha janga hili ambalo limetukumba  maana Mheshimiwa 
Spika watu wanaumia, watu wengi wameaga dunia, watu hawana uwezo wanakwenda katika 
hospitali za kibinafsi.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba na naomba wenzangu walichukulie jambo hili kwa 
umuhimu zaidi walipatie umuhimu zaidi na Kiongozi wa Walio wengi apewe ama Ki ongozi wa 
Walio wachache akiwa najua ni mama, ambaye pia mama ni mlezi, uchungu wa mwana aujuae . 
aujua mama.  
 Naomba tupate muelekeo Mheshimiwa Spika ili nini tuweze ku saidia watu wetu kule 
mashinani ; kwa kusema kweli ni dhiki amba yo imeingia na mimi nashangaa nikion a kwamba 
sasa hivi Rais wa Jamhuri amenyamaza .  
 Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na naomba tupate taarifa kutoka kwa hawa viongozi iwe ni 
taarifa ambayo itakuwa pia wameipea kipao mbele. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Fadhili but I think t his 
question since we have the Chairman of Health in this H ouse; I think  it will be better to the 
Chairman of H ealth to respond to the question ... 
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika, n aheshimu uamuzi wako najua tuna e Mwenyekiti 
wa Kamati ya Afya lakini twaomba tukiipatia kipao cha juu zaidi ili serikali ya Kaunti…  
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Mary what is it?  
 Hon. (Ms)  Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nashangaa na 
Mheshimiwa an ayeongea na wewe ambaye ndio Spika ushatoa directive  sasa nashangaa tena 
kama anajibizana afuate sheria za Bunge. Ahsante.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili.  
 Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika mim i nimesimama na nikasema naheshimu uamuzi 
wako. Mheshimiwa Spika sijapinga uamuzi wako na naomba Mheshimiwa awe msikilivu kwa 
hali ya juu akiwa ndani ya Bunge halafu siwezi kukosa nidhamu nikaenda kinyume na vile  
umeamua isipokuwa tu nimesema naomba Mweny ekiti akiunganishwa na vinara wetu wa Bunge 
wahusishwe pamoja watupatie mwelekeo ambao utakuwa ni mwelekeo wenye kusaidia watu 
wetu. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you all the same but we have the 
Chairman for the He alth Committee he might be having an immediate answer, Leader of 
Majority and Leader of Minority this is not their immediate duty but Hon Kibwana is here and 
that it is his immediate duty so Hon Kibwana do you have an answer on that please?  
 Yes Hon Saad Faraj . 
February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  4  Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I also respect your decision and the direction but all 
the same we ha ve a person who speaks for the g overnment in this House and this particular 
individual is the Majority Leader and if at all whatever happens in t he National Assembly is 
something for us to be proud of what to follow then we should follow the precedents tha t has 
been set by the national g overnment . 
 When issues are rais ed by Members that concern the g overnment directly then the 
Majority Leader is gi ven that opportunity to be able to bring that report to this House on behalf 
of the g overnment and I think with all due respect Mr. Speaker we should follow that route. 
 Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : But this is fully represented we ha ve the 
Chairman on Health, the Health Ministry is represented in this House so I still think it is fair for 
Hon Kibwana to give us an immediate answer. Hon Kibwana , will you please respond to that?  
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon Speaker as the Chair of  the Health Committee I 
would like us to share some few event s on this strike of our doctors .  
 Hon Speaker we are aware that this is a national strike tha t is also involving the County 
government ; currently the Council of Governors who are also in these  negotiation s they are still 
also consulting in this issue and you are aware th at there was a time the County g overnments , the 
47 Counties were about to sack the doctors but this deci sion was of sacking the doctors .   
 Hon Speaker we are very much aware that  there was also a case i n the illegality of this 
strike; up to now the stand of the County g overnment is that the strike is illegal, the strike is 
illegal and also the court has also declare d that this strike is illegal. Mr. Speaker....  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker , Point of information . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Amur Murfad whom do you want to 
inform?  
 Hon. Amur : Hon Kibwana Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the matter is before the court he  
cannot tell us about the Court, t he issue s that are before the  court cannot be discussed here , he 
should just tell us the matter is before the Court and sit because the matter is before the court so 
let him tell us that the matter is before the court and that is end of it . Thank you.  
 Hon. Kibwana  Swal eh: Hon Speaker with all due respect with the Mzee  Hon Amur I 
think if you read the newspaper, the newspapers .... I realize  he is analogue but if you are digital 
you will find that the court declare d that the negotiation continue and there was no ruling th at it 
was given saying that they should be no debate on this issue.  
 Hon Speaker this  is very important because our M embers are suffering ; now that the 
doctors have been release d then also as you are aware that this issue was also discus sed before 
the Sen ate with the C ommittee on Health.  
 Hon Speaker there was a fight between the Ps and the Cabinet Secretary which is very 
sad for us;  it shows that the national g overnment which is led by Hon  Uhuru Kenyatta is 
incapable of finding the solution to this docto rs striking .  
 Hon Speaker kindly we are hoping that the CBA...  
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Fadhili what is it? H e is responding 
to your statement . 
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Mheshimiwa Spika  naheshimu maoni ya Mheshimiwa lakini 
Mhesh imiwa mimi pendekezo langu ilikuwa ni je twafanya m ikakati gani huku chini kwetu? 
 Tusaidie watu wetu Mheshimiwa Spika kando na hayo masuala ya Waziri  ama vita 
February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  5 vilivyoko vya Waziri  atupatie ni mikakati gani? N dio maana ilikuwa nimeomba aidha 
Mwenyekiti ama  wale viongozi wa humu ndani watuambie twafanya nini hapa chini maana watu 
wetu waumia, watu wetu wa Kaunti yetu wazidi kuumia wengine wazidi kufariki . 
 Kuna masuala mengine ni hatari hatujui Mheshimiwa Spika kama Kaunti inafanya nini? 
 Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Kibwana can you respond?  
 Hon. Kibwana:  Hon Speaker when you were giving the way forward you will also share 
the background of this issue.  
 I want to inform my colle ague  that this  is the first time tha t I have s een this question in 
this Honorable House Mr. Speaker , so what I was saying is that there's what is happening 
currently and also when the negotiation is on.  
 Hon Speaker the issue of what we are doing as a government, the County g overnment has 
no any other plans on this issue;  am speaking on the information as the Chair of the Health 
Committee , the idea that was brought was of hiring doctors instead . 
 Hon Speaker this issue (??) because it is very important and you find that the union has 
refuse d all the doctors to be taken on contract basis , I hope that the negotiation s are going on and 
very soon the doctors will resume their duties. Thank you , Hon Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Wangudi . 
Hon. Wangudi:  Mhes himiwa Spika.....  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Can you use your microphone please . 
Hon. Wangudi:  Taarifa  ya Mheshimiwa Fadhili ilikuwa imelenga pahala pamoja , 
msimamo wa serikali ya Mombasa kuhusiana na jambo hili ni gani? Mheshimiw a Spika 
Mwenyekiti anatoa maoni yake binafsi … 
(Laughter)  
...yale ambayo anazungumza sio msimamo wa serikali ni mawazo yake Mheshimiwa 
Spika na ni suala baya ambalo tunafaa tulizuie katika Jumba hili ni naomba Mheshimiwa Spika 
atoe msimamo wa serikali na sio  msimamo wake ni suala la aibu .  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Saad Faraj . 
Hon. Faraj:  Naam a hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ushahidi 
ambao tuko nao kutokamana na wenzetu ambao wako kwa Bunge hili ambao ni wanakamati wa 
Kamati ya Afya wanatoa ushahidi kikamilifu kuwa tangu matatizo haya yalipoanza hawajawahi 
kukaa hata kikao kimoja kuzungumzia masuala haya . 
Mheshimiwa Spika  ni masikitiko makubwa kuona tuna hospitali kubwa ambao inaangalia 
masuala ya usalama na masuala ya kiafya kwa wakaazi wetu na wakaazi waliomo pembezoni 
mwa Kaunti wote hii leo hajachukua hatua Bwana Mwenyekiti hata kusema waweze kutoka na 
kwenda sehemu kama ile kuangalia zile hali za wale wagonjwa wanavyo  angaliwa.  
Mheshimiw a Spika haya si masuala ya kucheza haya ni masuala ambayo kwamba 
yanaathiri wananchi moja kwa moja na ni lazima ikiwa suluhisho halijapatikana kitaifa ni wajibu 
wetu tupate suluhisho ambalo kuwa ni la kikaunti ili kuweza kuwasaidia watu wetu kwa sababu 
hiyo ni sababu ya kuwa tumechaguliwa nayo kwenye Nyumba hili na sio kukaa kuchekeshana 
hapa na kuzungumza masuala ambayo hayana msingi. A hsante sana.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon Kibwana but I have a suggestion maybe 
I can see Hon  Fadhili a nd Hon  Saad are not satisfied with your answer ; may be I give you three 
days, is just an option so that you can bring back the report on Tuesday and if you fail to get an 
information you can use the Leader of Majority or Leader of Minority to help you to retrieve the 
February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  6 information but if you think you have a comprehensive answer which Members will be satisfied 
with I can give you some few minutes to communicate .  
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Hon Speaker just to respond to my Hon  Member who is not the 
Committe e Hon  Saad Faraj Ahmed is the Chairman of Lands and wherever he goes nothing is 
happening … 
(Laughter and applause)  
Hon Speaker....  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Wangudi:  Hon Speaker....  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hono rable Members order let us give Hon  
Kibwana time to respond . 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you for your protection Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Let us give him some time . 
Hon. Faraj:  But he has mention ed my name M r. Speaker....  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You will be given time , let us hear what he 
wants to say . 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Can you protect me Hon  Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes go ahead please . 
Hon. Kibw ana Swaleh : Hon Speaker....  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Saad have your seat please I will give 
you time to talk .  
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Hon Speaker...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Let it flow . 
(Laughte r) 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Hon Speaker let  us go to record that my Committee sat and 
discussed the issue of the doctor's strike and I have evidence th rough my Clerk that we wrote a 
letter to the Chief Officer on the issue asking status on both the facilit ies in Mombasa.  
Hon Speaker my Committee is working 24 hours , it is working hard on this issue and also 
going to make sure we give our report as you give us your direction so that all the Members will 
be able now to see what we have done on our part.  
Hon Speaker I think some of the Members who are trying to say the Committee is not 
working should also look at the houses, their Committees first before pointing a finger to other 
Committees , as you are aware that he was also the Finance Chairman. Thank you.  
(Laughter)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I think that chapter is closed, Yes Hon  Saad 
Faraj can you …, this is a statement  you cannot discuss a statement . 
Hon. Faraj:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker there were some allegat ions which were 
directed to me by the Hon  Member for Miritini . Mr. Speaker my track record speaks very clear ly 
for itself ; at the time when I was the Chairman for Budget and Appropriations that was the time 
everyone had laptops and Ipads … 
(Applause)  
February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  7 And that is a record that has been set and everybody understand clearly it’s because of the 
way we were able to do our budgets.  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Amur : With all due respect Mr. Speaker, we cannot be mislead I never received a 
laptop.  
Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Amur I have not given you time to talk . 
Hon. Amur : But somebody cannot lie in this House Mr. Sp eaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You stan d then I give you time to speak . 
Hon. Amur : Yes. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : But I have not given you time.  
Hon. Amur : Yes but somebody is putting things . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No no no you don’t speak before I allow you 
to speak.  
Hon. Faraj:  Thanks for the protection Mr. Speaker and this is a Hou se of rules and 
regulations and we need to obse rve that whenever we decide to…  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amur what is it?  
Hon. Amur : Whenever any Member is given anything by the County he has to append  
his signature , I appended my signature when I received the Ipad , not the Laptop Mr. Speaker  
(Applause)  
If there were Laptops which were purchased M r. Speaker we want to see the L SO as the 
evidence in this Assembly because I did not receive that , I don’ t want to be accountable for 
something I did not receive. Thank you.  
Hon. Faraj:  Hon Amur is very  emotional  Mr. Speaker , I have c ome up clearly to say that 
the laptops were bought and they were given to the staff, the Ipads were bought and they were 
given to staff and Members of County Assembly during my time and so many other issues that 
we were able to allocate in our budget which dealt with our welfare and during my time I can 
speak with my head held very high because during my time nobody went to any trip, travelled 
out of this County without being paid here but today you understand the current position...  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes. 
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker I have made sure in whenever capacit y, in whatever position 
that I was I made sure that I delivered.  
During my time as the Chairman for Tourism I did perform and allocated so much money 
for different areas to enhance tourism in our County Mr. Speaker, I am working I have been 
working and I w ill still be working . Thank you so much.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
 Hon Kizito Ope ya. 
 Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give the following statement on the status of county 
governmen ts development projects raised in this House by Hon  Paul Onje (MCA, Junda Ward) 
during the Seventh sitting on Wednesday, 25th January 2017.  
The Committee on Implementation sought a response on the matter and wrote to the 
County Secretary vide a lette r Ref. CAM/CAC/ADM/VOL.V/117 dated 8th February 2017.  
February 16, 20 17                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            20 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Han sard Editor  Page  8 As we await for the response by the County Secr etary, we would like to inform Members 
that all County development projects are outlined in the County Integrated Development Plan 
which are cascaded annua lly in the Annual Development Plan.  
The status of all the projects per department is also listed therein.  
 Mr. Speake r sir, we would like to inform Members to appr aise themselves of the contents 
of the Annual Development Plan, 2016 for further details.  
Thank you , sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon  Kizito, Hon Onje is not here 
so we don't know if h e is satisfied or not satisfied . Yes Hon Mary Akinyi?  
Hon. (Ms)  Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, ameacha ujumbe kwamba yal e ambayo 
yatapitishwa hapa yako sawa.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay, yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Members  having no other business this House is adjourned until Tuesday in the  
afternoon.  
The House r ose at 3:13 pm. 
    
 
 
 