November 1 6, 2017                MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                  21 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thurs day, 16th November, 2017  
The House met at 2:37p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Memb ers you may be s eated. Yes Clerk?  
MESSAGE  
Hon. Members Pursuant to section 9 sub section 2 and pa ragraph 3 sub section 4 on 
the First S chedu le of the County Assembly Service Act , 2017 , I have received a letter dated 
15th November from the Secretary County Assembly Board. Hon. Members the  letter reads ; 
(Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri)  read the Message)  
RE: NOMINATION OF TWO MEMBERS TO COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOARD  
Pursuant to section 9 sub section 2 and par agraph 3 and 4 the First S chedule of the 
County Assembly Service Act, 2017. I hereby  submit the names of two N ominees to the 
Board nominated Pursuant to Section 46 sub section d of the County Assembly Service Act, 
2017 for approval by the County Assembly.  
1. Swab ir Mas oud Abdallah  - Male  
2. Lynette M. Kamadi  - Female  
Hon. Members pursuant to Standing Order 39 sub section 3 (c) I hereby refer the 
message to Committee on Appointments/Rules and Procedures for consideration. Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon. Kitula ? 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I request for a statement that I 
seek to know from the relevant Committee on whether it is awa re of clogged 
manholes/drainage systems in Frere Town Ward , and what specific measures will be taken by 
the County Government to remedy the situation. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Hon. Members I refer this request for the 
statement to Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works , he is not 
around Hon. Fahad so any other Member ? Because I think even the Vice Chairperson is 
absent .. 
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) stood ) 
...so you are a Member  of the Committee?  I refer this letter to Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu , 
Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu when will the respon se be ready?  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): In a weeks'  time we will be able to 
respond on this issue.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So when you say in a weeks'  time it means next week 
Thursday ? 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Yes Mr. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu. Yes Clerk?   
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon. Feddis Salame . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Feddis Salame:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir , Involvement of Local 
Leaders in Ward Development Projects.  I seek to know from the relevant Committee on 
whether it is aware of on -going projects such as road repairs in Mwakirunge Ward that do not 
involve local l eaders and what measures the County Government will take to ensure all 
stakeholders are consulted and involved in Ward Development Projects. Thank you.  
November 1 6, 2017                MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                  21 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Feddis, Hon. Members again I refer this 
request for the statem ent to the Chairperson which I have seen now he is around; the 
Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works Hon. Fahad Kassim , 
Hon. Fahad Kassim when will the respon se be ready?  
Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I would kin dly request for two 
weeks' time please  that is because we already have the first one for the Frere Town so I think 
two weeks will be convenient and we will have a concrete report and also a positive one God  
willing. Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So when you are saying two weeks it means both the 
letters you will have them in two weeks' time or the first one you will have it next week and 
the one next week but one.  
Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Yes the first will be ready by next week and the second one 
after t wo weeks , so the first one by next week Thursday we will have it done and the second 
one by the other Thursday.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : That's okay . 
Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Thank you so much . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think the issue is the same thing so why  don't you just 
bring them all together?  
Hon. Fahad Kassim:  We would have done it b ut there's a need for site visit s with my 
fellow Committee Members so we will kindly request for that time.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It is fine . 
Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Okay tha nk you . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members the Assembly stands adjourned until T uesday 21st November, 2017 at 
2:30p.m. 
The Hous e rose at 2: 47p.m. 