March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 27th March, 2019  
The House met at 9:24a.m.  
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Hon. Members you may be sea ted. Yes, Clerk.  
 
PAPERS  
 
 Yes, Hon . Juma Renson Thoya , please table the R eport.  
 
(Paper laid)  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Yes, Mr. Speaker S ir on behalf of th e Committee of Labo ur, I stand to table 
the report,  the report on vetting of  Mr. Jeizan Faruk , Nominee for the position of Chief Executive  
officer to the  Mombasa County Public Service B oard, thank you.  
 
(Paper laid ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Clerk.  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
REPORT OF VETTING OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFI CER TO THE MOMBASA C OUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE  
BOARD (CPSB)  MR. JEIZAN FAROUK  
 
 I now call upon  Hon. Juma Renson Thoya , to give the Notice of M otion.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker S ir I rise, I beg to give  a notice of  the following M otion , that 
this House adopts the report of  vetting of  Chief Executive  Officer to the Mombasa County Public 
Service Board (CPSB) Mr. Jeizan Farouk.  
 

March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Juma Renson Thoya. Yes Clerk.  
 
STATEMENT  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY THE LEADER OF MAJ ORITY HON . MWIDANI ON THE REIMBU RSEMENT 
OF HON . MEMBERS AND STAFF WH O ATTENDED THE DEVOL UTIO N CONFERENCE IN KIRI NYAGA 
COUNTY  
 
 Yes, Hon . Hamisi Musa Mwidani. * 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr . Speaker S ir for giving me this 
opportunity to respond on the S tatement which was raised in this  House . Mr. Speaker Sir the 
request for Statement was raised in the House , regarding the reimbursement  of Ho n. Members 
and staff who att ended the devolution conference.  Mr. Speaker S ir my office wrote to the Clerk 
of the County Assembly  seeking to be furnished with a written response  to the S tatement, the 
County Assembly Clerk wrote to the County Executive  Member for Finance and Economic 
Planning and  Chief Officer in the  same  Department, seeking further clarification , subsequently  
the County Assembly Clerk wrote back to me and I wish to report t he Assembly as follows ;  
Mr. Speaker Sir we had a meeting with the C ommittee and then it was resolved;  
1. Supplementary b udget upload is currently ongoing and therefore no item can be 
committed in the IFMIS until is finalized,  
2. Central Bank Recurrent Account b alance is not sufficient to pay for the above 
event. Request for funds dated 7th February, 2019 remains pending due to delays in 
disbursement of funds by both the National Treasury and approval by the County 
Executive Member, Fina nce and Economic Planning.    
3. Honorable  Members and staff who attended the conference are encouraged to 
submit their claims for reimburseme nt to the Finance and Accounts D epartment so as to 
enable them proceed with the preliminary task of processing individual payment 
vouchers . 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker but.. . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, you can continue Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani . 
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : I think Mr. Speaker on that issue I am very 
happy that I have received a  report that the money is on the proce ss now maybe here up to Friday 
Members will be getting their allowances so I think we should accept  it to give it more time up to  
Friday and I would like M embers to stand with the prayer number three that they should prepare 
for the claim because most of the  Members up to  this moment  have never prepared their claim s 
so I wish if they can prepare the claim so that when the money is there it will be easy for them to 
be reimbursed . Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Renson T hoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I wonder if the County of Mombasa how many Houses do we 
have , because I think I have heard a vocabulary that, Supplementary budget is uploading , I thin k 
when did we pass through the S upplementary budget ? 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Maybe if there is a nother Assembly that did that , we understand that we have the 
Supplementary budget that had not been brought in this House , how is it being upload ed?  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon . Amur.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker , my learned frien d is like a witch doctor who knew 
what I wanted to say , we cannot allow the uploading  that is going on , yet the S upplementary 
budget did not appear in this House . Mr. Speaker it  is an unconstitutional matter for them to 
upload before this  House approved.  
  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon . Hamisi can you clarify .  Mr. Speaker 
I have to be very frank  because I con cur with the Members for what  has been done , it is against 
our process but it is good as a Member to be very open to say the truth but I am happy that we 
are going to have a meeting on Thursday with the finance, these are  the questions which we have 
to ask them … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes because actually I cannot hide and while I know the re is uploading there taking  on; 
although it has gone in a different way but actually because Mr. Speaker with your due respect 
we are now calling the meeting on Thursday so these  are the issues they should be raised. Thank 
you. 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Hamisi Musa where  did you get this information 
of the supplementary upload is currently going on? Because, as I understand that you have not 
met the Minister! So I do  not know where did you get this information, are you sure about this 
information or …?  
 
 The Leader of Maj ority (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I am very much sure because the 
Clerk could not mention things which are not correct , to be very sincere and it is better I am 
saying I have to be very open to this House; that is why now we have called a meeting on 
Thur sday to know in which position made them to upload the budget before it has not passed to 
the House.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir this is a House of law and all procedures must be 
followed , we canno t be taken for grant ed as rubber stamps . It has been there in the Daily Nation 
and every M edia that this Mombasa County has been turn ed to be a rubber stamp! And this is 
now proving to be yes, we are rubber stamp s!  
 We want an immediate stop to the uploadin g Mr. Speaker through this House we cannot 
accept. It is unacceptable Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Hon.… Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Hon. Thoya:  I think there is a prob lem Mr. Speaker and unless the S tatement response is 
expunged  out of the proceeding s of today, w e want the Chairman or the Acting C hairman to give 
us direct message from the CEC not a report from Salim. That report must be withdrawn with 
immediate effect. Thank you.  
 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes H on. Hamis i Musa please can you just go back to the 
CEC and clarify this issue so that in the afternoon we get the full report because I believe that 
they cannot be uploading the S upplementary budget without the House seeing it unless your 
Clerk gave  you wrong information , please s o just go and clarify.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes so that in the afternoon we get the answer please.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Sir. 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes C lerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF REPORT OF  THE VETTING OF MR. JEIZAN FAROUK , NOMINEE FOR THE POSI TION OF 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFI CER TO MOMBASA COUNT Y PUBLIC SERVICE BOA RD  
 
 Yes Hon . Renson Juma, please move the M otion?  
 
 Hon. Thoy a: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I rise on ce again to propose the adoption of the 
report on the vetting of Mr. Je izan Farouk , Nominee for the position of Chief Executive Officer 
to Mombasa County Public Service Board.  
 
(Loud C onsultation)  
 
1. Introduction  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon . Members of the County Assembly, it is with great pleasure to 
table this report on the vetting of Mr. J eizan  Farouk , His Excellency the Governor’s nominee for 
the position of Chief  Executive Officer, Mombasa County Public Service Board  in the County  
Government of Mombasa.  
 During the 8th Sitting held on 21st February , 2019 the Hon . Speaker conveyed the 
message of His Excellency, the Governor vide his letter dated 11th February , 2019 of Ref. Msa 
CG/APP/CECM/1/208.   
 Pursuant to the provision of S ectio n 58(1(c) of the County Government Act , 2012, 
Section 7 of the Public Appointment (County Assemblies Approval) Act No 5. of 2017 and 
Standing Order 191 (5)(f)(g) the nomination stood committed to the Committee on  Labour and 
Social Welfare of this County A ssembly.  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Pursuant to Section 7(1) of the Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval)  Act, 
2017,  Section 42 (2) of the County Governments Act,  2012  (Revised , 2016) a nd Standing Orders 
191(5)(f)(g) , the nomination stood committed to the Committee on  La bour and Social Welfare 
of this Honourable County Assembly.  
 Through a press advertisement appearing in The Star  Newspaper on Thursday,  7th March, 
2019  and the County Assembly W ebsite, the N ominee and the public were informed of the 
vetting and the public was invited to send written memorandum on the suitability or o therwise of 
the N ominee.  
 The vetting  exercise was conducted by the C ommittee on Monday, 18th March , 2019 
from 9:00 a.m. at the office of the Clerk, County Assembly Building.  
 This report provi des the findings and recommendations on the suitability for appo intment 
to the position of the N ominee for consideration by this House and approval of the same.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon . Members of the County Assembly let me now present the 
report of the C ommittee on Labour and Social Welfare for consideration by the House.  
 
2. Observations and Findings  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, the following are the observation and findings of the vetting exercise.  
2.1 The Committee on Labour and Social Welfare is mandated under Standin g Orders 42(1) and 
191(5)(f)(g) to hold approval hearings and make recommendations to the Coun ty Assembly 
for appointment of M embers to the County Executive Committee.  
 
2.2 The Committee did not receive any adverse reports, presentations or complaints for or 
against the appointment of Mr. J eizan  Farouk for the position of Chief Secretary Officer, 
Mombasa County Publ ic Service Board of the County g overnment of Mombasa.  
 
2.3 The N ominee being vetted answered all written and oral questions that were asked by the 
Commi ttee satisfactorily. These questions included those provide for in the First Schedule of 
the Public Appointments (County Assemblies) Approval Act, 2017.  
 
2.4 The Committee asked the Nominee on meaning and  his understanding of integrity.  He was 
able to satisfac torily explain the same and he did inform the Committee when asked, that he 
had not been adversely mentioned in matters of corruption.  
 
2.5 The N ominee, Mr. Jeizan Far ouk has excellent educational credentials. He holds  a Bachelor 
of Laws (LLB), among other rel evant professional courses. He therefore meets the 
educational th reshold as provided in S ection  58(c) of the County Government  Act.  He 
presented his academic certificates as well as hi s numerous testimonials to the C ommittee.  
 
2.6 The N ominee has a wide knowl edge experience and competence in handling County Public 
Service  Board issues . He is currently the A cting Chief  Executive Officer and Legal Advisor 
for the County Public Service Board and among his achievements are: -   
 
 He introduced result based man ageme nt system, m ethodologies and tools such as the 
Performance App raisal S ystem and employees dashboard to harmonized 
development.  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Coupled with employee training to cope with the changing technological times.  
 
The N ominee submitted the following documents: - 
 
 Clearance Certificate from Ethics and Anti -Corruption Commission  
 National Identification Card  
 Compliance Certificate from Higher Education Loans Board  (HELB)  
 Director of Criminal Investigation Clearance Certificate  
 Kenya Revenue Authority Compliance Certi ficate  
 Customer Credit Report  
 
The original of the aforementioned, including original national I/D  card were also 
availed to the C ommittee for verification during the approval hearing as required.  
 
2.7 Mr.  Jeizan Far ouk (Born on 16th  September  1984), the N ominee for the position of Chief 
Executive Officer – County Public Service Board presented the following 
certificates/testimonials to the Committee:  
 
Educational Background : 
 
2019          Certified Secretary (KASNEB)  
2011   Advocate – Admission to the Bar  
2009  – 2010  Post graduate Diploma – Kenya School of Law  
2005 – 2008  Bachelor of Law (LLB) – Moi University     
2000 – 2003    (KCSE) Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education – Sunshine Secondary 
School  
1991 – 1999  (KCPE) Kenya Certificate of Primary Edu cation  – Lang 'ata West Primary  
 
Offices h eld: 
 
1. January 2017 –Date    Acting Chief Executive Officer and Legal Advisor to the  
     Mombasa County Public Service Board  (CPSB) .   
 
2. Aug 2015 - Dec 2016      County Government of Mombasa – Deputy Director  
Board Management Services  & Legal Advisor County 
Public Service Board.   
 
3. Feb 2014 – Jul 2015          County government of Mombasa – Legal Officer  
  
4. Mar 2012 – Jan 2014   Abdulswamad, Abeid Said  & Co. Advocate (Mombasa)  
Associate Advocate.  
  
5. Mar 2011 - Feb 2012       Abdul swam ad, Saad & Associates Advocates  
 
6. Jul 2010 - Feb 2011          Consortium for the Empowerment& Development of  
Marginalized Communities (CEDMAC) – Program Officer  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7   
7. Aug 2008 -Aug 2009       Children Legal Action Network  – Volunteer  
  
2.8 That having considered th e credentials, suitability,  capacity and integrity of the N ominee, 
and pursuant to Standing Order 42(1) and 191 (5)(f)(g), the Committee at its meeting held 
on 26th March , 2019 at the Mombasa County Assembly Buildings at 11 :30a.m. resolved to 
recommend tha t the County Assembly approves the appointment by His Excellency the 
Governor of Mr. Je izan Far ouk to the position of Chief Executive Officer, to the Mombasa 
County Publ ic Service Board in the County g overnment of Mombasa.  
 
3. Conclusions  
 
3.1 The Committee conduc ted the vetting exercise as per the law and was satisfied with the 
credentials, experience and capacity of Mr. Jeizan Far ouk, Nominee for the position of 
Chief Executive Officer to the Mombasa, County Publi c Service Board, in the County 
government of Mombas a and therefore recommended him for appointment to the position.  
 
4. Recommendations  
 
4.1 That this report containing the C ommittee introduction, observation/finding, conclusion and 
recommendation on the vetting of N ominee for the position of  Chief Executive Off icer to 
the Mombasa County Public Service Board be adopted by the County Assembly of 
Mombasa.  
4.2 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I now beg to move that this report be adopted by M embers of 
this House.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker,  Hon. Naliaka will second this M otion.  Thank  you. 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon. Naliaka?  
 
 Hon. Naliaka:  Mr. S peaker Sir I beg to second the M otion.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Naliaka. Thank you Hon . Members I now  
propose the question that the M otion b y Hon. Renson Juma Thoya be considered by this 
Honourable House in the same terms as moved?  
 
 (Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Renson Juma Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Once again  I want to appreciate that the Members 
are ready to debate on this, what I want to tell this House that the officer said Mr. Jeizan Faruk 
submitted  his documents and we are very certain he is out to prove a lot of change s in matters of 
labour in this County . 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  We und erstand we have issues in this County here and the re but I know given this 
opportunity and the regular interaction between Jeizan Farouk and the Committee he will bring 
changes of great ben efit to this County . I urge the Honourable House to support this report.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Thoy a. Yes Hon. Salama?  
 Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Ningependa k umuunga mkono 
asilimia mia moja  Mheshimiwa Thoya kwa ripoti ali oileta kwa sababu huyu ni kijana na ana 
nguvu na pia ashawahi kutekeleza majukumu mengi kabla ya ripoti hii kufika . Kwa hivyo mimi 
nasema naunga mkono mia fil mia . Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika on the 
observations and findings under 2.2 naona kuna t ofauti ya kazi ali oweza kupatiwa , kulingana na 
sheria Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti inastahili kuwa Chief Executive Officer not Chief Secretary 
Officer . Kwa hivyo kuna tofauti hapo kwa hivyo nafikiri ni  makosa ya Karani  waweze 
kurekebisha hiyo kwa sababu hii ripoti isije baadae ikaweza kutufunga Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
lakini licha ya hayo naunga mkono hoja kama Mwanakamati wa masuala ya l eba katika Bunge la 
Mombasa kwamba kweli tulim kagua  kijana Jeyzan Far ouk na kama sisi serikali ya Kaunti ya 
Mombasa tunafahamika kuweza kuwaajiri vijana katika serikali ili kuweza kupata huduma bora . 
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na  kufikia hadi sasa Gavana kweli anatimiza kama alivyoweza 
kuajiri katika hotuba yake ya kwanza katika Bung e hili akasema ya kwamba kipao  mbele zaidi 
atapatia vijana . Kwa hivyo langu namuunga mkono ikiwa ataendelea na ari hii na motisha huo 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti itakuwa bora zaidi vijana wakiweza kuajiriwa kwa wingi hata nafasi 
iliyoweza kut olewa hivi karibuni itakuwa bora kuwa ikiwa asilimia kubwa itaweza kupatiwa 
vijana . Kwa hivyo kwa hayo machache naunga mkono kuteuliwa kwa Jeyzan Far ouk. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Ham isi Musa Mwidani, Majority 
Leader . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Mimi nasimama 
pia k uunga mkono na naunga mkono Kamati  kwa kazi nzuri walioifanya … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa sababu nimeona wamepitia kila kipengele kinach otakikana. Bwana Spika ukiangalia 
the Nominee ni mtu amesoma kwa hivyo mimi naona anastahili kuwa kwa hiyo nafasi hivyo  basi 
ningeomba hii hata isichukue zaidi ya lisaa limoja   kusudi tuweze kumuwezesha aweze kuingia 
ofisini mwake atekeleze ka zi muhimu sana kwa sababu najua hapo ndio kipe ngee ambacho kina 
umuhimu zaidi . Kwa hivyo mimi nai unga mkono  na pia na unga  mkono Kamati  ya Leba kwa 
kufanya kazi yao nzuri. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kombe Nzai?  
 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker Sir  for giving me this chance to air my 
views. I wish to con cur with my fellow Honorables to support this Motion, what matters Mr. 
Speaker when it comes to issues of appointment is the background qualification of that par ticular 
person and when I looked on the academic qualifications of the officer I feel very much 
impressed that indeed ye s he can make a change to this Department.  In addition to that Mr. 
Speaker this County lacks a lot of policy making so if this tendency will continue I believe much 
policy documents will come and many changes shall arrive. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kombe Nzai. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you M r. Speaker for this opportunity . Mr. Speaker I h appen to be 
one of the Members who inte rviewed the said fellow Hon. Jei zan Far ouk and according to me 
Jeizan has all the qualifications required to hold the said position. He had tough times Mr. 
Speaker ; I had so many questions concerning the current scena rio in our County system but 
indeed he explained himself .  
 I just want to make clear because we had some Member s who had some doubts but as a 
Committee we recommended that Jei zan to be given this position simply because of those areas 
that had issues . Mr. Speake r he clarified accompanied by the County Secretary and they gave us 
the information that we were looking for  and I therefore agree with my Chairman that this House 
in solidarity recommend that Jei zan Far ouk be given that position. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Bwire. Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I want to congratulate the 
Committee first for the good job done ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker the young man who is in his early 30s or the 35 has shown according to this  
report he has all the qualifications that need somebody to be given a certain chance , being a legal 
advisor to the County government I bel ieve he grew with that in that Board. 
 Mr. Speaker it is high time now we put y oung and energetic guys to the Departments 
other than still holding those who are now going to retire being given contract s; the system 
should change , and  if we have energetic young boys and girls like these the first priorities sh ould 
be given to these young boys and girls ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Members I now give the Hon. Juma Renson 
Thoya to reply to the Motion.  
 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           22 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . It is not just normal to miss  even a d issenting 
voice , it means the Committee did a wonderful job and I want to congratulate it … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 …As the Members wer e debating,  I expected even a single dissenting  voice,  but I think 
this man is out to prove greater changes and therefore I appreciate  all these people who have 
given their views towards this Motion and congratulate them and we say that we are together as 
one in this. Thank you.  
 
(Questi on put)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Renson Juma Thoya. Hon. 
Members I now put the question that th e Motion by Hon. Renson Juma be adopted by this Hon. 
House in the same terms as moved ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk ? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House sta nds adjourned until Wednesday 27th March, 2019 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10 :56a.m. 
  
 
 
 
 