February 24,  2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          22 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednes day, 24th February, 2016  
The House  met at 9:09a.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Kindly Hon. Members have your seats . Yes Clerk  can 
you confirm if this Hon. House ha s a quorum .  
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
 (Interruption)  
       Yes Sergeant a t Arm s ring the quorum bell,  
(Interruption)  
       Yes what is it Hon. Mary Akinyi . 
       Hon. (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I thought the Speaker is blind .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes but sometimes I’m supposed to actually have eyes 
and see to continue with the order of the Business .  
(Sergeant at A rms r ung the quorum bell)  
(A few Hon. Members enter ed the  Chamber s) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mr. Speaker Sir . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Caroline I see the Chief Whip around and I see 
there's a quorum in the House . Do you see if there's quorum or you  want to  confirm  whether  
there's quorum .  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Auma : I have already confirm ed with th e Chief Whip .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Clerk ? 
(Clerk confirmed no quorum status)  
        So yes Chief Whip can you confirm if there's quorum in the House .  
        Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Omar ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . I can see Hon. 
Members a re coming so I believe other M embers are still com ing, so let us give them some 
minutes to come and I believe we will have a quorum in the House . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : In other words the Chief Whip is trying to make himself 
clear that there's no quorum  and he continues to whip more M embers to come . Now the 
provisions of our very own Standing Order will allow him to get out and whip more 
Members . 
(The C hief Whip left the Chamber s) 
       Hon. Swaleh you are not the a ssistant to the Chief Whip and Sergeant At Arms you make 
sure you follow Standing Order 131 that the Second quorum bell be rung , which is Standing 
Order 131 (2) .  
February 24,  2016                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          22 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 (Silence ) 
       Yes Sergeant A t Arms let the s econd quorum bell be rung please because still there's no 
quorum, can the  bell be rung the second time .  
(Sergeant at A rms r ung the quorum bell  for the second time ) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Mr. Speaker can I be the Assistant Chief Whip so that I can whip 
Members . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : It is the p arty decision to s uggest that and the party has to 
direct us on that issue . 
(Silence ) 
       I want to believe that we have come to the expiry of the minutes in Standing Order 131 
(2). Clerk , can you confirm if there's quorum ? 
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen pursuant to Standing Order 131 (2) this House stands adjourned 
until toda y in the afternoon at exactly 2:30 p.m. 
 
The H ouse rose at 9:31 a.m. 
  
 