March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 27th March, 2019  
The House met at 2:45p.m.  
   
(The Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
 
REPORT ON D ISTRIBUTION OF LIVESTOCK TO GROU PS BY THE DEPARTMENT  OF AGRICULTURE , 
FISHERIES , LIVESTOCK  AND COOPERATIVES  
 
 Yes Ho n. Junior Wambua?  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Naam  Spika mpango huu wetu tulio  nao lakini kwa sasa nilikuwa 
tunaomba mtupatie wiki moja ili tuweze kujitayarisha kumaliza … 
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Order! Order Hon. Members. Yes Hon. Rens on 
Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Bwana  Spika sijui huyu Mwenyekiti Mwenza anakuwa na umaarufu gani 
wa kila wakati anaomba apewe muda, apewe muda hawa vifaranga kama wako basi saa hii 
wamekuwa wakubwa. Nasikitika alipewa mara  ya kwanza wakaja wakasema ripoti ni  gushi  leo 
tunatarajia hapa tujue wakulima wetu wanaletewa vifaranga lini? Na marekebisho yale ambayo 
tuliyaona yeye bado anataka muda, huu muda ni upi? Ama yeye pia ana  collude  na wale 
wahusika tujue Bwana Mwenyekiti.  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Mheshimiwa Spika tulileta ripoti yetu katika Bunge na haikupita 
tukaambiwa turudi tena tuitengeneze kwa hivyo nafikiri wiki ijayo kila kitu kitakuwa sawa . 
 

March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Members it was the wish of the Chair that 
the C ommittee brings a report so that the r eport turns to a Motion and it be debated in this 
Honourable  House so that the House can pass a resolution on a report concerning the distribution 
of livestock .  
 So Hon. Members let us give the Hon. Chair the time he has asks for a weeks’ time so 
that whe n he brings the report you will have time to look upon the report and pick whatever you 
wish to pick from the report and deliberate on this floor of the House . So Hon. Chairman 
Agriculture we are giving you one week as you requested failure of which the Ch air will direct 
on what will follow . 
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY THE LEADER OF MAJ ORITY HON . MWIDANI ON REIMBURSE MENT 
OF HON. MEMBERS AND STAFF WHO ATTENDED TH E SIXTH ANNUAL DEVOLUTION 
CONFERENCE FROM 4th TO 8th MARCH  
 
 Yes Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Let me tak e this 
opportunity to give the S tatement on reimbursement of Hon. Members and Staff who attended 
the sixth  Annual Devolution Conference from 4th to 8th March.  Mr. Speaker Sir, a request for 
Statement was made in this House regarding the reimbursement of Hon. Members and staff who 
attended the Devolution Conference.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, my office wrote to the Clerk of the County Assembly, seeking to be 
furnished with a written response to the Statement. The County Assembly Clerk wrote to the 
County Executive Member for Finance and Economic Planning and  the Chief Officer in the 
same Department, seeking furth er clarification. Subsequently, the County Assembly Clerk wrote 
back to me and I wish to report to the Assembly as follows;  
1. The County Treasury is in the process of preparing the Second Supplementary Budget 
2018/2019, hence the IFMIS system was closed from  Monday, 4th March , 2019 to -date. 
The earlier report that was presented in the morning had a typographic error, I regret for 
those anomalies.  
2. Our Central Bank of Kenya Recurrent account balances are not sufficient to pay for the 
Kirinyaga claims. Our reques t for funds which is dated 7th February, 2019 has remained 
pending for approval of payment for a long time hence disbursement of funds from the 
National Treasury has not taken place. However, yesterday evening, 26th March, 2019 the 
County Executive Committ ee Member (CECM), Finance approved the request and the 
process for funding of the Assembly has started. We expect to get funds God willing, 
before Friday, 29th March , 2019.  
3. Mr. Speaker , members and staff who attended the conference are yet to submit their 
claims for reimbursement to the Finance and Accounts department so as to enable us 
proceed with the preliminary task of processing individual payment vouchers.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ) exited the Chair ) 
(The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Bwire ) in the  Chair)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes thank you the Leader of Majority , it seems 
Members want to react. Yes Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur: (Off mic rophone ) …But Mr. Speaker what we ar e trying to see is 
the rights  of the A ssembly being infringed ; sometimes the Executive Members travelled and they 
were paid, what subjected us from being paid then? To be caused all th is embarrassment and for 
what, what did it cause the Executive to be paid and the Assembly Members not to be p aid? We 
want to know what was the criteria used also , how the Executive was paid and the Members of 
the County Assembly were subjected to  denial of  their rights?  
 They have embarrassed us to be waiting for our monies Mr. Speaker , we are more 
important tha n the Executive we are an Assembly who are suppose d to be oversight, 
representation and then we are being left behind and first priority is given to the Executive , this 
is not acceptable. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Faith Boni face?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I f ail to understand if the request 
was made  on 7th February why did it take so long for them to reply on 28th February ? Mr. 
Speaker that shows there  is sabotage from the CEC, Finance and measures hav e to be taken on 
this specific Executive Committee Member.   
 Mr. Speaker it is very much embarrassing the system we are told they were closed on 4th 
March and it was stated very clearly it will only take 10 days of which the 10 days we will have 
elapse d on 15th or 16th… 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Go on Honourable . 
 
 Hon. Mwende:  …So Mr. Speaker the Executive Committee Member should come out 
clear ly and explain to this Honourable  House what occurred in between for her to fail to pay  the 
Hon. Members on time. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Katika barua ya 
Afisa Mkuu  kipengele cha pili Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti inasema ; 
‘…In this reg ard, the IFMIS system shall be closed from Monday 4th March , 2019 therefore 
advise your requestors in the system to cease operations from then so  as not to  interfere with the 
supplementary budget preparation process ...’ kuanzia tarehe 4 Mheshimiwa Mwenyeki ti.  
 Leo Kiongozi wa Wengi  amekuja anatuambia kwamba ‘…however, yesterday evening, 
26th March, 2019 the County Ex ecutive Committee Member (CECM)  Finance approved the 
request and the process for funding of the Assembly has started. We expect to get funds  God 
willing, before Friday, 29th March , 2019 …’ 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Mheshimiwa hii ni picha dhahiri kwamba supplementary  imefanyika bila kupitia katika 
Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kinyume na sheria.  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni lazima 
tuweze kutenda haki na ikiwa tutakwenda k atika njia hii hatutakuwa hatujaitendea haki wananchi 
wa Mombasa, hatujajua nini iko katika supplementary budget , kitu gani kimeweza kutolewa, k itu 
gani kime wekwa, g ani imepunguzwa , gani imeongezwa? Leo hii tunakuja tunakubali kwa kuwa 
tunataka kulipwa mar upurupu yetu tupitishe kitu kama hichi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti itakuwa 
si jambo la sawa. Ahsante.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. W hat has happen ed should be condemned 
with the strongest term s possible;  It is very sad that the same Executive did pay for the 
registration of the Members to attend the conference , I thought at the time when they were 
paying for the registration they knew very well that they were supposed also to plan or to budget 
for the Members up keep while they are at that particular conference .  
 But I f ail to understand why after even we attended this conference it is about one or two 
weeks down the line and nothing seems to be happening , maybe what we can say is that 
somebody som ewhere is sabotaging the good work of this Assembly contrary to what they 
should be doing because they should be providing a very good environment for this Assembly to 
execute its duties and therefore I would like to urge the responsible person to move wit h speed 
and ensure Members are actually paid. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker Sir , I want to take you to the note from the Chief Officer, 
Finance it reached the O ffice of the  Clerk on 28th of February, 2019 it is now a month that thi s 
issue is coming to this House.  I will be very happy if we need to understand what has been 
happening  for the better part of 30 days.  Wajua nataka usikie vizuri . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwir e): Am all yours Hon. Member . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  …Barua hii ilifika katika ofisi ya Karani   wa Bunge hili tarehe 28 mwezi 
wa p ili na leo ni tarehe 27 , takriban siku 30 kama sikosei ; je kwa siku hizi 30 mambo yote 
yamekuwa  yamesimama,  vile vile ikingojea sisi tu pitishe supplementary budget . Tunataka kujua 
hivyo vitu vimeendelea kwa siku 30 kwa sababu tuko na tetesi kwamba ile supplementary budget  
ina uploadiwa kama sijui Kiswahili vizuri mtu ataniambia hizo ni vitu tunataka Afisa Mkuu  
aweze kujitokeza kwa Kamati na sisi tutakuwa pale tujue kwa sababu tunataka kujua je haya 
maneno yanayozungumzwa kwamba hii supplementary budget  is being upload ed, ni kweli  ama 
ni maneno tu kwa sababu tunaweza amua tusiliangazie hilo tuingie katika kumbukumbu za 
kuambiwa tumez embea katika utendaji  kazi wetu wa kupiga darubini .  
 Ni hatia , ni kinyume cha K atiba kwamba supplementary budget  itaendelea bila kupitia 
Jumba hili, k wa hivyo hayo mambo yanataka ufafanuzi wa kina Bwana Mwenyekiti. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. B wire) : Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi your opinion please?  
 
 Hon. Chi reri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika saa hii nimeamua kunyamaza yote 
yatakayozungumzwa ni sawa. Ahsante.  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Hon. Kombe Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker S ir to have given me this chance to als o 
express myself. First and fore most I want now to move from the sleeping bed to the walking 
position. I have learnt so many things and it is time now to see by your n aked eyes;  Mr. Speaker  
Sir having the report on my hand the dating of the Finance D epartme nt does not tally wi th the 
time, I was wondering why some unknown words were being used like stamp MCAs what and 
call... I believe these were some of the reasons some issues were being pre pared and passed 
without our knowledge , it is high time I urge this House to peruse each and every document that 
will be tabled in  this House because…  
 
(Interruption)  
(Applause)  
 
 I am seeing there is a need and co ncern , our people are suffering o n the gr ound at our 
expense and cost. Thank you very much.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes thank you Hon. Member. T he issue at hand 
is a bit critical and it touch es on finance and no business can be transacted anywhere without 
finance. That must be taken  into consideration and it is also as Hon. Kitula, the Chief W hip has 
stated it seems there are some contradiction s according to him. I will just want to make a ruling 
on the same , the Finance C ommittee in conjunction with the PAC to invite the Chief Offic er to 
deliberate on the sa me but still …  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 What is it Hon. Thoya? You are given a time to speak, why sitting down?  
 
(Hon. Thoya off microphone)  
 
 What is it Hon. Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya : You make me laugh Mr. Speaker when yo u say that you are r uling that 
Finance and PAC.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : You do  not laugh at the S peaker’s directives.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  We are going to laugh Honourable , but it is only in Mombasa Coun ty 
Assembly whereby we see the Members of Finan ce being the same M embers in PAC … 
s 
(Interruption)  
 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You are out of order Hon. Member ! Now 
kindly allow me to give direction … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 You have wasted time Hon. Members … 
 
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 Now kindly allow me  I want to  put it to  rest; as I have said earlier the issue needs to be 
looked into and the Assembly is really suffering nobody can run out  of that or away from that 
mark timing. Allow me t o commit this issue before the Committee of F inance to deliberate o n 
the same and bring here the responses on their meeting between th em and the meeting between 
the C ommittee and the Chief O fficer next week on Wednesday . So the C ommittee take note of 
the same I believe the Assistant Chairperson on F inance is around, so ki ndly please?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Musa Mwidani) : Okay Mr. Speaker you know I cannot 
deny your rulin g but actually it is very clear;  I stated very clear ly and very openly that our 
Central B ank of Kenya recurrent account balance s are insufficient , on 7th we requested to be 
given money but actually it was not approved but good enough yesterday whe n we had a 
discussion with the S peaker and CEC and  the approval was done right away. Mr. S peaker the 
way we are talking somebody is now in Nairobi processin g this fund and this is what I said , that 
is why I am saying God willing before 29th February, 2019,  29th February ni kesho kutwa  Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : This M arch Hon. Member. February was last 
month and this is  March.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani) : No, March sorry! March not February I am 
sorry … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : The Majority Leader is on the floor . 
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : It is 29th March, 2019 w hich is this coming 
Friday so let us have that time because somebody is in Nairobi now processing the same.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : I agree with you Hon. Member and of course … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Order! Order Members! O f course  I am with you on th e same ,  my directive is that failure 
to what you have promised the House  then you need to bring another S tatement after your 
meeting with the Chief Officer.  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  We have no doubt with your response of c ourse  it was written by the D epartment and we 
are saying t hat failure to the availability of resources by the date you have already committed 
here, kindly make effort to meet the Chief O fficer but in case you will do as per your response 
then I think nobody has a problem with you all we are asking … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Order M ember s! I am giving out a directive you want to debate again! This is a directive 
we are making , you do  not interrupt when the S peaker is giving the directions. So let us give it 
the benefit of doubt Hon. Members , please Friday is a day after to morrow so  failure to that Hon. 
Majority L eader next week you have questions to answer and th at is why I have directed your 
Committee under your Chairmanship since the C hairp erson is not within to bring a S tatement in 
case you fail to avail the resources on  Friday. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Hon. Prisc hilla Mumba?  
 
(Hon. Mwaka Bakari stood ) 
 
 Yes Assistant Chairperson , Hon. Mwaka?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kulingana na hino ripoti 
itakuwa tayari kufikia kesho saa nane ... 
 
(Interrup tion)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you. What is it Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker it is becoming unbearable ! The Transport D epartment 
whenever we request for S tatements even if you check the list of last week there have been 
requesting for this week, this week , next week! Mr. Speaker how long are we going to  be taken 
for granted ?! Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ningependa kum hakikishia kwamba kufikia kesho saa nane ripoti 
itakuwa.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Athuman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athuman Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I just want to add salt to 
the injury be cause this issue of Transport  has become too much. We are talking about a whole 
month like; a whole month has just passed. Tomorrow!  Tomorrow!  Tomorrow! Tomorrow never 
comes  Hon. Speaker until when? ! These  people are going to take charge if they cannot exercise 
their authority.  
 Please it is high time I think we should consider Hon. Speaker to  dissolve this Committee 
because I do  not see the reason why every othe r time we come here we raise a S tatement, 
tomorrow, next week probably on Tuesday in the morning . 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  So I think is becoming too much , it is a wast e of time and it is abuse to this Hon ourable  
House , I need your indulgence in this so that we can solve this issue once and for all Hon. 
Speaker. Thank you . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire ): Thank you Member, yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy : Mr. Speaker the floor is highly honoured. Mr. Speaker thank you for 
giving me the opportunity ; I just wish to add my voice to this , it is on the last Thursday wh en 
you gave a direction to the Chair of the C ommittee and it is in that regard that you gave the 
directions that the response should come on Thursday as per the Standing Order 42(c) .  
 So Mr . Speaker I am in agreement wit h the Vice Chair and the C hair because they  (??) 
that the response should be due tomorrow and it is why we are at this because they were some 
changes at the House Business  and I do  not think that it was duly passed to the rel evant 
Chairperson  and Vice Chair. S o in my opinion since your direction was with regard to these  
responses were to come tomorrow it is in their right a s per the right to fair hearing i t is their right 
that response should come tomorrow and there should be no complaint because that was  as per 
your direction Mr. Speaker. Thank you . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes thank you, Member indeed I remember 
very well giving a ruling on the same and it is the chairperson who promised that they were in 
consult ation and that they will bring the response next week , which is this week tomorrow , that 
was the C hairperson’s response on last week and indeed on the response on a Statement number 
eight (8) as well as number nine they were to be brought tomorrow but I th ink it is just some 
common errors made by the House Business Committee to bring this business so kindly as the 
Assistant C hairp erson has asked and the entire C ommittee to bring the response tomorrow as 
directed last week by the Chairperson. Yes Clerk?  
  
STATEMENT  
 
 The same  applies tomorrow, Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi, Chairpe rson on Education?  
 
 Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir thanks o nce again for this opportunity. I  want put it clear 
to this Honourable House that the Committee of E ducation sat and we deeply deliberated on this 
matter because it has been coming ti me and again and therefore the M embers decided that the 
CEC for  Education D epartment, the C hief Officer and all Directors for this D epartment be called 
for a meeting that is on Frida y and we have alrea dy done our letter Mr. Speaker S ir.  
 They have confirmed verbally that they will come although they have said they are also 
going to respond through a written information and therefore on Friday we shall be having th e 
CEC, we shall be h aving the C hief Officer and all the Directors of Education in the C ommittee 
room at 11:00am . And also Mr. Speaker Sir I want to request ... that is regarding t he bursary issue 
and also the issue on supply of tools and equipment on the ECDE centers  there ar e also issues on 
renovation, issues of school milk all of those issues we shall have to deliberate on them deeply 
let us hear from the horse's  mouth , this time not from the Chair but from the horse’s  mouth.  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Mr. S peaker I thin k it is very important for the Members and therefore M embers I have 
an evidence that indeed we have already called, whatever if you may.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
(Laughter)  
 
 I have evidence Mr. Speaker S ir if you maybe in need I can bring it forward Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Allow me to have it and see it. .. 
 
(Hon. Omondi tabled communication with the officers from Department of Education)  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr Speaker as I finish  I just want to take this 
opportunity on Friday at 11:00 a.m in the C omm ittee room we would like as Education 
Committee to invite all the M embers who will be interested, as the amicus curie  in that particular 
meeting ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 So as to deliberate  on the matter , thank you Mr . Speaker Sir.  
 
(Low C onsultations)  
 
 The Tem porary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Thank you Hon . Chairman.  Hon Chair I think 
this issue was discussed last week and I gave direct ives appealing to you and your Committee to 
come back to this H ouse and te ll us whether you need the CEC M ember plus his team to app ear 
before the Committee or before the entire House and to me I can just confirm the letter written to 
them, I have no responses neither do you have one, from them or for them you have no response 
for them saying whether they will come or not.  
 
 Hon. Omond i: It is yet to be confirmed Mr. Speaker S ir, although I said it was verbally, 
they only respond ed verbally  that they will come but they are yet to write to communicate 
officially,  of which they say they will do.  Thank y ou. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire): So I want to urge you Hon . Member that when 
you write a letter to any D epartment, seeking a response kindly stick on a written response as 
well, this issue of verbally what if they come here and then they say we never responded 
verbally, we were not in a position to come ! What if they write a letter tomorrow asking you to 
allow them co me before your C ommittee before next week, what will you tell the House?  
 So let  us treat as you  have served them with a letter  and they have not responded yet, so 
sit and wait for their response;  but Hon Chair I have no problem with you, neither the House has 
any problem with you we understand and know the wo rk and the role you are playing.  
 So kindly communicate and we need an official written response tomorrow in the 
afternoon, so tomorrow at 2:00 p.m bring a  written response from the CEC M ember confirming 
that they will be attending your meeting on Friday. .. 
 
(Applause)  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  
 Yes, C lerk. 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CASB MEMBER HON . MURFAD AMUR ON ACCESS  TO INFORMATION 
WITHIN  THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
 Yes, Hon . Murfad Amur ? 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker we are in process of doing 
what has been requested by my learned friend Amriya Juma Boy, we are thinking of sta rting 
from the previous County g overn ment whe n it started devolution. T here was that past previous 
Assembly so w e are in process in doing both boards, for the accessib ility of information of the 
Members on who is who ; who has been elected twice or thrice so we are in the process of doing 
that board, we will be availing all the information on the notice board Mr . Speaker, thank you.  
 
(consultations)  
 
 The T emporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : I am  made  to understand that you are the one 
who issued the Statement, yes so what i s your concern?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy : Thank you Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker , I am concerned that the 
previous speaker Mr . Amur has not given  reliable timelines to work with because we have to 
appreciate that access to information is a  basic right under the Bill of R ights , under the A rticle 
35, that it is a non negotiable  right and we need to take (??) of importance, such M embers of the 
public have the information they require . So my concern Mr . Speaker is the ti melines the Board 
will work on and when we are expecting to see results . Mr. Speaker h is response is a bit open , 
thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Hon. Amur just give the timeline , when are you 
responding on the same?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  With all due r espect my colleague Mr Speaker S ir, the consent of 
this Assembly is the pa rtial matter; even if  we want to do it, so once the financial uploading has 
been done  then the rest will be followed because even if we have to do this we need money, so 
since the money is a problem I cannot give a date unless the money is available Mr . Speaker 
once the money fl ows... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Order! Order  Members ! Hon. Members does it 
mean we suspend the business of this County Assembly till we find the resources?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Again Mr . Speaker it  is the same M embers who travelled using 
their money, the constrain ts of the money is the issue, it i s an issue of LPO’s or what even our 
LPO’s are no longer wanted for your information.  
 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : So are you not in a position to tell u s when  you 
will be responding to that ? 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:   I have to consult with the full Board Mr . Speaker to give a date, I 
cannot just give a date blindly . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Hon. Amur you have two weeks to respond.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Am ur: Thank you Mr . Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Thank you.  Clerk ? 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON WATER , SANITATION AND NATUR AL 
RESOURCES HON. FAHAD KASSIM ON WATER SHORTAGE IN  JOMVU KUU WARD  
 
 Yes, Hon Fa had Kassim , Chairperson on Water, Sanitation and N atura l Resources?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 The Vice Chair, any Committee M ember?  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe: Alama ya kiamrishi Mheshimiwa Spika ! Nasimama na alama ya 
kiamrishi!  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Yes. 
 
 Hon Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kunipatia ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Are you responding on order number 12? A 
point of order, then al low me to make a ruling on this; yes since the Chairperson on W ater, 
Sanitation and Natural R esources, plus the Vice Chair are not in the House, let this business be 
brought next week.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Point of order Hon . Speaker!  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) :  Yes? 
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, taarifa  hii niliileta Bung eni wiki 
iliyopita  nikikumbuka vizuri sana Waheshimiwa  na tukiangalia katika maisha ya mwanadamu 
vitu viwili ni vya msingi mno  ambao haviwezi kupatiwa kisogo . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hewa 
na maji;  maji ni uhai, vipi leo hii taarifa  imekuja hapa Mwenyekiti  wa maji, Naibu wake na 
Waheshimiwa wote wamechanja mbuga ! Hii ni mad harau makubwa sana, watu wangu J omvu 
wanakufa maji, hakuna maji ni wiki ya pili, kwa hivyo ningeomba Mhe shimiwa Mwenyekiti hili 
si swala la kusema wiki moja naomba hatua dharura ichukuliw e kupitia busara yako .  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  Tafadhali hili ni s uala ambalo hali hitaji kabisa kusongezewa m uda, tafadhali na 
Mheshimiwa Naibu nimemu ona hapa, lakini amechanja mbuga, Wanachama  wamekuwa hapo 
wamechanja mbuga . Sasa hii inakuwa namna gani Mhe shimiwa Mwenyekiti? T afadhali 
nakuomba hili si swala, ni maji tunazungumzia kitu maswali ya uhai.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) :  What  is your concern Hon . Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Mweny ekiti ni vizuri kwamba anaongea; kwamba 
Wanachama wame chanja mbuga, mimi ni mm oja ya W anachama lakini katika wale ambao 
walitoa hizo tetesi, mimi ni mmoja wapo tukilalamikia kwamba Jomvu  na Mikindani  kuna utesi 
wa maji na tukasema kabla hiyo mambo ya mabomba kutengezwa  tutoe kitu inaitwa  mitigation 
factors, hio ndio imenizuia kwamb a sijasimama, kwa sababu mimi am int erested party in this , 
tunataka jibu mambo ya wiki ijao itakuwa ni makosa tulisema kama ni malor i ya maji yaletwe 
watu wetu washikilie, wakati wakitafuta suluhisho la kudumu, hatujachanja mbuga tuko hapa 
lakini  sisi pia  tuko ndani ya lile kapu la wale watu wanateseka kuhusu maji . Ahsante.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) :  Yes Hon . Bomoa  Omondi Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir thank you for the opportunity . I just want to stand with 
the two Hon . Members ; who h ave just given their se ntiments on this issue, indeed this is a grave 
matter . As we are speaking and it  has touched in almost all the W ards in Mombasa County, 
Airport W ard where I represent being one of the cas ualty it is indeed very wrong even before 
God,  in fact I can call it a sin, that today  when we are expecting a response  for such a serious 
matter, we do not have any of the M embers, responding on it ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Member do  not mislead the House . Hon. Thoya 
has just  confirmed that he is indeed a Member of the said C ommittee, so it  is not that M ember s 
have run away you still have M embers but they have no responses.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes, Mr . Speaker Sir thank you for that clarification but Mr . Thoya who 
is my f riend has just confirmed that he i s also a cas ualty, and there is no way he can stand  here 
and even defend the same C ommittee, he has just confirmed that here that he is also a cas ualty...   
 
(Applause)  
 
 And therefore  Mr. Speaker S ir something should be done, because we are not going to 
wait as you can see, even in this Hon ourable  House I think t here is something wrong in the 
Water Department  and it is time to crack the whip we need to struck the weep  in this 
Department...  
 
(Applause)  
 
  Mr. Speaker S ir just to  finish, four weeks  ago. 
 
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : You still have 30 seconds Hon . Member . 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes I will adhere to that ; four weeks ago when I was being interviewed 
through a local radio in Baraka FM , residen ts, most of the Momba sa resident s were ca lling and 
they were telling me  you have started by cracking the w hip, now they were tellin g me the next 
should  go to the Water Department ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 And you can see what is now happening. Thank you. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Order ! Order! Member s. Yes the Chief Whip. 
 
 The Chief W hip (Hon . Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mweny ekiti, labda tu kusaidia 
Wanakamati wa maji . Nafikiri ni miezi mitatu iliopita, Idara ya Maji  iliweza ku tangaza kandarasi  
ya kuweza ku peleka  maji katika sehemu kadha ya Kaunti ya Mombasa kupitia ma  lori, labda 
Kamati iweze kwenda kuchunguza ma  lori yanapeleka  mahali gani na orodha  ya kupeleka  katika 
Kaunti  ya Mombasa iko vipi, lakini ma  lori yako na  yanapeleka  Mombasa Kaunti maji kutumia 
MOWASCO  Mheshimiwa Mweny ekiti tayari yako hayo ma  lori. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Bwire) : Yes, Hon . Milka Ngare.  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr . Speaker Sir. I just want to expres s my di sappointment 
towards the Committee of Water; if they knew they had a response to bring today and they were 
not going to be available especially the leaders  they should have delegated because water is a 
very important commodity, and it  is not only in the Wards which have been mention ed, even in 
Kisauni by the way we are suffering we do  not have water .  
 That is why  I am agreeing with some of the Hon . Members  who have echo ed the wish 
that we should dissolve this Committee, and to be  given to more serious people to carry out the 
mandate, so  the sooner we do it the better  so that we can get serious wit h a Committee like water 
where the commodit y is a matter of life and death .  
 So I hope you are going to consider that request, that soon we should and it  is good that 
the Majority Leader is here in the House, he shou ld consider dissolving all the Committee s so 
that we  can put proper people in place.  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes Hon . Member from Mwakirunge ? 
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii . Nikiwa pia mmoja 
wapo wa Mwanakamati wa M aji na hata juzi pia  juma lil ilopita  nilisema kwamba siko tayari 
kubeba mzigo ambao si wangu.  
 Kusema kweli Kaunti ya Mombasa  haina maji ; kabla hata sijafika Mwakirunge 
Mombasa nzima haina maji halafu wacha niingie Mwakirunge nikikuonyesha picha za 
Mwakirunge kama vile ninavyo ongea kila siku katika Bunge hili…  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Hon. Amur kindly consult in low tone.  
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana. Kama vile ninavyoleta taarifa siku zote katika Bunge hili 
kwamba Mwakirunge hakuna maji , sasa hivi wa mama wanakesha visimani, watoto wanakesha 
visimani, masomo yamekua duni kwa sababu watu hawawezi kumakinika kwa sa babu ya maji . 
Mchana huu wa leo Kiranja wa Bunge amesema kwamba malori yako mimi kila wakati 
nampigia  Afisa Mkuu  wa maji hata leo nimempigia na akasema hakuna malor i sijui Kiranja 
atanisaidia vipi ili niweze kupata hayo malori yaende Mwakirunge lakini kila wakati nawapigia 
simu na wanasema hakuna malori. Kwa hivyo kuna jambo lifanyike katika hii Kamati  ya Maji ili 
watu waweze kusaidika. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) :  Yes I will take the last speaker , Hon. Leila?  
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi pia nimesimama hapa ni 
Mwanakamati wa Maji na pia ningepen da ku eleza Bunge hili sisi kweli ni Wanakamati wa Maji 
lakini tumeshindwa kusimama maana ba do ripoti tunaitayarisha na haijakamilika ikija 
ikikamilika tunaomba Bunge hili watupati e nafasi mpaka wiki ijayo kama Jumanne  tunaweza 
kuja na hio ripoti kwa sabab u ni juzi tu hapa Mwenyekiti wa Uchukuzi amehangaishwa sana 
kulingana na ripoti ambazo amekuja nazo hapa Bungeni ambazo si za  kuridhisha na sisi 
hatungependa kusimama na kutoa ripoti ambazo si za  kuridhisha maana yake masuala ya maji ni 
nyeti na yanahitaji u makini na…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes a point of information ! Hon. Leila are  you  
ready to be informed?  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Thoya:  I am informing the House Mr. Speaker ! 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Ok. 
 Hon. Thoy a: Mr. Speaker it is just very sad to have somebody who has not been in this 
House for around one week either he or she was ailing somewhere he or she is not aware of that 
Statement or when it was being asked…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Order Member whom are you referring to? You 
must be specific. .. 
(Interruption)  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Hon. Thoya:  I am referring to Hon. Leila Nyache, she has not  been in this House for 
around two weeks when the Statement was being asked she was not in…  
(Interruption)  
 The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  Order Member! Order! Order Hon . Member ... 
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Honourable Member!  
 Hon. Thoya:  She was not in Mr. Speaker ... 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  Hon. Member I say order you sit down, all of 
you sit down please. Hon . Member we have the Hansard, the records of whoever is present 
always are taken  so you do not contradict yourself , you do not say if a Member has been absent 
for two weeks and the records are taken you see they are those issues of integrity and leadership. 
What of if it is found that she sign ed, she was there and yet you have said here today that she was 
not there and it has been recorded. So kindly be very keen on what you say so that you do not 
either contradict yourself or your fellow Member.  
 Allow me now to make a ruling ; I have heard your concerns and this issue is not a one 
Ward issue , it is affecting the entire County and the reports I have is that the lett er was written 
and submitted to the Department concerned , the response came but the Clerk had to take it back 
because it was not an official response, it was not signed and I think that is why the Hon . 
Member was talking of half -baked information or h alf-baked response that they did no t want to 
submit to this House s o the responses were taken back and we are expecting to have an official 
response from the Department.  
 Meanwhile I want to urge the Committee to do a follow -up on the same so that next wee k 
on Tuesday you bring the response ; we have tomorrow, Friday, Monday then Tuesday make sure 
because so many Wards are affected it is only that some of us we cannot complain that much. So 
kindly that is my directive if you have anything to do with that it i s closed kindly allow because 
Hon. Members are all aware that it is not your fault , neither someone’s fault as all these issues 
are being tackled by the Department so there is no way you can force the Speaker to make a 
ruling that will favour this Hous e, again nothing will be done on the same.  
 So it is just a matter of giving the Committee time to do a follow -up to make sure the 
issue is tackled because whe n you, Hon. Thoya and Hon. Athuma n I know where you are 
coming from, I know the problem s you are f acing and almost of all these Members are facing the 
same. So kindly you have persevered for the last almost four to five weeks  and I know you are 
only required to persever e for the next three  days then you get the response next week please. 
Yes Hon. Athman . 
 Hon. Athuman Shebe:  You see Hon. Speaker even the tone of my voice has changed…  
(Interruption)  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I understand . 
 Hon. Athumani Shebe:  You have to sympathize with me please as there are some issues 
you can through your indulgence just try  to communicate ; the water boozers are just lying there  
in MOWASCO  so giving me one week Hon. Speaker with all due respec t my people are dying of 
thirst  do something please we can wait for the Committee to  finalize  their process but we cannot 
wait for t hese people to die please.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you . I have heard you Member , the 
House leadership will take up the matter as you wait for the response from the Department  so 
kindly the House leadership under the able leadershi p of Hon. Hamisi who is the Majority 
Leader will take up the issue with the Executive as we wait for the response…  
(Applause)  
 But do not praise him I have just asked him to do it on our behalf as we wait for response 
next week. So if anything good comes o ut of this before the response we will appreciate. Hon. 
Majority please, thank you. Yes Clerk?  
(Interruption ) 
 What is it Hon. Ogutu?  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Bwana Spika tuliomba taarifa kuhusiana na 
masuala ya Magongo Clinic drainage system  pale ni mbaya kw eli kweli na mvua nafikiri 
kuanzia wiki ijayo itaanza kunyesha na imechukua takriban mwezi mmoja sasa sijui Changamwe 
si sehemu mojawapo ya Kaunti ya Mombasa ? Iko Kwale? Kesho nianze kuripoti  Bunge la 
Kwale maana yake hilo jambo halijachukuliwa na umuhimu a mbao unahitajika Mheshimiwa 
Spika naomba utusaidie.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you it has been noted Hon. Abrari I saw 
you up. Yes Hon. Athuman  kindly let us wind -up. 
  
 Hon. Athumani Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Pia mimi Mh eshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ni muathiriwa mkubwa sana wa masuala ya Ardhi katika eneo langu la Jomvu na 
nilileta taarifa hapa nakumbuka Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mwezi jana lakini sijui ni kitu gani 
kilitokea?    
 Shule ya Chekechea Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti inanyakuliwa ardh i yake na vile vile pia 
tuna recycling plant  yetu ya pale Dzi tsoni pia vile vile ardhi inanyakuliwa tafadhali  naomba 
Mwenyekiti wa Ardhi aweze kutembelea yale maeneo ni masuala ya dharura sana masuala ya 
Ardhi nilileta taarifa hapa na ikapitishwa na sijui ni kitu gani kilifanyika Mheshimiwa Spika 
tafadhali ahsante.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  I think the Vice Chairperson on Lands is with 
us here and you have taken note of the sa me. So arrange on how you can have a site visit on the 
affected a rea and bring the Statement in two week’s time. Thank you. Hon. Shomari?  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  Hon. Ali Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Mimi 
ningependa kuchangia kwenye suala la maji hili  ni suala ambalo linaumiza watu sana 
Mheshimiwa. Inasikitisha sana kuona…  
(Interruption)  
 Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Order Hon . Member! I have made a ruling on the 
same and I gave the directives by saying that the Majority Leader to intervene as y ou wait for the 
responses next week. So let us wait for next week.  
 Hon. Mohamed Shomari:  Mheshimiwa itakuwa watu wote washakufa … 
(Laughter)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  We cannot die God is with us. Yes Hon. Leila?  
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii tena ya 
pili. Mheshimiwa Thoya hapa ananiambia nimumunye sijui kama ya mumunywa ama ni vipi? 
Atanisamehe kidogo , mimi suala langu Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kupitia kipengele cha 
41 Kanuni za Bunge  ningependa kuuliza Mwenyekiti wa Ajira Mheshimiwa Thoya kama ana 
habari ya kwamba mwaka jana kulikua na vijana wakijaza hizi fomu za matibabu za kazi ya 
ubaharia na wamejaza vijana wengi sana hizo kazi za ubaharia na walitumia…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) :  Order! Order Member! Which Department are 
you referring to?  
 Hon. Nyache:  Labour . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Labour, ok . 
 
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningependa muweke masikio vizuri 
Bunge hili musikize maneno haya ni  mazito ; ningependa kumuuliza Mwenyekiti wa Ajira ya 
kwamba kama habari mwaka jana wote kuna vijana walikua wakijiandikisha katika hizi za 
ubaharia na walipewa fomu wajaze za matibabu na wakaitishwa pesa kuanzia Kshs.5000, 
Kshs.6000, Kshs.8000 wengine Kshs .12,000 Mheshimiwa Spika.   
 Mpaka sasa hizo kazi vijana hawajaitiwa sijui kama kuna ba adhi wameitwa mimi sijajua 
wenz angu labda wataeleza lakini hakuna kijana mimi sehemu yangu aliyeitwa katika hiyo kazi 
wala hayo mafunzo . 
 Vijana wengine walikopa pesa zao ; walikopa hizo pesa za matibabu kuenda kupimwa 
hizo hali zao ni masuala ya kusikitisha maana yake mama zao wenyewe wengine ni watu wa 
kuchoma viazi, wa  kuchoma mahamri wakajibambanya wakapata zile pesa na wakawapatia 
watoto wao kwa hamu anajua mtoto wangu a taenda kupata hii kazi atanisaidia .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni masikitiko mpaka leo vijana hawajaingia kazini saa zote mimi 
nafuatwa ndani ya nyumba na kuulizwa...  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 (Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you Hon . Member your point is taken.  
(Inte rruption)  
 Hon. Nyache:  Mheshimiwa Spika naam?  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : You see you have raised a Statement and the 
Chairperson on Labour and the entire Committee will work on it , your concerns are taken.  
 Hon. Nyache:  Sawa, ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : And you might be invited as a friend of the 
Committee also to give an insight on the same.  
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba afuatilie jambo hili huyu 
Mwenyekiti wa Ajira tafadhali. Ahsante sana . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you.  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Bwana Spika nafikiri langu pia ni rai kwamba kuna unyakuzi wa ardhi za 
shule na Kamati ya mambo ya Elimu iliweza kutembelea Saint Mary’s , Bang ladesh  na wakaona 
hivyo vikwazo kwamba hata kuna m ipango ya kwamba shule ijengwe pale lakini bahati hio 
tutaikosa kwa sababu uwanja umenyakuliwa wakati wakiwa wanaangalia .  
 Lile tatizo liko kule Jomvu wapitie na pale Mikindani Saint Mary’s muweze kutatua hilo 
tatizo ili iwe neema ambayo serikali gatuzi ya  Mombasa imetupangia tuweze kuipata. Ahsante . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you the Vice Chairperson you have 
heard,  a Statement Hon. Shomari?  
 Hon. Mohamed Shomari:  Yes I have a Statement.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Hon. Shomari you will be the l ast speaker . 
 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii. Mimi niko 
na taarif a kutoka na na Wodi yangu ya Magogoni haswa kwenye kitengo cha Elimu . Kwa kweli 
Magogoni imetengwa sana hakuna mradi  hata mmoja wa serikali ya Kaunti amba yo imefanya 
katika Wodi yangu.  
 Kwa hivyo kiwanja niko nacho ningeomba wahusika waweze kuja katika Wodi yangu 
tutawaonyesha kiwanja ambacho kimetengwa ili iweze kujengwa hata kama ni ECD hata na 
mimi niweze kuacha legacy  pale niseme angalau Mheshimiwa Ali S homari aliweza kusukuma 
kidogo kukajengwa ECD katika Wodi yangu ya Magogoni . Naomba sana Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Ahsante sana.  
(Applause)  
March 27, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon . Member , the Committee on 
Education has taken point and it will wo rk on the same. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members there having being no any other business the House stands adjourned until 
28th March , 2019 at 2 :00p.m.  
The House rose at  3:52p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
       
 
     
 