 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 24th February, 2016  
The House  met at 2:32p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Clerk.  
PAPER  
            Yes, Hon . Tom Ogalo.  
(Silence ) 
            Hon.  Ogalo To m? The Committee on Labor and Social  Welfare?  
(Silence ) 
            Okay, the  Vice Chair of this  Committee?  Yes Hon . Swale h Baya are you a Committee  
Member?  
            Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : I was just talking on behalf o f Hon . Tom Ogalo , I think he has 
something  to consult a bit , so I don’t know whether the C hair with your permission you can just allow  
some few minutes if possible.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Swaleh w ell okay . Yes, Hon . Enock  Mwinga .  
            Hon. Mwinga : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  I am not in the C ommittee for  Labor but I 
am a friend in that C ommittee , so if you can allow me to read the R eport  it will be okay  Mr. Speaker.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes w hat are your fears Hon . Mwinga ? Can you let us know  
what your fears are?  
            Hon. Mwinga : I know Mr. Speaker.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  What are your fears? Why are you afraid?  
            Hon. Mwinga : I am not fearing  because I am not  in that C ommittee Mr. Speaker , I just asked 
for permission from your C hair if I can be allowed t o stand on behalf of the C hairman  Mr. Speaker.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes, Hon . Mohamed  Chiro?  
            Hon. Mohamed  Ndanda : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I stand to agree with Hon . 
Mwinga because this  Report is very much important , it touches the lives of our people who were 
terminated and okay I am seeing the  Chairman is there Mr. Speaker I think let me reserve a bit... 
(Applause ) 
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Tom Ogalo.  
            Hon. Ogalo:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I beg to table the R eport on Mombasa  
Apparel terminated workers  Mr. Speaker, Sir.  
             Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes, Hon . Tom Ogal o can you take us through your R eport.  
  Hon.  Ogalo:  Mr. Speaker w e just have to table the Report then  we go to  reading after Notice 
of M otion.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You have to … that has been accepted and we have received it. 
That is why you have to take us through. So if you are ready take us through ...  
(Hon. Ogalo read the Report )  
ARBITRARY TERMINATION OF WORKERS AT MOMBASA APPAREL (EPZ)  
 
 Hon. Ogalo:  Mr. Speaker Sir, the investigative report on the arbitrary termination of workers 
Mombasa EPZ .  
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Mr. Speaker, Members of this C ommittee ; I am the C hairman, Tom Ogalo, the V ice Mary 
Akinyi , Members are  Hon. Zeinab  Mumba, Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani , Hon. Abubakar   Kibwana,  
Hon. K izito Opeya,  Hon.  Patrick S iminyu, Hon. Paul Onje,  Hon.  Zainab Kithinzi,  Hon.  Kalume S alim,  
Hon.  Maimuna Mwa massa. Mr. Speaker, contents I will say it in summary, introduction , finding s, 
Committee observation, conclusions and conversations. Mr. Speaker Si r, I intend to summarize. This is 
a Report on the findings of the Committee of Labor and Social Welfare following a statement raised  
by a M ember of the County Assembly and ruling by Hon . Speaker on 26th January 2016 at 2:30pm  that 
a site visit to the affected EPZ to be undertaken and report on the same tabled.  
 The mandate of the site visit  was to among others seek an audience with the aggrieved workers 
and meet with the employees with a view to determine the following main issues;  what led to the 
alleged termination of the EPZ employee contracts, was due process followed and the workers 
afforded a fair hearing as per the C onstitution of Kenya 2010 , and  is there an amicable solution that 
can be arrived at by both parties to s ettle this dispute once  and for all. The C ommittee on Labour and 
Social welfare is among the sectoral committee s of the County A ssembly of Mom basa established 
under interim S tanding order number 191 on the appointment of sectoral Committees … 
(Interruption ) 
  Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Ahmed? Can we now get information from Hon . 
Ahmed  Faraj ? Yes, Hon . Onje can you re sume your seat ? 
  Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker Sir, I think we will be duplicating what we have already done as a 
Committee and some of us were in attendance during this meeting and we fully support this document 
because we travelled through this journey together with the C ommittee and so ma ny of us who were 
not actually Members of the C ommittee have been involved thro ughou t the journey of preparing the 
Report . Mr. Speaker  I therefore request this House  to adopt this document because it has passed 
through all parts  during C ommittee meetings when we had engagements with the director s together 
with the EPZ workers . I therefore request that we adopt this document because  we believe that 
whatever was deliberated upon has been captured fully in this document. Thank you   Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Ibrahim Kondo.  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Thank you Mr . Speaker . I am here to second what my colleague Hon . 
Saad  Faraj has already said. Thank you  Sir. 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : With permission from the C hair, are you in agreement that it is 
important to confirm this?  
 Hon.  Ogalo:  Yes, Mr. Speaker Sir.   
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Ladies and gentlemen, following the prayer by Hon . Ahmed 
Saad  Faraj and supported by Hon . Ibrahim Kondo I do  now put to question that this R eport be adopted 
as tabled by Hon . Tom Ogalo?  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Clerk, next?  
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 NOTICE OF MOTION  
 Yes, Hon . Ogalo?  
 Hon. Ogalo:  Mr. Speaker sir, I beg that the Assembly adopts the R eport on the Mombasa 
Arbitrary EPZ Terminated Workers Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, I want us to agree that this Notice of M otion has been laid 
and I want to believe after this a date has been  set for which this particular R eport is going to be 
debated and if not so then you have to consult with the Count y Ass embly Business Committee t hat 
will be tomorrow in the morning so that we can seek for allotment and when this pa rticular R eport can 
be debated by the H on. Members,  yes next?  
MOTION  
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh.  
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on Health, the 
Department of Health brought before us the first quarter  Report and it was brought to this House  also, 
it was highlighted by the Members. M ine today Mr. Speaker, is just to ask this Honorable House  to 
adopt this Report which is very important . I think it is very important just to appreciate the work of the 
department and the C ommittee for doing this quarter R eport which is very essential in terms of follow -
up and in terms of measuring the performance of the Health  workers and the Report had  different 
categories, milestones,  target achieved. The report also gave infrastructure development, service 
delivery. Hon. Speaker, also the R eport had emergency response to the oil crisis whic h is also very 
important . As you a re aware, most of our communities have  been affected beyond the others…  
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Ahmed.  
 Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker, the Hon . Member who is also the C hair of Health is  taking us 
through a document  which, ourselves do not have a nd from the look of things he is actually pin -
pointing to the milestones and the important issues that are supposed to be addre ssed b ut the R eport 
itself for us who are not  Members are not even a ware of what the contents are , so it would be advisable 
for him to go through line by line, page by page for us to understand. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Swaleh, maybe to that matter you need to table that  
Report, take the House  through it then that is when adoption c an also be moved so a nd there is that 
fear that the H on. Members may not be having a copy. Yes, what is it Hon . Mwidani?  
  Hon. Mwidani : Mr. Speaker I think that my colleague is not leading this House  in 
order because this Report was tabled ; in fact  it was being circulated here from Tuesday and  here it is! 
We have all of us , maybe he has misplaced it.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Kizito  Opeya  Okoth.  
 Hon. Opeya : Mr. Speaker, I also support my colleague , Hon . Hamisi  Mwidani Senior , this 
Report was tabled I th ink some time back. Maybe some M ember s misplaced the copies  they need to do 
proper filing of Report s so the Chairman can lose this R eport some time. ..  
(Laughter ) 
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon. Ibrahim .  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Thank you Hon . Speaker. I hereby do support my C hairman of disaster. 
The Report is here with all the M embers and if the rest don’t have it they have to look again. Yeah, 
thank you Mr. Speaker ……  
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Patrick Simi nyu. 
 Hon. Simi nyu: Than k you Mr. Speaker. I think the C hairman who has given this opinion is not 
a different opinion but I would like to give direction to this House  because the C hairman or somebody 
was misleading us just by a point of information. Yes, I want to inform this House . 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you allow for intervention from Hon . Ibrahim?  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Thank  you Hon . Speaker. I wonder if we are two Speakers here  and the 
Honorable Member  is taking that task of giving direction to this House  and there is a Speaker on the 
Chair. 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes, Hon . Patrick can you just seek the right time so that we 
can understand…  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker , Hon . Saad  was misdirecting us a nd we all know this information 
I just want t o give the proper information t hat is not wrong Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : That is a criminal way of making that correction. Continue.  
 Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker, the C hairman is in order. He placed this Paper on the Table on 
Tuesday; today it is a M otion…  
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you reduce? Yes, what is it Hon . Ahmed?  
 Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker some of the M embers are trying to be cheeky. Mr. Speaker, this 
document , rather this Notice of M otion was brought here severally and  it was pushed to another date 
so those who had those copies , they are very lucky because a lot of time has been spent to make sure 
this document come  to this House  to the extent of some of the M embers fuming in wanting this 
document to come  to this House . Mr. Speaker I think it is only fair that for every new session we need 
to have M embers to have copies in their possession so that they can deliberat e and contribute properly 
because every financial year we have supplementary budget a few days ago and we pass it. It means 
that all offices have been allocated  the funds necess ary to do their jobs to the max imum  and I am sure 
that the Department of the Ha nsard or the Department of the Clerk office has the proper  funds to make 
sure that every M ember in every session has the copies that they require , that is the only concern that I 
had. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you Honorable Members allow me to give direction please. 
Maybe three or just one standing , can you wind up t hen we get to Hon . Madundo then we wind up.  
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker , a Notice of M otion  was already placed in this House , today was 
Motion because when the P aper was brought, i t was brought in the form of a Notice of M otion all 
Members have cop ies, even I  have a copy here. Today was a Motion part of which the C hairman is 
correct Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Madundo.  
 Hon. Moham ed Madundo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Saad  amezungumza  
akisema  kuwa  kuna mambo ya  bajeti, b ajeti huwa  inafanywa  lakini  si jinsi hii bajeti  kwa sababu  ikiwa  
Mheshimiwa  Kibwana  alileta Mswada  hapana  saa hizi tunarudi  kusema  tufanye  tena h ii bajeti  
itakoroga  hili Bunge ….. 
(Laughter ) 
 Kwa  sababu  hatuwezi  kurudia mambo kwa  kurudia  kwa kurudia ndio maana  watu  wengine  
wanasema  wanazoea  pombe  alafu  wahame … 
(Laughter ) 
 Lazima  nilete  ufahamu  katika  Bunge, k una W aheshimiwa  wengine  huwa  wanasahau. .., 
Mheshimiwa  Kibwana  alileta  hii Ripoti tena ililetwa  na mimi n i kama  imesomwa  na wasomi  na kuwa  
tulipitisha  hiyo. Kwa  hio Mheshimiwa  Spika, Mhesh imiwa  Kibwana  ako sawa. A hsante.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Jimmy Odari.  
 Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon . Speaker for according me the  opportu nity to give my  views 
regarding the request of M otion by Hon . Chairman of the Health Committee.  
 Hon. Speaker  this docu ment, the quarterly R eport on health  of the C ounty is a very critical 
document and I understand last Tuesday when it was presented  it had some  issues to the extent that the 
Chairman requested for ti me to go and sit down with his C ommittee to make some corrections , 
therefore I think it is only prudent that since and by the fact that this  is a very critical document, 
Members  need to have copies on their table…  
(Applause ) 
 …So as to be able t o give their contribution on a R eport  from their own point of view , so it is 
very impor tant that when such a critical Report is being discussed M embers should have copies in their 
hands so as to give proper contribution on the same . Unfortunately only three of us here  have the 
Report, this R eport , so on that basis Mr. Speaker I would request that you give more time to the 
Members so that we can make proper contributi on. We should not just pass this very important 
document anyhow  only to realize that we have passed a document which is not proper , which is not 
going to serve our people in a proper  manner. Thank you , Hon.  Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Mwidani  are you on that same point or you have a 
different opinion from what he had to say?  
 Hon. Mwidani:  Mr. Speaker, I want to make this House  seem that we are in the correct. 
Actually, maybe those M embers who are complaining that there are no copies, that day t hey were not 
there because the R eport was tabled on another paper Wednesday the 3rd and if somebody was not 
there picking the copy is now compla ining. Now, it is his problem but actually the copies were there 
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 with the agenda with the O rder paper on Wednesday 3rd this is what I am showing as an exhibit and 
actually on that day is when we were picking our quarterly report so , maybe Mr. Speaker, the 
Members who were not there on that day should not make some blames to the C ommittee or other 
people f ailing to appear in this House  is whe n they missed on the copies s o I think Mr. Spe aker, these 
are the M embers who were not there on that day ... 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order Hon . Members! Can I now confirm this to the House ? 
Hon. Mohamed can you reduce?  Can I get the consent from  this Hon . House  that from the Departmen t 
of Health, the first quarter R eport of October 2015 had been tabled before this Honorable House ... 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
 Now, the next question, can I get confirmation or otherwise, from this  House  that the 
Depa rtment on Health first quarter R eport October 2015 had been adopted by this Hon . House ? 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
 Now, you see those are the steps. First of all, Hon . Members I am just reminding us that first of 
all we tabled the Report, the second stage we adopt it, the  third step is that we table a Notice of 
Motion, from the N otice of Motion it becomes a M otion s o, I am confirming as we continue goi ng 
until I get to know where this particular business is.  
 Now, Hon . Members, l adies and gentlemen, allow the C hair to also get your opinion that  this 
same Report had been laid as a Notice of M otion before this Hon . House ?  
(Question proposed and agreed to) 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now, Hon . Swaleh  Baya, this business ; the second one that 
today you are supposed to table this M otion has now been given a clean bill of health by this Hon . 
House .  
 However, there are some dissenting voices that  certa in amendments were to be raised, s o, what 
the House  will be expecting is that by the time you were tabling this… maybe you will be tabling this 
with certain amendments … 
(Applause ) 
 So and… Order M embers! Order Hon . Mumba! Order Hon . Ahmed! So, Hon . Swaleh  Baya, 
the time is yours so continue .  
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you the C hair for taking the proce dure for this Hon . House  for 
those  who wanted to hijack the Report .  Hon. Speaker the R eport as a M otion we don’t make any 
amendments, there are  no amendment s, there were no amendments. T hat is what I want to confirm a nd 
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 for those who claim there are  amendments, they should give us the evidence of such amendment s. I 
believe the R eport was brought without any amendment s and is confirmed in this Hon . House . 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : So who seconds that it be debated now;  it has to be second ed or 
otherwise we may not eve n propose any question to that R eport. Yes, Hon . Lucy Chizi  Chireri.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Chireri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika, ninaunga  mkono  yote yaliyozungumzwa  na 
Mwenyekiti . Ahsante.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Ladies and gentlemen I propose the question that the quarter ly 
Report be…  
(Interruption ) 
 Yes, what is it Hon . Nyamvula?  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  . I think Mr. Speaker… (inaudible )… I don’t 
know… Mr. Speaker please allow… (Inaudible )… I don’t know which copy  I should debate on.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Just pick any.  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  They are too many. The whole point Mr. Speaker is that  we are not 
too sure ...(Inaudible)  we are just  trying to follow the procedure. This R eport does not have a cover.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Loud c onsultation ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, what is it Hon . Caroline?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Hon.  Speaker I was going through the Report and I  think it has not been 
signed by the executive member s o the R eport is not complete.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, H on. Stephen Wangudi.  
 Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker just to confirm  to this House , there is 
a breakout of ... (Inaudible) syndrome in Mombasa C ounty a nd the Mombasa (??) Department here in 
the Assembly. Members of this A ssembly are very co mmitted t hat is why you can see that the R eport 
is being tabled and the signed R eport. There are also M embers who were not able to remember if the 
copies were available in this Hon . House . Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg your direction  on this matter t hat the 
tabled R eport h as not undergone several stages and the end we have com e to realize th at the R eport is 
not complete. We beg to hear your direction and we will receive for us to complete up the process.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Jimmy Odari.  
 Hon. Odari:  Hon. Speaker, unfortunately, I think I wish to concur with Hon . Nyamvula  
regarding the procedure and the  due process for bringing Reports . Mr. Speaker , before this hard  copy 
from one of my colleagues here and we expect you have minute s and Report to the C ommittees 
concerned. This copy, apparently  is from the Department of Health w e would have expected that this 
Report would be  accompanied by minutes of the R eport from the department a ttesting that they in fact 
went through the R eport and these are their recommendations o r their opinions regarding the R eport. 
Thank you , Mr. S peaker.  
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Ibrahim.  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Thank you Hon . Speaker. Hon . Speaker  with due respect from this 
House , this is a R eport  which  came from the Department of Health a nd as a Committee  we don’t have 
any quarte rly R eport concerning ourselves s o I think most of the M embers who are just complain ing 
are not in this C ommittee a nd I hope they need to be taken first for capacity  building because they 
don’t know what  is going on according to this R eport Hon . Speaker. .. 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Maimuna  Salim . 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Maimuna  Salim : Mheshimiwa  Spika, tuko  hapa  kufanya  mazuri  kwa watu  wa mji 
wetu  wa Mombasa  n a tunajua mambo ya afya vile ambavyo  ni jambo  amba lo lina athiri  watu  wetu. 
Kwa  hio, mtu  akizungumza vile sisi   tunazungumza  hatuko  katika Kamati  lakini  ni wahusika  wakuu  
kwa sababu  watu  ambao  wameathiriwa  ni wetu na ni lazima  hii Ripoti tuiangalie  vizuri  sana na mahali  
ambapo  kuna marekebisho  tuweke ili tusaidie  watu  wetu. .. 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Ahmed.  
 Hon. Faraj:  Mheshimiwa  Spika…  
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You will have your time Hon . Onje.  I will give you an 
opportunity to talk.  
 Hon. Faraj:  Mheshimiwa  Spika  kama  kwa bahati  nzuri  ukonayo  kopi hii, ukifunua  ukurasa  wa 
mwisho  kabisa  ili kuhakikisha  kwamba  Kamati  ilikaa  kikamilifu  ikaandaa  Ripoti hii utaona  sehemu  ya 
sahihi  ya ambayo  kwamba  sahihi  ya kwanza ambayo  imeandikwa  ni executive member , ya pili ni Chief 
Officer .  
 Huyo  Mwenyekiti  wetu  nafikiria  labda  kimepotea  potea, labda  kitafutwe  lakini  hapa  haimo 
Bwana Spika, k umaanisha  hii Ripoti ni copy  and paste  ya yale maelekezo  yaliyotoka  kutoka  kwa 
Kitengo cha Afya  ikaja  hapa  na wanatus ukumiza  nayo  bila ya wao wenyewe  kukaa  kama  Kamati  kwa 
sabab u ushahidi  wa Kamati  pia huku  mbele  hakuna. Kama unavyoiona, R ipoti yenyewe  imeandikwa 
na serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa , kitengo cha Afya, K amati  siioni  mahali, najaribu  kuitafuta  kwa 
juhudi  na bidii Mheshimiwa  Spika  lakini  siipati  bado , kumaanish a ile Ripoti imechukuliwa  tukaja  
tukas ukumizwa  nayo  sisi hapa. A hsante.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Kondo  do you ha ve a question Honorable ? 
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika, hawa  ambao  
wamekuwa  wakiongea  hawana  Ripoti sijui zimetoka  wapi, naona  wote  wameshikilia  nakala  za Ripoti 
na wakiziangalia. Mheshimiwa  Spika, R ipoti hii inahusiana  na Wizara  ya afya na hakuna vile J umba  
hili kama  Kamati  ya Afya  inaweza  kutoa  Ripoti ya…  
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is it Hon.  Mary?  
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9  Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi  ningependa  
kusema  kuwa  wacha  tupate  mwelek eo ambao  unahitajika , hii Ripoti vile imetoka  katika Kitengo cha 
Afya  ndio imekuja  hapa  kumaanisha vile vile ilivyotoka  kule kwa kitengo  ndio imetoka  kule ikaja  
hapa  katika  Nyumba  hii. Inamaanisha  vizuri  hata ikiwa  huna macho utaweza  kuona h ata kama  hujavaa  
miwani  kama  mimi  utaweza  kuona  kuwa  haikuambatana  na kile kikao  inaonyesha  wazi  kuwa  
hawakukaa  katika  kikao  wakakaa … 
(Interruption ) 
 …katika  kikao  waka pitia mambo haya h ii quarterly R eport  hawakupitia  kama  Kamati. 
Tukubaliane  tuweze  kupata  mwelekeo vile inavyohitajika  kwa sababu  hata hii Ripoti vile imetoka  kule 
kwa kitengo cha Afya  huko  kwa executive  ikaja  katika  Nyumba h aikupitia  katika  Kamati.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Kizito.  
 Hon.  Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. First Mr. Spea ker we should congratulate the C hair…  
(Applause ) 
 ...because this is the first time we are seeing a quarterly Report in this A ssembly  since we were 
elected … 
(Applause ) 
 What we should be asking Mr. Speaker, where… what about the C ounty executives for 
transport, for finance…  
(Applause ) 
 Where are the quarterly R eports? Because as per the constitution we are supposed to ha ve this 
quarter ly Report so instead of demonizing him, we should congratulate him…  
(Applause ) 
 ...The Chairman for transport, the C hairman for finance, all the other C hairmen who are 
sleeping should  stop sleeping , we need these other R eports Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Patrick Simi nyu. 
 Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker, I stand to congratulate the able Chairman. Mr. Speaker, this 
Report is not a property of the C ommi ttee. We were not asking for a Report from the C ommittee, we 
were asking for the R eport from the various  Committee s. Mr. Speaker, this Report was brought here 
last Wednesday and as you know according to the rules and regulations of the House , people with 
amendments should see the C hairman before  the date but here… and an y amendment shoul d be in 
written . Here people are challenging , in fact, they want to raid this process and I want to reiterate on 
what Honorable from  Mkomani was saying.   Mr. Speaker, this is history in the mak ing, this is the first 
quarterly R eport that we are having in this House . We should be asking for other R eports Mr. Speaker 
Sir, in this House , some M embers here are trying to delay the process a nd they have gone through this 
Report. It is a good R eport Mr. Speaker Sir and in order. Thank you. 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon . Jimmy Odari.  
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10  Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon . Speaker. Hon . Speaker , as much as we appreciate the R eport but 
Hon. Speaker, this House  is a House  of procedure, it is a House  of law and recession. Mr. Speaker we 
cannot deny the fact that the Health Committee has s till delayed the first of such R eport s to this House  
to the extent to allow them to flout the procedure. There is due process for such a thing Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speake r, there is no evidence that the Committee sat down to discuss this . There is no evidence. 
We…  
(Applause ) 
 Want evidence to show  that the C ommittee sat down and went through this R eport and came up 
with the opinion . Where is the opinion? Where is the recommendation?  
(Applause ) 
 …Hon. Speaker, it is ver y sad that a certain important Committee like the Committee of H ealth 
can reduce themselves to being  messengers. Messengers of the County to bring just a R eport … 
(Applause ) 
            …Where is the overs ight role?  
(Applause /Interruption)  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order Members! Order M embers! Order! Can you allow Hon . 
Jimmy Odari to continue his contribution. Hon . Lucy Chireri… Order M embers! Hon . Kibwana! 
Order! Order! Hon . Kibwana can you have a seat! Hon . Kibwana can you resume your seat?  
            Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh : It is unfair…  
(Interruption ) 
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Can you resume your seat Hon . Kibwana? Hon . Jimmy Odari, 
Order! What is ea ting you will not finish you up, c an you sit down Hon.? Resume your seat,  Hon. 
Jimmy can you resume  your seat yourself , resume your se at as well Hon . Jimmy ! Hon. you see w hen 
you have the author of the Motion or a M over,  his own time is always given by  the end of t he debate 
so you need not to interfere or interr upt the contributions by other M embers.  
 So can you just allow Hon . Jimmy Oda ri to wind up he has 
less than three  minutes to wind up. Yes, Hon . Jimmy Odari.  
(Applause ) 
            Hon.  Odari:  Hon. Speaker, I wish to insist and reiterate that it is prudent for the C ommittee t o 
follow the due process, t his R eport was brought by… I want to put it today that they  had just picked… 
received the R eport from the department and brought it to this House  without sit ting down to 
deliberate on it t o see what is contained in the R eport , they do not have the conclusion o r 
recommendation regarding the R eport. What are they changing? What are they going to tell th is House  
if themselves  have not sat down? There is no list of M embers, there is no list of attendance, they didn’t 
even write anything,  nothing is there that they did  so Mr Speaker we do not oppose the R eport.             
I want it to be clear, we are not opposing the R eport but I want them to follow t he due process of 
presenting such a Report. We want to see their input on the Report as a C ommittee because whatev er 
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 is contained here, even the Report is signed by the County Assembly and the Chief O fficer. Where is 
the oversight role in this Report?  
(Applause ) 
            Mr. Speaker,  They should go back and do their work properly then  bring it back to the House . 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Caroline .  
            Hon.  (Ms.) Auma : Mheshi miwa Spika, a hsante  sana. Mheshimiwa  Spika  nampongeza 
Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati ya sheria  kwa kusimama  na kusema  mane no ya kunifurahisha. Mheshimiwa  
Spika, quarterly R eport  inapoletwa  kwa Bunge  ni lazima  ipitie  kwa Karani  ili aweze  kutia  sahihi  ipitie 
kwako  Mheshimiwa  Spika, wewe  ndio uweze  kuitoa  hapa  mbele  ya Bunge  na iende  kwa Kamati,  
baada  ya kutoka  kwa Kamati, Kamati  wataka a na hiyo Ripoti wajadili mambo husika  kisha  waje  na 
Ripoti kwa jinsi ambayo  wameijadili  kama marekebisho  ni waweke marekebisho .  
 Mheshimiwa  Spika, R ipoti yenyewe  haijamalizika  ukiangalia  majina  ya Wanakamati  hayako, 
yatakikana  ingepelekwa  Ripoti na majina  ya Kamati na Mwenyekiti  mwenyewe   huwa ametia  sahihi 
pale chini. Mheshimiwa  Spika, R ipoti ni nzuri  lakini  njia ambayo  ilipopitia  ndio ikafika  hapa  kwa 
Bunge  ndio ambao sio sawa, t wajua  ni mara  ya kwanza…  
(Interruption ) 
            ...Mheshimiwa  Spika, tunajua  wameleta  Ripoti hii na ni Ripoti nzuri  na nikiangalia  ndani  ni 
vitu ambavyo  vinaeleweka l akini  warudi  tena chembani  kule wakatuletee mapendekezo  ambay o 
wamekaa  kama  watu  wazima  walisikizana , ni hayo  tu. 
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Kondo.  
            Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika, kwanza kabisa  
nasikitika  Mwakilishi  wa Wodi  ya Changamwe  anavyo ongea, n a quarter ly Report  hiyo imemgusa  
zaidi  yeye kutokana  na hospitali  yake ya Changamwe  ambayo  kwa muda  mfupi  ita kuwa  chini.             
Mheshimiwa  Spika, hii  ni quarter ly Report  ya mwezi wa  October 2015 na  njia iliyo kuja ni njia ya 
sawa  na njia ya haki; quarterly R eport  inatoka  katika  upande  wa Executive  na mahali  imepitia  hivi sasa 
ilikuwa  ni njia ya sawa , mbele ya Nyumba  hii ijadili quarter ly Report  alafu  irudi  kwa Kamati ya Afya , 
kisha Kamati ya Afya  ndio iregeshe  Ripoti ikiwa kamili . Ikiwa  kuna  mabadiliko  sasa Wanachama  
wapiti e Ripoti hii wai angalie pole pole mahali  kunatakikana  marekebisho, irekebishwe  hapa  ndio iende  
tena kwa Kamati . Mheshimiwa  Spika tuko sawa  na Wanachama  wengine  ambao  wako  hapa  
hawajaiona  wala  kuiangalia  ndani  hii , Kamati  haijatoa  ripoti  hii, quarterly R eport inatoka  katika  
upande  wa executive , hakuna Kamati ya Bunge  ambayo  inatoa quarterly R eport  Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Kwa  hio baada  ya hapa  ndio itarudi  kwa Kamati  iende  ikapitiwe. A hsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order Members ! Can you all resume your seats.  Well, I have 
heard it from the former that this is history in the making in the se nse that there is no any other 
Committee that has done what it has don e today. I want to say that this i s our primary role and 
mandate a nd on that note therefore; each and every C ommittee is  urged to do exactly what this 
Committee has done and I want to believe that this is not the first time t hat we are handling a R eport as  
a House  and we know very well that whenever this House  has received any Report, that R eport must 
be subjected  to the relevant department or C ommittee to deliberate on the document. .. 
 February 24, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information purposes 
only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 (Applause ) 
 After going through a Report that is when the same or the relevant Committee of the House  
will table now the R eport with the many report s attached ….. 
(Applause ) 
 ...Ladies and gentlemen, we have to also appreciate that this particular  (??) emerged  as far, I 
had to put questions in each and e very stage, n ow, the stage that was not properly handled is  the stage 
when it was tabled i mmediately . This particular R eport had been adopted then it had to be considered  
with that C ommittee d uring such a stage,  we are expecting each and every one of us to make relevant 
recommendations on certain aspects and if there is none then we also need to communicate on the 
same in this Hon . House . Otherwise, as it is, it is not the Committee , you know statements from Ho n. 
Auma  who is suggesting that this particu lar R eport has found its way to the House  through caesarian 
procedure … 
(Laughter ) 
 ...You know, not a normal birth and for that reason therefore, I want to believe we have a 
normal House , everything has to be normal  no any other surgeries or corrections should be conducted 
in any R eport. So, ladies and gentlemen, I would want to bec ause nothing wrong has happened,  in the 
sense that it has not been proposed. It has not even been proposed, it has been moved, p roposed but not 
seconded. It was quickly interrupted by Hon . Serah  Nyamvula. So, I think it still stands to be in the 
hands of the able C ommittee chair ed by Hon. Swaleh  Kibwana  Baya. .. 
(Applause ) 
 ...and for that reason therefor e, I re -direct that, that same C ommittee to handle and scrutinize 
this same R eport because this is something that I have also gone through the content s, a very  nice 
content  but we need to confirm whether they are true or just fiction because it is ab out our health, not 
anybody’s, i t is about our health and this needs very close and serious affection. For that reason 
therefore, Hon . Swaleh  Baya, this R eport is still back to you and the Committee and we all need you to 
conduct all the necessary examinations and you have to take your necessary time and input in this 
Report because even you as a C ommittee in those previous instances.  I have said, even the pro blem 
that we are having are there any problems or are we still having m ore problems that have bee n 
mentioned by this particul ar Committee.  
 Otherwise, as it is ladies and gentlemen, it stands that this particular Report is back to the 
Committee concerned. Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
Yes, Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
            Ladies and gentlemen, this House  stands adjourned until 25th of February 2016 , which  will be 
Thursday tomorrow at exactly 2:30p .m. 
The House  rose at  3:27p .m. 