February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 2 2nd February, 2017  
The House met at 2 :45pm. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down.  Clerk.  
MOTION  
 Yes Hon Fadhili what is it?  
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker if am not wrong I understand you 
directed that Hon Chairman of Education is supposed to expound on yesterday's statement. 
 Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes that business was done  in the morning.  
 Hon. Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker but I wanted to get full information of when 
and where in each and every ward that bursaries are going to be distributed. Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Jimmy Odari.  
 Hon. Oda ri: Thank you Hon  Speaker. Hon Speaker thank you f or according me the 
opportunity,  I wish to move a Motion titled , Environmental Impact of Changamwe Highway.  
Mr. Speaker I beg to move the following Motion;  
(Hon Odari read the Motion)  
 THAT AWARE that the C ounty g overnment is charged with the responsibility of 
controlling air pollution and other public nuisance under the Fourth Schedule Part 2 (3) of the 
Constitution of Kenya 2010;  
 FURTHER AWARE that the ongoing Changamwe Highway Construction Project is vit al 
for the development of Mombasa County and Kenya at large;  
 CONCERNED that the ongoing road works at Changamwe are destroying the drainage 
system, affecting the water supply and above all, posing health risks due to the noxious dust;  
 I therefore urge t his County Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
 The County g overnment in conjunction with the national g overnment to come up with 
proper mitigation measures to curb this menace in order to safeguard the health, safety and well 
being of the residents and passers -by.  
(End of Motion)  
 Hon Speaker I beg to move this Motion and I wish to call upon Hon Ahmed Omar 
Ebrahim (Meti) to second.  
(Hon. Ahmed Omar Ebrahim second ed the Motion)  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Meti , I now propose a 
question for p ermission to be debated.  
 I propose that the County g overnment in conjunction with the national g overnment to 
come up with proper mitigation measures to curb this menace in order to safeguard the health, 
safety and well being of the residents and passers -by. Yes Hon Jimmy Odari . 
 Hon. Odari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Hon Speaker as much as w e and people of 
Changamwe appreciate that project and in fact we are really happy for the development that is 
taking place, we are very happy that we have a super highway in our ward but we must not 
overlook the effect of the roads , the effects on the people particularly when it is affecting the 
people of Mombasa.  
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  2  We have to consider that because the health of our people is paramount ; as much as we 
are happier to the gover nment but we have to consider the health and wellbeing of our people, I 
being their representative and trying ensuring that the wellbeing is well taken care of, this has 
come up with some effects that among them are negative and I wish to point them out so  that this 
House would pass this Motion so that my people of Changamwe would appreciate the work of 
this Ass embly and their representatives.  
 Among the things that have affected my people of Changamwe number one ; the dust is 
affecting the residents health adversely, number two the dust has affected daily mood of some of  
the residents causing closure o f some businesses due to the dust , some businesses are closed 
down.  
 Number three ; water supply has been affected due to interference with the means since 
the start of this project there had been the contractors relocated the main supply of water there by 
affecting my people and they are not getting water that they were getting before, number four  
sewage system has also been affected, most of the toilets i n Cha ngamwe does not pass shit 
because the  main sewage system has blocked.  
 So if you come to Changamwe you will find these problems with regard to the removal or 
disposal  of shit  Mr. Speaker , the streetlights have also been affected because some of the 
streetl ights have had to be removed to pave way for the expansion of roads and they have not 
been re stored  till now, even the access road within the estates  have been affected because the 
contractor had to divert the routes to pass into the estates and due this  heavy traffic and heavy 
machinery most roads have been damaged . 
 Mr. Speaker again there is loss of employment due to the demolition and non  
compensation of some business es, therefore these are among the things that have affected my 
people and i as i have  been sent to come and speak here on behalf of them, i wish to call upon 
this Hon orable  House to look into this matter seriously on behalf of the people of Changamwe, 
thank you Hon Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Murfad.  
 Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. S peaker, there is a say ing that  every good thing comes with 
a bad thing , we do appreciate the road is being done but the Hon M ember has not p roved to this 
Assembly with any evidence  that people have been affected s o that we can believe that  every 
good thing can come with a n opposite  side. 
 This is a temporary issue that after the roads ;  the water, the streetlights will be  redone, 
we do appreciate that C ounties do good jobs, I say thank s to that but even for a pregnant mother 
she goes throu gh a lot of hurdles  but the day she gives birth she enjoys th e baby that is born.  
 So in every bad  thing there is a good thing,  we should say thank you to the good things 
and then if there is any evidence be proved that people have suffered with evidence whether they 
have been treated in hospitals or the shortage of water, shortfall of water is all  over the country , 
so what i want to tell my brother  is let's wait for the project to be completed , and  if it is not done 
as it was then we can complain because every good  thing comes with a good thing. Thank y ou. 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Meti.  
 Chief Whip (Hon. Ebrahim ): Mr. Spe aker I do stand to support the M otion as well ; i do 
concur with what Hon Jimmy has said, we cannot lose the lives o f our people because of a 
certain project, as to what was said the people of Changamwe as I also have relatives there the 
issue of drainage is very serio us because the drainage system  has locked , others have been 
damaged therefore causing hazard ous environ ments . Let’s say the shi t does not move ; just of 
part of the h ouse Mr. Speaker in causing cholera , you know what it means if there is a cholera 
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  3 outbreak it doesn’t mean that the people of Changamwe do  not  appreciate projects but we need 
to put up better m easures. 
 Mr. S peaker we were going to safe guard the people of  Changamw e and also complete 
the project , the other issues are the security because of the p oles; the lighting poles  most of them 
have been removed in the areas which are so damaged , there ha ve been a lot of robbery cases 
because I also witness ed one when I was going to the airport . I saw a robber y occurring at 
7:30pm someone snatch ed a phone and escap ed with it, it was a very sad thing and then we need 
this H ouse to direct features which will  not s ideline  the people of Changamwe as well as the 
project will completed in a good manner but it doesn’t mean that they don’t want the project but 
also need to supplied like the rest of people of Changamwe so I therefore support Mr. Jimny 
Odari, thank y ou sir.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Kondo . 
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hoja ilioletwa na mtarajiwa wa C hangamwe Mheshimiwa Jimmy Odari.   
Mheshimiwa Spika mambo yameende lea Changamwe kama alivyotangulia M heshimiwa 
Amur kusema kuna mambo sote tunaya hitaji na kila j ambo litakapotokezea ni lazima lina  athari 
yake.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ijapokuwa ni msimu wa kiangazi lakini na sisi tukumbuke kuna wale 
wanaoathirika pakubwa na vumb i ambalo liko katika maeneo yale na mazingira na maswala ya 
maji, mazingira ya maswala ya njia ya maji chafu pamoja na kinyesi tukisubiri kazi iishe halafu 
tuangalie wangapi wameathirika itakuwa ni jambo la kusikitisha kwa sababu ndugu yetu 
Mheshimiwa A mur alipata madhara ya nyumba na alikuja na usalama ni jambo muhimu kwa 
Mungu kwa kupoteza maisha ya watu ….. 
(Laughter ) 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mwanzo tuzuie…   
(Inter ruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Amur, w hat is it?  
Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speak er sir these spectacles are for reading and they can see as far as 
ten kilometers , from here my brother will reach that age and he has spectacles at this tender age I 
should  borrow his … 
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika. M heshimiwa S pika ndugu yangu 
Amur miwani niliyo  nayo ni ya madaktari wasomi hai husiani na miwani yako kwa sababu ya 
umri wake na pia madhara al iyoyapata kule Old T own. 
Mheshimiwa Spika hili jambo lichu kuliwe uzito ; unajua kuna  miradi tuko na mitaro 
ambayo watoto ambao wako katika shule kuna hospitali ziko katika kando  kando ya h izi 
barabara na hii yote ni kwamba hakuna u angalifu mzuri wa wale ambao wanafanya kazi ile 
kuhakikisha sehemu ile inamwangwa  murrum  kuanzia asubuhi mpaka jioni . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika hili sw ala tulibebe kwa uzito kupitia kiti chako na 
ikiwezekana, ikiwezekana kupitia kwa wizara ama kwa  Kamati ya miundo msingi barabara na 
Mwenyekiti  ambaye ni mkakamavu na w anahusika waletwe mbele ya N yumba hii wajieleze kwa  
sababu gani hawachukui hatua mw afaka  kwa maswala ya wananchi wote wa Changamwe 
vilevile na wale wengine amb ao wanaingia kutoka katika kiwanja chetu cha Ndege.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hili swala sisi tunalipinga kwa  sababu  ya ujenzi am bao 
unaend elea pale mbaya ….. 
(Appl ause) 
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  4 ….Nimesema  tukio ambalo li ko sijasema nimepi nga Mswada  lazima tuelewane , kwa 
hivyo naomba  uongozi wako amb ao ni wa busara , yanayoen delea kule yaweze kusimamishwa 
kwa haraka upesi . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.    
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili.  
Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa S pika mimi kama mkaazi wa 
maeneo  ya Changamwe nimes imama kwanza kupinga hoja hii  iliyo mbele yetu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika aliyeleta hoja hii  kwanza nashang aa akiomba J umba h ili likubaliane 
na serikali ya K aunti ikiunga na na serikali ya taifa . 
Mheshimiwa S pika twajua kuwa mradi unaoendelea pale kwanzo ni mradi ambao 
umeletwa na serikali kuu  na tumeelewa mpaka leo hii hakujakuja wakaazi wakaleta petition 
yoyote , mwanzo….  
(Applause) 
…alafu la pili Mheshimiwa S pika ino impa ct assessment  hufanywa kabla ya mradi kama 
huu haujaanza, na wakati huu u kifany wa hakuk uja pingamizi yoyote hapa wala B unge kuu 
kupinga, na pale tumefika  imefika katikati ya mradi huo unaendelea , hatutaki kuletewa hadithi za 
Abunuasi ndani ya B unge hili mt u kuja kusema choo hakiendi , hizi ni hadithi za A bunuasi na ... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Kibwana what is it?  
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : I think my colleague from Port Ritz is trying to being 
entertaining to this Honorable H ouse, I think this is a good M otion he should not say that hadithi 
za Abunuasi . 
Hon Jimmy Odari represent s the people of Changamwe , he represent s the people of 
Changamwe and he has spo ken on behalf of the people of C hangamwe and I think he should 
respect my co lleague from Changamwe , thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi nilisema hadithi za A bunuasi kwa sababu 
tunaambiwa kinyesi hakiendi,  hatuja sikia hata siku moja kutoka kwa wakaazi wa maeneo yale na 
mimi nikiwa ni  mmoja nimejitambulisha naishi kwa maeneo yale ya kwamba kuna siku nimeona 
kwangu … 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : What is it Hon Wangudi?  
Hon. Wangudi : Mheshimiwa Fadhili alipozungumza kuwa hajaona wakaazi  wa eneo 
hilo… 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Are you standing o n a Point of order or what 
is it?  Under what S tanding order !? 
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Wangudi : Yes Hon Spaker. .. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Then wha t is the S tanding  Order ? 
Hon. Wangudi : Mheshimiwa Spika Mh eshimiwa Fadhili anaposimama katika N yumba 
hii…. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No Hon Wangudi let me put it straight, you 
will be given a chance to speak, you will als o speak,  you always stand on a P oint of order,  if you 
have a P oint of order yo u stand on a P oint of order  and you quote that order , but when you give 
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  5 a chance to speak you will talk against what Hon Fadhi li is talking, are you up on a P oint of 
order?  
Hon. Wangudi : No Hon Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Fadhili.  
Hon. Mwalimu : Naam Mheshimiwa Spika,  mimi nimesema na  heshimu maoni  ya 
wenzangu wala si  kusema napinga maoni ya wenzangu lakini  napinga hiyo hoja kwa jinsi 
ilivyoletwa na vile  vile t ukijua hili ni J umba la sheria ikiwa tuko na udhibitishi w a kuon yesha 
madhar a ambayo yako ni haki yaletwe mbele ya J umba hili watu waone udhibitisho kuna hivi, 
kuna watu f ulani wamedhurika  kiasi hichi, basi tuchukue jukumu kuu kama serikali ili tus ukume 
pale ambapo panahitajika ihakikishe imefanya …. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon what is it? Are you standing on a 
Point of order?  
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Yes. 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Under what S tanding order?  
(Laughter ) 
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Mheshimiwa Spika tukianza kupeleke ana namna hio. .. 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Honorable  you only stand on Point of order, 
if you want to talk,  talk. Under what S tanding order?  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon.  Ibrahim  Kondo:  Honorable  Speaker we have rules and regulations but we are not 
on a rule to give each and every single quote from that Standing order , so...? 
(Laugher ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Which S tanding order are you standing on?  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kond o: Mheshimiwa Sp ika. 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : If you want to speak wait for Fadhili to finish, 
you stand to start . 
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Just to clarify point of information, whom are you informing, for 
I have b een informed for the people of C hangamwe to hear it from this H ouse.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Everybody will be given a chance to talk we 
don’t need to interfere with other people, please don’t interfere with him, can you sit down 
please Honorable Fadhili , can you continue.  
 Hon. M walimu : Mr. Speaker, I withdraw.  
(Laughter ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Honorable  Simi nyu Muriuki…  
 Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I support t his M otion because  it is going to take 
care of people from Changamwe  Mr. Speaker…  
(Loud C onsultation ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members  order! Let’s keep order! Let’s be 
order ly in the H ouse!Order!  
 Hon. Siminyu: This M otion should be brought earlier in the case Mr. Speaker but  better 
late than never.  
 Mr. Speaker I have be en passing through Changamwe and I have seen such  a disaster  
going on in that area ; the people are really suffering, there are some prayers that the Honourable 
Members h ave said they are not in this O rder paper, they are very important like he said the iss ue  
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  6 of compensation and I was looking at this document there is nothing to do with the compensation 
of which  it is important to bring in  this M otion.  
 Mr. Speaker  the prayer of Honourable of Changamwe has brought , we need to find out ; 
they said that the Environmental Impact Assessment  (EIA) is done by NEMA before the project , 
is it there ? Those are the issues that as M embers we should ask ourselves and I believe that we 
have a very vibrant Committee of Environment and can find out that whether the EIA was done 
and what measures were taken to avoid  the effect  that is going to happen to the people of 
Changamwe.  
 Mr. Spea ker as the Honourable M ember of Changamwe have said that the drainage 
system is not working , what measures have they taken to ease the press ure for that system to 
work . 
 This is a very ser ious matter and the Honourable M embers should not joke because a 
Member is elected to repres ent issues affecting his people and I believe Honourable for 
Changamwe, Hon Jimmy is doing the legal thing and the r ight thing for his people . 
 Mr. Speaker,  I fully support it and I beg the Ho nourable M embers  of this House to 
support this M otion, thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes please Hon Mwinga . 
 Hon. Mwinga:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kun ipatia nafasi hi i na mimi 
nikaweze kuchangia msw ada huu ambao umeletwa hapa na Mheshimiwa Odari.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama h apa kupinga msw ada huu,  mimi nimeshangaa na 
Mheshimiwa wa Changamwe kwa sababu ule mradi ambao unaendelea mahali pale ni mr adi 
mkubwa am bao unatambulikana Kenya nzima .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika hata mimi nashangaa kwa sababu kabla huu mradi haujaanza watu wa 
Changamwe walihusishwa, viongozi wa Changamwe walihusishwa na la kushangaza ni kwamba 
hawakupinga kutoka mwanzo na mpaka sasa m radi uko karibu kuisha ndio Mheshimiwa  ana 
sikika kwa N yumba hii akisema kwamba ule mradi una madhara. Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri…  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, what is it Hon Ibrahim Kondo?  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo: Hon Speaker this  is just a….  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Do you wa nt to contribute or you have a 
Point of order?  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  No, a P oint of information. Hon Speaker … 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Do you need to be informed  Hon Mwadziwe ? 
 Hon. Ibrahim  Kondo:  No, am not informing Honourable…  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You wait for your turn and you will speak for 
your turn Honorable … 
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Hon Speaker  am here…  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Under which S tanding order?  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Am just informing the House . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Under which S tanding order?  
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Am just informing the House the people of Changamwe are 
here….  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Under whi ch S tanding order? No, just sit 
down. If you do not have a S tanding order please sit down. Yes, Hon Mwadziwe can you 
continue..  
 Hon.  Mwinga:  Mheshimiwa Spika pengine la kushangaza ni kwamba Mheshimiwa 
analalamika ya kwamba watu hawajalipwa wale ambao wali vunjiwa manyumba, lakini ilikua 
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  7 kwa magazeti watu wote washalipwa labda anatuletea Mswada  huu kwa sababu wale watu 
wamelipwa wamemaliza pesa wanataka waongezwe pesa lakini watu washalipwa na nashangaa 
akisema ya kwamba watu hawajalipwa.  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimi wa Spika msw ada huu unafikiri hata wale ambao serikali kuu 
pamoja na yale mashirika ambayo yalisaidia kutengeneza m radi huu wakisikia jambo hili labda 
kuna wanataka kutengeneza mahali pengine hawatatengeneza kwa saba bu watu wetu watakua, 
badala washukuru  watu wana lalamika. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes, Hon Akinyi . 
 Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi pia 
nimesimama kuupinga msuada huu….  
(Applause ) 
 …kwa sababu zifuatazo Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa Spika katika mjadala huo 
amewekea mkazo kuwa vumbi ya barabara inau miza watu pale  lakini niko na uhakikisho kila 
asubuhi na jioni huwa kuna gari ambalo linanyunyiza maji barabarani.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika  ukiwa unaangalia vile barabara inavyo tengenezwa wakifika mahali 
mpaka huwa wawache barabara mbapo inapenya magari yanapoingia ili magari yaweze kufika 
mahali ambapo yanaenda.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika naendelea kupinga mjadala huu asiseme kuwa kinyesi ha kiendi, 
yawezakuwa kwa vile ku na shida ya maji kule Changamwe  sasa wale watu hawamwagi maji ya  
kutosha katika vile vinyesi ndani ya choo ndio kwa  sababu vinyesi haviendi na  haviteremki kwa 
sawasawa . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika  kama Mheshimiwa alikuwa anataka kuleta haya mambo yote wakati 
barabara ilikuwa inafany iwa assesment,  mambo haya yote yaliwekwa chini, yakawa 
yamesemekana kutokana na hii barabara a mbayo inataka kutengenezwa hapa  mambo haya 
yatakuwa ni mambo mabaya na mambo haya yatakuwa ni  mazuri, ambayo itafikia wakati 
barabara itakapokuwa inatengenezwa.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika tumebaki na miezi minne ile  barabara inakamilika kwa  sababu 
tuliambiwa na hata tunajua kufikia mwezi wa sita ile barabara itakuwa imekamilika, sasa 
Mheshimiw a tukiwa tumeanza k ushikana na serikali kuu  serikali ya Kaunti kushikana na serikali 
kuu iangalie mambo vile itaka vyokuwa inatengeneza haya mambo ili yaendelee vile 
inavyo takikana na waliyatengeneza kabla hata hawajaanza yale mambo yale Mheshimiwa Spika. 
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi naendelea nikiwa nimekaa hapa ch ini kuwa mjadala  
huu naupinga k wa sababu umeletwa wakati mbaya. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Saad Faraj.  
 Hon.  Faraj:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika , nimesimama kuupinga vikali mswada huu ; 
Mswada ambao kwamba umeletwa kwanza kabis a ni lazima tuku mbuke ni wak ati ambao 
kwamba sio muafaka wa  kuletwa mswada kama huu, n a katika vipimo vya kimitambo ya 
uongozi  panapo anza mradi wowote huwa kuna jambo kwa kimombo huwa inaitwa 
Environmental Impact Assessment  ambayo kwambo inahusiana na madh ara na athari ambayo 
kwamba inawezwa kuwachwa k wa mradi kama ule unapofanyika n a walihusishwa viongozi 
wote wakiwemo W aheshimiwa wa eneo la Changamwe  kwa sababu mradi huu unafanywa katika 
sehemu yao, Mbunge alikuweko, wawakilishi kutoka serikali ya Kaunti na wawakilishi kutoka 
serikali kuu .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika nashangaa mradi baada ya  kuwa ushaenda kwa muda mrefu na 
unataraji wa kumalizika mradi ule sasa hivi tunapata malalamishi ya  kuwa kuna m asuala kama 
haya yanachipuka  na kuhusiana na masuala ya ridhaa, wa le wakaazi wa  maeneo yale 
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  8 walioathirika na masuala tofauti tofa uti waliweza kulipwa ridhaa zao  na wakaridhika na mradi 
ukawa  unaendelea.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika kuna  mpangilio ambao kwamba ni lazima tuuheshimu, sisi kama 
viongozi tusichukulie kila  kitu ni sias a, kuna masuala mengine laz ima tuyaangalie kwa maslah i 
ya jamii na umma mzima kwa  jumla . 
 Tukiangalia faida ya ule mradi unaofanyika ni  mkubwa zaidi kuliko mambo haya 
madogo ambayo tunajadili hivi  sasa Mheshimiwa Sp ika; leo barabara za C hangamwe zilikuwa 
hazipitiki, kulikuwa na msongamano mkuu katika barabara zile za Changamwe, kulikuwa na 
matatizo ya  kila aina katika braabara kama zile, leo Mungu amejaalia mradi haujamalizika 
kikamilifu lakini unaona athari kubwa ya  kuwa kuna mabadiliko makubwa yanayopatik ana 
katika barabara kama zile.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kibinafsi naupinga mswada huu kwa  kuwa wakati ambao 
kwamba umeletwa sio, na masuala yote ambayo kwamba yameletwa yamepitwa na wakati,  ni  
kuomba Mwenyezi  Mungu mradi huu umalizik e kwa salama uwafae wat u wa Changamwe na 
Mombasa yote kwa  jumla.  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Kibwana. Hon Kondo  under  Stand  
Order number 78 is saying no M ember should speak more than once to a question exce pt in the 
Committee o f the W hole County Assembly … 
(Laughter)  
 Yes Hon Kibwana.  
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon Speaker . Hon  Speaker I would like to share the  
problem that my friend and colleague from Changamwe is facing;  sometimes Hon Speaker the 
issue of EIA is a formali ty and not up to  standard  so sometimes .... 
(Applause)  
 …Hon Jimmy came to this House because he is living in that place Hon Speaker and it 
maybe to some exten t the problem that he has said in this Honorable H ouse has not been done 
properly about the issu e of the water and whatever drainage system.  
 Hon Speaker these are major projects which sometimes are done under the national 
government, through this Honorable House I think you should give us an opportunity to our 
department of Infrastructure to see wh ether it has been table d to this Honorable House , is it 
correct or wrong .  
 Hon Speaker I think also in this issue I don't know if you will take it from your Chair Mr. 
Speaker the issue of Co rporate  Social Responsibilit y (CSR) ; these projects normally co me to our 
County but we don't know what ha s benefit ted our people ... 
(Applause)  
 ...So Mr. Speaker I think now we are saying that there's a saying that , ''Better late than 
never'' , so I think also this is an opportunity for us as Honorable House to see wh ether they are 
adhering to the Environmental Impact A ssessment and also to see whether the compensation 
some people are be ing intended to be from the national g overnment when they claim people have 
been paid they should give us evidence that they have been pa id or they h ave been compensated . 
  Finally Mr. Speaker I think it is very important for us to see if this road has got benefits 
but when you go through this road I think they should be put some signs that we are going to 
avoid some accidents in the future . 
 So Mr. Speaker I stand with my colle ague because  he is living in that area, the people of 
Changamwe are also suffering and also through my area where we have SGR am seeing the 
same problem. Thank you Mr.   Speaker.  
(Interruption)  
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page  9  Deputy Speaker (Hon. Ms wabah Rashid) : Hon Kondo you cannot speak again . 
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Through your quote Mr. Chair you have said that no Member 
should talk twice but I spoke once not more than once ... 
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Not more tha n onc e you have spoken to this 
Motion just have your seat. Yes Hon Ji mmy Odari can you reply to the M otion .  
 Hon. Odari:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kuongea Kiswahili sababu wenzangu wengine 
hapa hawaelewi Kizungu cha Uingereza …  
(Laughter)  
 ...Hicho ni kitu cha ku consider  Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza nilipoleta hii hoja sikutarajia 
kwamba kuna wataalamu wa mambo ya mazingira watanijibu ...  
(Laughter and a pplause)  
 Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa nafikiria watanipeleka katika Kamati husika ikachun guze 
nijue ukweli wa haya ma mbo;  mimi katika hawa wote wal iozungumza hakuna anayeishi 
Changamwe ni wapita njia na wengine hawajui lolote kuhusiana na Changamwe isipokuwa mtu 
kama Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Kondo ni mtu tunayeshinda naye pamoja ….  
(Applause)  
 ….Mimi naenda wodi yake na yeye y uaenda wodi yangu hata Mheshimiwa Mary ni 
mpita njia tu na haya maneno ni maneno serious , maneno ya environmental assesment  
Mheshimiwa Spika nayafahamu sana. Mheshimiwa Spika nimebahatika kufanya kazi...  
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members! Members just leave Hon  Odari to 
finish...  
 Hon. Odari:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nishawahi kufanya kazi katika mashirika mbali 
mbali, nish awahi kufanya kwa Kamati za mambo ya haki, Kamati za ISO, Kamati nyingi za 
Public Health  ni nyingi ambazo nimep itia, masuala ambayo nimeyaleta hapa si masuala ya 
historia ama ya hadithi haya ni mambo ambayo yataka mtu kwenda pale Changamwe ayaone sio 
mambo ya kuzungumza tu...  
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Jimmy Odari you should know the 
people you are addressing, you should ask for people to vote for you.  
 Hon.  Odari:  Mheshimiwa S pika nasema vipi….  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Urge them to support you.  
 Hon.  Odari:  Nataka kueleza hawa watu wapate kuelewa,  haya  masw ala ambayo 
yametokea ni m aswala ambayo ya ko mashinani saa hii na nigeshukuru Mheshimiwa Spika kama 
ungetuma K amati iende kule wodi mtaani ihakikishe kwamba ni kweli, .. 
 EIA ni formality  tu M heshimiwa S pika inafanywa lakini ukija mashinani  utapata maneno 
yanayotokea tati zo la relocation  ya pipe ya maji ni kitu kilitokea nilishuhidia na macho yangu na 
tatizo la taa za barabarani  kuondolewa mimi nilishuhudia na macho yangu mambo ya water 
pipes  kuwa relocated  nilishuhudi a kwa macho yangu na ni kitu ambacho kimeat hiri si hadi thi 
pengine walipokuwa wakifanya EIA hawakutarajia itafikia hapo . 
 Hii EIA ni formality  lakini mambo yanayotokea mashinani  ni mambo mengine tofa uti, 
kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika mimi ningepe nda hil i jambo tulichukulie kwa uzito Kamati ya 
Bunge inayohusika na  mambo haya ikafanye site visit  ikahakikishe kama ni ukweli ama ni 
uongo . 
 Mimi nimesema tangu mwa nzo kuwa sipingi mradi watu wa C hangamwe hawapingi 
mradi mwanzo  tunajivunia huo mradi kuliko w ale wanasema ule mradi uko kwa W odi yangu , 
February  22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         23 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  10 uko kwa Wodi ya K ondo , uko kwa wodi ya Fadhili,  uko kwa Wodi ya Mswabah S pika sote 
twajivunia , twafurahia hata vile itapunguza msongamano wa magari  twafurahia hatupingi lakini 
kuna watu wanai shi pale kando ile vumbi inawaathiri , yale maji ambayo hayapatikani lazima 
tuangalie . 
 Sijapinga tu kwenye maombi yangu Mheshimiwa S pika nasema , the C ounty government 
in conjunction with the national government to come up with proper mitigation measures to curb 
this menace in order to safeguard the health,  safety and well being of the resid ents and passers 
by. 
 Hio tu, kwa hivyo nawasihi,  nawatafadhalisha waunge mkono huu  mswada kwa manufaa 
ya watu wa C hangamwe wala haujachelewa wazungu wasema , better late than never , sio kitu 
kimefanyika tuwas aidie watu wa C hangamwe tuwasaidie si kusema kim echelewa na watu wa 
athirika. 
 Hii measure itakayochukuliwa si ati itaat hiri mradi tukisema vyoo vifunguliwe mradi 
utasimama tukisema maji yafunguliwe utasimama wacha vitu vyote vizuri viende pamoja , kwa 
hivyo naomba waheshimiwa ... 
(Laughter ) 
 …Wapendwa wa unge mkono huu mswada mia fil mia. Ahsanteni.  
(Question put)  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members there being no other de bate I put the 
question to the Motion by H on Jimmy Odari on environmental impact of Changamwe highway 
be passed as it is ... 
(Question put and negatived ) 
 Yes C lerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Ladies and gentlemen ther e being no other business this H ouse stands adjourned until 
tomorrow.  
The House ro se at 3: 25pm . 
    
 