June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 30th June, 2020.  
The House met at 1 1:37a.m 
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes, 
Clerk next order please?  
 
PAPERS  
FINANCE COMMITTEE REPORT OF THE PROGRAM ME BASED BUDGET (PBB) ESTIMATES  FOR 
THE FINANCIAL YEAR, 2020/2021  
 
 Yes Hon. Hatimy Moha med, Chairperson C ommittee on Finance, Budget  and 
Appropriation lay your P aper.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker S ir, I wish to lay on the 
Table the County Assembly today 30th of June , 2020 the following Paper, a Report of  the 
Finance Committee  Programme  Base d Budget Estimate for the financial year 2020/2021.  Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Paper laid ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADOPTION  OF THE REPORT ON MOMBASA COUNTY PROGR AMME  BASED BUDGET ESTIMAT ES 
FOR THE YEAR 2020/2021  
 
 Yes, Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker.  Mr. Speak er I beg to move the 
following Motion;  
 

June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 That this House adopts the report of Finance Committee on the Programme  Based Budget 
Estimates for the financial year 2020/2021.  
 
 I beg to move , Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Who is your seconder?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I request the Vice -Chair to second Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I arise to second the 
Motion. T hank you.  
 
[Question proposed]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I n ow propose a question 
that the M otion by Hon. Moha med Hatimy on adoption  that the repor t on a Mombasa County 
Programme  Based Budget Estimate for the year 2020/ 2021, be considered in this House in the 
same terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to]  
 
 Yes Hon. Moham ed Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I gave a notice of 
amendment and I request  this House to amend the notice s; that this House approves the addition 
of Ksh.250M illion  on to the County Assembly Programme  Based Development Budget (PBB) 
for the year 2020/2021 to finance the Speakers’ residence , renovat ion of the Mombasa County 
Assembly Building at  the Treasury S quare of Mombasa and for the offices of Members of the 
County Assembly.   
 Number two , Mr. Speaker that this House approves  of other addition of Ksh. 50M illion  to 
the County Assembly Programme Based Development Budget for the year 2020/2021 to finance 
the car a nd mortgage loans scheme .  
 I beg to move Mr. Speaker an d I request Hon. Kibwana to second . Thank y ou. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Yes, Hon. Kibwana?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I do second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fa dhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propo se a question 
that the amended M otion by Hon. Hatimy Moha med as moved be debated in this House ? 
 
[Question proposed and  agreed to]  
 
 Any inputs Hon. Members? Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire?  
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speake r. Mr. Speaker I  beg for more clarific ation on the 
amendments and I would  wish to know again the total budget of County Assembly, plus the 
amended that has been done by the Chair . I would  also wish to know Hon. Speaker  which offices 
is the Hon. Member talk ing about ; the MCA’s offices? S o in short I would wish to get more 
clarification on the amendments that ha ve been done  because it has not been captured on the soft  
copies which we were sent earlier , thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy Moha med?  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Mheshimiwa  Spika nafikiri Wanachama  wote watakubaliana 
na mimi kuwa hili jambo la ofisi za W aheshimiwa zilikuwa na shida sana  kwa hivyo ikiwa 
tutakuwa na ofisi yetu sisi  wenyewe  itakuwa hatuna shida za kupe lekana mbio na nafikiri pia 
alileta fikra ya kusema kuwa tutafute yale makasha ya kisasa ambayo ni maofisi ambayo 
yatawekwa kw a kila W odi.  
 Kwa hivyo sisi tumeweka hivyo kama projection  na sio kuwa ati kusema kuwa  
itagharimu milioni 50, hapa itakuwa yaweza kuwa milioni 50, yaweza kuwa chini ya milioni 50, 
yaweza kuwa juu ya  milioni 50, hapo itategemea tutakapofanya BQ  ndio itaonekana.  Ya pili 
Mheshimiwa  Spika ni kutaka kujua juu ya b ajeti, nasema b ajeti expect iwe bilioni 40 , six, 34 
Mheshimiwa n a kuongeza shs 250  millio n zile ni za upande wa Bunge la Kaunti . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire , I think yo u 
still need more clarification?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Of course Hon.  Speaker, am still digesting it. Y ou see I am  looking for a 
page, I came across a page that I saw some allocation of the said offices already in the soft copy 
that we had been sent and again there is amendment on the same Hon. Speaker. So am still 
struggling to find  that page where the office s or those container s have been captured in the initial 
copy that we had and again there is that amendment Hon. Speaker.  So I would just like to have 
that clarification ; why is it that we had an allocation and again th ere is an amendment on the 
same? I f am not wrong there was an allocation of shs15  million and again t hat there is that 
amendment , why?  Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy can you clarify more? 
Hon. Bwire it i s actually on page 23. Y es proceed.  
 
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa  Spika nafikiri hesabu  ya 15 na figure ya  50 ni 
vitu viwili tofauti ; kwa hio  tumesema 15 zitakuwa hazitoshi, nimesema kuwa zitasimami a kwa 
ofisi za W odi zote na kama ninavyo sema kuwa hii ni projection , sio ati itakuwa ni 50 ama 
itaku wa chini ya 50, ama itazidi juu ya 50. Kwa hivyo milioni 15  tumeona kuwa hazitatosha kwa 
maofisi za Waheshimiwa na ndio kwa maana nimesema tulete marekebisho  ya jambo hilo ili 
tusipate shida wakati saa yote kupata shida mambo ya votes , hatutapata shida mam bo ya votes . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Raphael?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Yes Hon. Speaker am still struggling to get wh at the Hon. Chairman is 
talking.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Of course I understand what he  is saying but everybody knows how much and anybody 
can guess how much a co ntainer can cost;  be it a 40 tall feet, be it a 12 tall feet , we can just 
guess . So with 15 million  shillings  Hon. Speaker  the initial estimated budget for the  30 
containers,  it was almost  shs 750,000  if am not wrong, if we estimate shs 15 million divide by 
that something close to that 700. So Hon. Speaker I do  not find it necessary adjusting those 
amounts ; again from 15 to 50 and again saying that we cannot actually give it a price.  Hon. 
Speaker I wish to go with  shs 15 million initiall y that was allocated and I do  not buy the idea of 
amending it to 50 million  shillings  or rather we do something with the extra amount Hon. 
Speaker , that is my view . Thank y ou. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman M wamwiri:  Mheshimiwa  Spika naomba mimi nimt aarifu Mhe shimiwa 
wa Junda ya kwamba kimahesabu amenukuu visivyo, million i 15 kwa Wodi 30 , ni laki tano na si 
laki saba na elfu hamsini . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Raphael?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. T hank you Hon. Mwamwiri for clarification, but 
again 500 is almost close to a price that you can give a 40 feet or a  20 feet container, but having 
a 50 million shillings budget for 30 containers Hon. Speaker is more exaggerated, even  if we go 
by what Ho n. Chairman is saying  we will be exaggerating those figures and we need to do 
something that is close to reality . Thank y ou. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa  Spika tunaposem a container sio container 
iliyopakia mzigo, hizi ni container ambazo ni spe sheli itakuwa equipped  na kila kitu container  
itakuwa na f anicha , choo, air condition  na itakuwa na kila kitu  manake itakuwa ni ofisi kamili. 
Sikusema kuwa  nitakwenda kuchukuwa container  kuja kulikata ukafanya ati ndio ofisi, hili ni 
container  ambayo ni kama nyumba  limetengenezwa kisawa sawa Mheshimiwa Spika. M imi sina 
shida kabisa ikiwa yeye anaona hii million i 50  zitakuwa zimetosha, ikiwa Wanachama  
wameku baliana na yeye mimi sina shida  lakini nasema kuwa hii si container ile ya kubeba 
mzigo, hizi ni container spesheli  ambazo zimetengenezwa zimetiwa kila kitu ndan i. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Tudor Ward.  
 
 Hon. Samba: Thank you Hon. Speake r. Mr. Speaker as I said yesterday here, that 
whatever contribution s that we are making always we s hould have soberness to prevail. A s the 
Chair for Finance has just stated there is  also a procurement process, it i s not just that we want to 
pick u p a conta iner then just plant it somewhere, but it i s going to follow all the tender 
procedure s and I think whoever is going to win the tender has to make some profit out of it and 
one container as the Chair has stated ..., I was in a business of clearing and forwar ding before I 
became a Hon. Member and one container 40 feet it goes  for around shs 500 to 600 thousand 
plus. It is not just  an empty container, it will be fully equipped and the Chairman also has said 
this is just a projection, so that when time comes th ere will be no excuse that  there are no votes 
in accounts.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  So after that I think they will be auditing and even the Chair for Finance will also table  
the report,  and I think the projection that we are having here we should go by that projection 
what matt ers is the accountability…  
 
 Hon. Samba: ….With that projection what matters is the accountability , so instead of us 
debating I request Hon. Bwire to relax because as far as I am concerned he needs thos e for 
containers more than any Member here. T hank you H on. Speaker.  
 
[Applause ] 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Charles Kitula.  
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kabla sijazungumzia hili swala na lengine 
Mheshimi wa Spika wewe ukiwa katika K iti chako unastahili uweze kuangalia kwanza Bunge 
wakati limekaa linakaa kuongea kuhusu nini. O rodha ya Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika inase ma 
kikao cha leo paper  itakuwa  laid, the report on Mombasa County Program B ased budget FY 
2020/2021  alafu tukija katika mwisho ambayo inasema , adoption of the report of  Mombasa 
County Program Based B udget of FY 2020/2021 . Sasa wewe kama M wenyekiti na  Makatibu  
wako wametupatia stakabadhi katika M eza zetu ni za jana ; Mombasa County Annual 
Development P lan (ADP) . Sasa report ya budget  estimate s ziko wapi?  Waheshimiwa 
mnapop atiwa stakabadhi kwanza someni tusiwe tu watu  wa kukubali kila kitu lakini hata 
hujasoma kwenye meza kuna vitu gani.  Tukubaliane Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Kitula? Hon. Kitula?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Naam.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): I am sure every M ember has got a soft 
copy of what we will  be discussed  today…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Kitula : Hapa katika dawati langu Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuja jana , leo ni.. . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Kitula…Order! Hon. Kitula! What 
I have with me that ha s been laid in this Hon ourable House is a Report on the Mombasa County 
Program Based B udget estimate of the FY 2020/2021 and what Mheshimiwa  has moved and it is 
being di scussed now  is amendment then we will proceed to discuss the Report from the 
Committee on F inance on a Mombasa County Program Based B udget , so if you have an ADP I 
do not know.  
 
 Hon. Kitula : Mheshimiwa Spika wacha nikurekebishe kidogo , Motion  iliyokuja ha pa ni 
Motion  ya budget estimate amendment M otion , amendment  inakuja katika Motion  Mheshimiwa 
Spika ambayo…  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 [Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Kitula what is being discussed no w 
is amendment that M embers ..., it h as been propose d and it is now on the floor of the House and 
Members will decide either to abide by this amendm ent or to reject the amendment…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Amendment on what?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): ...the amendment then we will pro ceed 
after the amendments ... we will proceed discussing this R eport…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Amendments on what Hon.  Speaker, you need to be clear.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): On what has been tabled because the 
Hon. Member  tabled a mendment on….  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Kitula : Mheshimiwa Spika nimekubali saa hii napatiwa hiyo stakabadhi  ilikuwa ni 
kitu kidogo Mheshimiwa Spika kama Makatibu  wana   stakabadhi  wanipatie tuendelee lakini 
mara ya kwanza wametupatia ADP ya jana. Saa hii ndio  tunaona Kiranja wa Bunge  
wanatupatia…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): May be that is a technical error Hon. 
Kitula.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ilikuwa ni hilo tu Mheshimiwa Spika si mambo mengine.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalim u): Okay then Hon. Memb er, proceed with 
the amendments. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ni afiki marekebisho ya 
Mwenyekiti katika swala zima la kuziandaa ofisi za Wodi Mheshimiwa Spika;  tukizingatia b ajeti 
hii inayokusu diwa ambayo ni makadirio na sio matumizi halisi kuna uwezekano kama 
nilivyotangulia kusema ya  kuzidi kima ama kupungua lakini pia tujiulize bajeti inayotumika 
kulipia ofisi za kukodi kwa mwaka ni pesa ngapi kwa jumla . Mhe shimiwa Spika , na kwani hi li ni 
swala ambalo litafanyika mara moja na kwendewa mbele ya kwamba hakuna ada ya kulipia ofisi 
tena na hiyo bajeti imekuwa ikitumika miaka ya nyuma . Mheshimiwa S pika itawe za kuelekezwa 
katika matumizi mengine ya kusaidia wakaazi na wananchi wetu wa Mombasa kuliko ni kuekeza 
zaidi kulipia ofisi kila mwaka , kila mwezi hali ya kwamba tunapote za pesa zaidi Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Kwa hivyo ki mtazamo wa kiuchumi Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi naafiki na naunga ya 
kwamba ofisi zote katika W odi ziwe ofisi za kudumu ambazo ni swala itaf anyika mara moja 
kuendelea mbele , itakuwa hakuna tena matumizi hayo ya kulipia ofisi Mheshimiwa. Kwa milioni 
50 Mheshimiwa S pika kuna uwezekano ndio zisitumike zote na kama zitabaki kila mwaka 
tutafanya supplementary  na pesa ile itapata shughuli ya kutumik a kui saidia na kukuza serikali 
yetu G atuzi ya Mombasa kwa minajili ya manufaa ya wananchi wetu . Mheshimiwa Spika, 
ahsante naunga mkono marekebisho ya kipengele hicho.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon . Speaker. Hon. Speaker I do support 
amendments in line with the issue of t he loans of the staff plus the M embers. Hon. Speaker our 
Assembly is struggling not lik e other A ssemblies  when it comes to mortgage and car loans , they 
normally [??] point  pick to pay o r to remit or to give to their M embers. So I think this 
amendment will go and help our staff plus Hon. M embers in getting their rights; this is their right  
Hon.  Speaker, even the National A ssembly , in fact they are better than the C ounties be cause they 
even get grants at the National Assembly but here at our C ounty level we normally get loans.  
So I think it is very difficult for M embers to get loans which they are going to repay back to the 
County , therefore  I think the amendment in giv ing mor e money to this scheme  will go to help the 
staff plus the Members. Thank y ou. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker . First and fore most I do con cur with the 
amendment s which were just read by the Chair of F inance because they have a lot of support and 
great importance to the Hon. Members. Before I hand my contribu tions to the floor Mr. Speaker 
Sir I would want to talk on the integrity and leadership , I am not going back but the mistakes  
which were mentioned by my colleague in Nyali we had noticed them earlier and we are the ones  
who has collaborated with the C hair and also liased  with our C lerks…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): I think a Member is up. Are you up  on a 
Point of order?   
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Yes. 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Nzai, have a seat.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker we must remind ourselves with the procedures of this 
Assembly. Hon. Speaker alre ady you had ruled out  what the M ember has raised and we have 
now embarked on discussing the amendment, I wonder why the Hon. Member is still revisiting 
the issue raised by a M ember and you have already given out the ruling on the same. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fad hili Mwalimu ): Thank you. Yes, proceed Hon. Nzai.  
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Hon. Nzai:  Mr. Speaker I do con cur with…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): …and you time is ending.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  I do con cur with the amendment s which have  just been added becau se 
ksh.15M illion was too little f or the offices in the W ards.Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
[Technical hitch ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Use the mic rophone  infront of you .  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : I do not think tha t is working; it is not working.  
  
[Hon.Amriya Juma handed mic rophone]  
 
 Hon.  Amriya Juma:  Okay thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Spea ker as much as we 
appreciate the se hard eceonomic times ; as much as I also appreciate tha t having an ambitious 
budget at this time of the yea r is not a very good idea because everyone knows the economic 
times we are experiencing and how it has affected the economy of Mombasa , both the COVID 
19 pandemic and the SGR issues, I  also would want to  reiterate that it is important that this 
Assembly gets the face that it deserves and most of the Hon . Membe rs can agree with me that 
these A ssembly buildings are not in very good condition and even very good condition I will be 
overstating ! They are ac tually in just moderate conditions or bad; especially our latrines, our 
toilets and our buildings are leaking , it  needs some  refurbishment  and the plenary itself we have 
old furniture that has been here for over the past two decades , I  assume.  
 It is high time that we get the pending facility up -to-date and modern deserving of our 
tenure or our status Mr. Speaker. So I want to agree with the Finance C hair that this building 
needs renovation s but I am not very sure that we can be able to achieve that now tha t we have 
had an economic challenges and there are other priorities in the C ounty , but I want to support 
that the building should have a facelift Mr. Speaker and if may be if thing s continue like this may 
be we can have some other challenges or circumstanc es that do not allow but as I speak I think it 
is important tha t this building has a facelift if circumstances allow. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members I now stand up to put a 
quest ion that the amendments to the M otion re ad by Hon. Hatimy be adopted in this House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Hon. Hatimy , you can now start the debate for the input.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama hapa mbele ya Jumba hili kuomba Wanachama  leo tarehe 
30 ndio inatakikana iwe bajeti imepitishwa tuweze ku jadili  kwa njia ya sawasawa na isiwe kwa 
njia ya watu kushindana kupotezeana wakati bali kupeana faida na kuweza kuwafanyia kazi 
wanachi wetu wa Mombasa.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika Motion  iko m bele yetu , yule 
mwenye na maneno yake azungumze hapa tuyazungumze tukubaliane ili Kaunti ya Mombasa 
ipate kuendelea mbele. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Charles Kitula.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spi ka kunipatia fursa hii . Hasa siku ya leo ni siku 
muhimu Mheshimiwa Spika,  siku ambayo inastahili kupitisha b ajeti ya Kaunti kwa wananchi 
wetu wa Mombasa . Mheshimiwa Spika leo ninavyotakia maono yangu ni  desturi ya baadhi yetu 
katika B unge hili anapoongea k iongozi ye yote basi yeye anapokosoa kitu huonekana kana 
kwamba yeye ametumwa basi au ako katika misingi ya kisiasa . Mheshimiwa Spika  ili 
kuthibitisha hilo kwamba nitakayoongea leo hii sijatumwa na mtu yoyote wala sio katika misingi 
ya kisiasa nimea mua mwen yewe kwa maamuzi yangu nikiwa katika Bunge hili nainulia mkono 
moyoni mwangu kwamba nitakayosema siku ya leo ni ukweli mtupu na hakuna mtu aliyenituma 
wala si o katika misingi ya kisiasa na M wenyezi  Mungu aniongoze.  
Mheshimiwa S pika tuliingia hapa mwaka 20 17 katika Bunge hili tukapitisha b ajeti ya 
2017 na ilipokamilika bajeti ya 2017 ambayo tuliweza kuitumia iliyopit ishwa na Bunge lililopita. 
Halafu mwaka 2018/2019 tukapitisha bajeti ya pili Mhesh imiwa S pika, mwaka 2019/2020 
tukapitisha bajeti ya tatu . Katika ripoti hii nimeweza kuipitia usiku i lipotumwa katika grupu zetu 
za Whatsapp  na nikasema ni jambo bora Kiranja wa B unge ametufa nyia ambayo izidi kuendelea 
ikiwa mtu atakuwa awe ka ribu na maswala ya mtandao akip ata stakabadhi  katika mtandao 
inakuwa ni afa dhali watu kama sisi ambao tunapenda kupitia mi tandao na kusoma 
kinachoende lea katika mitandao Mheshimiwa S pika, kwa hivyo kongole B wana Kiranja wa 
Bunge .  
Lingine Mheshimiwa Spika katika bajeti yetu iliyopita 2017/2018,  2018/2019  na 
2019/2020 baada ya kup itia R ipoti hii ambayo imeletwa na Mhesimiwa M wenyekiti 
nimeshangaa sana kuona katika kipengele cha 14 wanasema kwamba , ‘The County T reasury in 
submission before the C ommittee has also blamed departments for slow absorption of 
development fund s referring t o consumption of  recurrent fund s for non core activities and 
putting low efforts in revenue collection , this needs to be corrected by the D epartment s by 
prioritizing  the delivery of programes that will benef it the larger citizenry in the C ounty….’ . Hii 
inaashiria ya kwamba kulinga na ripoti  ya Kamati ya Fedha  kwamba viongozi katika idara 
husika hawajui pesa ya maendeleo. Lakini ukweli uko wapi leo tuambiane ukweli sisi tangu 
2017/2018 hadi 2019/2020 J ulai 2017 hadi De semba 2019 sisi  tumetumia shilingi bilio ni 28 
Mheshimiwa S pika;  shs28 bilion i tumetumia lakini la kushangaza katika shs 28 bilioni hizi 
tulizotumia mimi nash angaa nimekuwa kiongozi katika B unge ndani ya 28 bilion i vijana wetu na 
kina dada zetu katika idara ya Inspectorate  wengine wao hawana mish ahara mpaka leo . 
Mheshimiwa S pika ndani ya shs 28 bilion i hakuna hata ECDE moja tumejenga ikakamilika na 
inatumika.  Ndani ya shs28 bilioni Mheshimiwa S pika, katika  shs 28 bilioni hizo hakuna hata 
mwanafunzi mmoja kiserikali ambaye Mombasa tumempatia schola rship.  Mheshimiwa S pika 
ndani ya shs2 bilioni tulizotumia katika vikundi vyetu vya kina  dada na kina mama 
empowerment hawapatiwi; n dani ya shs28bilion i Mheshimiwa S pika tulizotumia sisi ni mji wa 
pili baada ya Nairobi lakini hatuna hata kiwanja kimoja cha kimataifa, ndani ya shs28 bilion i 
haku na hata soko moja sisi tumejenga likakamilika na likatumika. Shs28 bilioni Mheshimiwa 
Spika hii hakuna vilevile katika sehemu zetu tunakotoka drainage system s ni mbovu . 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 Sasa nikajiuliza katika shs28 bilioni hizi wahusi ka ni akina  nani; n a leo nimekula kiapo 
nitawaambieni , nitawa tajieni wahusika wan ne wakuu katika serikali yetu ya K aunti ya Mombasa 
ambao wananyanyasa haki zetu za B unge na vilevile kutotendea wananchi wetu haki. 
Nitawatajia baada ya k umaliza hotuba yangu watu wanne; m moja Mheshimiwa S pika hatuwezi  
jua hizi pesa zinakwenda wapi , la kushangaza zaidi nikaona Wizara ya Uchukuzi  na Miundo 
Misingi  ndani ya miaka hii miwili na nusu wametumia  shs 3 billion i. Mheshimiwa Spika, 
shilingi  bilioni tatu wametumia nikata ka kujua vilevile hizi bilioni tatu zimetumika vipi Ripoti ya 
Wizara ya Uchukuzi na Miundo Misingi  wanasema kwamba 2017/2018 walikarabati na kuweka 
murram  mashinani kilomita 109.75 Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Mheshimiwa S pika hii ni  ishara ya kwamba ki la Wodi  tuliekewa kilomita 3.6 za 
barabara  tena 2018/2019 Wizara ya Uchukuzi na Miundo Misingi  wakajenga barabara zengine 
kilomita 65. Mheshimiwa Spika h ii ni ishara kila Wodi  kwa kiwango cha chini  barabara ni  
kilomita  2. Kwa hiv yo 2017/2018 na 2018/2019 kila Wodi  tuliwekewa kilomita 5 na mita 220 
kwa kila Wodi . Nikaendelea pia kuangalia miradi ya ujenzi wa barabara  Mheshimiwa Spika 
2017/2018  tukawekewa kilomita 12.7 kila Wodi. Hii ina  ashiria kuwa kila Wodi ilipata cabro  
mita 400 kila mtu , 2018/2019 wakajenga kilomita 18.74  Mheshimiwa Spika, hii ni ishara kuw a 
kila Wodi ikapata kilomita 1.5. Kwa hivyo  k uanzia miaka mb ili na nusu tumejengewa katika 
Wodi zetu tumejengewa kilomita 1.9 za cabro .  
Mheshimiwa Spika hapa tuko Waheshimiwa wote nani hapa aniambie katika Wodi yake 
amejengewa cabro hata za mita 500 na serikali yetu ya  Kaunti ya Mombasa ? Mheshimiwa Spika 
leo hii tuko mahali hapa kuweza kupitisha bajeti  ambayo nikamsimamisha Mwenyekiti  wa 
Kilimo Mheshimiwa Wambua , Mwenyekiti wa Vijana na Michezo Mheshimiwa Samba , 
nikasimam isha Mwenyekiti wa Leba Mheshimiwa Thoya , nikasimam isha Mheshimiwa  Bomoa  
mmoja wao asimame aniambie hapa katika Bunge hili katika idara yake maendeleo amewekewa 
pesa ngapi , Mheshimiwa Spika hataniambia . Hii ni ishar a kwamba bajeti hii haihusishi 
Mheshimiwa ; mbali na hivyo bajeti hi ya 2020/2021 ni kinyume n a sheria, imekiuka Kanuni za 
Bunge  nambari  207 inayosema , '(1) The Member of County Executive Committee responsible for 
finance and the accounting officer of the County Assembly Service Board shall, not later than 
30th April, respectively submit to th e County Assembly budget estimates and related documents 
specified in law for the County government, a nd County Assembly. Mheshimiwa Spika (2) The 
estimates and related documents submitted under Paragraph (1) will be tabled in the County 
Assembly within th ree days of submission....  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Samba: Point of order!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes there is a Point of order.  
 
 Hon. Samba: Yes Hon . Speaker I am on a Point of order number 87, the responsibility of 
statements an d facts . Hon. Speaker we are being lectured by the Hon . Member and I stood 
because I was mentioned ; even in our W ards there are no roads , there is no single M ember who 
has been constructed a road of even 500 metres . Hon. Speaker I do  not know whether the 
document that he has we can get them so that at least we may tread on the same path; I am not 
objecting his own findings , i think the document that is supposed to be debated in the House I 
think they have to be verif ied through the office of the C lerk, and we should also have them so 
that we can also contribute to the M otion .  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  So it is just a kind request if he has the documents let him sha re with us because some of 
the Wards , like my W ard i think 500 metres cabro construction that  is my concern Hon . Speaker . 
Thank you v ery m uch. 
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Point of Order Mr.Speaker!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Nzai there is no Point of order on a 
Point of order! L et the Hon . Member finish  then you will stand with your Point of information or 
interrupti on or Point of order but Hon . Kitula as per the S tanding order raised by Hon . Samba 
you were supposed to substantiate your facts and also to put in mind Standing Order 83 (1) , you 
cannot mention somebody whose removal from office depends on a decision from  this County 
Assembly . So you have to put in mind also it is in our Standing Order not unless you can 
substantiate what ever that you have and proceed a nd also your time is limited.  
  
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N imeweza k usema ya kwamba na 
nikanyoosha B ibilia kwamba ninayoongea yote ni ya kweli na akitaka ushahidi nimekuj a nao 
nitampatia ama niipatie K iti chako . Barabara zote zimejengwa katika maeneo yetu ziko hapa 
nitakupatia ama Mhesh imiwa M wenyekiti akiwa tayari Mheshimiwa Samba nitampatia ha pa 
stakabadhi  ushahidi uko hapa Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti kwa hivyo nampatia Katibu.. . 
 
[Interruption ] 
      
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Nzai ? 
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  to have understood what I mean.  Mr. Speaker I stood 
to co ngratulate the information my fellow Hon. Member is giving to this House but I want to 
inform him that there is every good , news messages , good areas where you can give that message 
to the public . I believe the time we are having in  this Assembly right now  is so minimal that we 
cannot absorb all the good material he is giving us ; I would suggest and wish that he look for a 
better platform whereby he can give us the proof documents and evidence . It is also that the time 
is not on us today , we are here for w hat is on our hand  so can we please look on this then the rest 
we shall go to  the EACC, DCIO to whatever so I  beg him kindly. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay thank you.  Yes Hon . Kitula there 
is a proper way of tabli ng your evidence and if you will wish to table whatever that you have you 
can table through the proper procedures in this Hon. House so that what you have in hand 
reaches the table of the Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni likuwa nimesimama chini y a Kanuni za Bunge 
nambari  87 ambayo Mheshimiwa Samba alikuwa ameongea kuhusu responsibility of statement 
of facts  na nim wambie Mheshim iwa Nzai hili ni B unge la W aheshimiwa , Bunge tukufu sio 
Bunge la wananchi . Kwa hivyo kama tuko katika B unge tukufu ambayo stakabadhi  yoyote na 
kama Kanuni ya Bunge  87 inasema ikiwa nimekiuka sheria ni lazima  hapo hapo  nikupatie  
stakabadhi  ili kama ninayoongea ni ya kweli au la .  
 Kwa hivyo nit hibitishe Mheshimiwa Samba kwamba kila Wodi kwa kiwango cha chini  
barabara zimetenge zwa ni kilomita saba , ushahidi uko hapa Mheshim iwa Spika ndio nikas ema 
Kanuni ya Bunge  87 ili kuong ea ni ya kweli ningekupatia stakabadhi  hii. 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Table the document before the House.  
 
[Document  tabled ] 
 
 Hon. Kitul a: Mheshimiwa Spika nimalizie kusema najua hili litaumiza wengi mioyo yao 
lakini nimalizie kusema nilianza kuongea k ina nani hawa wanatuumiza sisi Waheshimiwa na 
wananchi wetu. Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na uc hunguzi wangu nimefanya katika B unge hili 
kiong ozi wa kwanza amba ye... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula y ou are out of order as per 
our S tanding orders ! Do not mention somebody’s name who cannot even respond to your 
allegations as at now and I  said earlier it is in our S tanding order if the person you are to mention 
his removal from office depends on the decision of this Assembly you will also be out of order to 
mention his name at this moment a nd also Hon. Kitula as per our Standing orders your time is 
up. L et us proceed Hon . Members, y es Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Ukiangalia ripoti 
tuliokab idhiwa na Mheshimiwa wa maswala ya fedha na makadirio ya bajeti kuhusiana na 
mandalizi ya bajeti ya mwaka wa 2020/2021 niungane nao kwa ya le yalitokezwa ambayo ni  
baadhi ya changamoto tulizozipata mashinani  tulipokuwa tunaendesha zoezi hili kuhakikisha 
yale yalioangaziwa ndio yale ambayo wananchi wetu wa liyakusudia . Mheshimiwa Spika na 
swala lil ilokuwa nyeti mashinani ama eneo ninalowakilish a mimi lilikuwa swala zima la 
ukamilishaji wa miradi ; ya kwamba kila mwaka Serikali gatuzi itakuwa ikienda mashinani 
kuulizia swala la mapendekezo ya mirad i yaliotengezwa na inapofika mwaka unaofu ata 
wanaenda tena kuulizia maswala mengine wakati miradi ili otanguliza yal iokamilika na nini 
haikukamilika . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika  kwenye ripoti sehemu ya 13 naona K amati imeangazia ya kwamba 
hizi juhudi za wakaazi wa Mombasa kwa kuachwa nusu au kutokamilika kwa miradi kwa sababu 
inawanyima makusudio na malengo yalioku sudiwa awali na hivyo kuishurutisha idara zote 
husika ya kwamba katika bajeti hii wame wekewa kipao mbele na kulazimishwa kukamilishwa 
kwa miradi ilio nusu kabla ya kuanzisha miradi mipya na miradi mipya ilioangaziwa hapo ni 
miradi ya dharura ambayo haijawa hi katika bajeti iliotangulia . Mimi n iunge mkono kwa hili ya 
kwamba K amati imetendea haki mapendekezo ya w ananchi na kwamba wamezingatia na nina 
imani M heshimiwa Spika ya kwamba kila K amati husika katika uwezo wa oversight  tutasimama 
kidete kuhakikisha id ara hizi tunazisukuma kuweza kukamilisha yale yaliotangulizwa mbeleni na 
sio kuwapitishia kuwaunga mkono kutaka kujenga maswala mapya na ya le mengine kuweza 
kubaki njiani.   
Mheshimiwa Spika pia katika sehemu ya 11 kifungu cha mwisho K amati za Bunge 
zimetaj wa na kuombwa kuzidishwa uwe leji wao na uwezo katika kuzisimamilia idara husika 
utendekaji wa majukumu . Jambo hili ni jukumu l etu kuhakikisha kwamba quarterly reports  
zinafika kwa wakati na Kamati zinachuku a hatua mwafaka ya kuzikagua kuzipitisha na kuhoji  
pale kulioko na dosari au walakini katika utendakazi kwa sababu bila oversight ama waangaliz i 
wa idara ambazo ni jukumu la K amati , tunapeana fursa ya idara zetu kuendesha bajeti zile kwa 
jinsi na taratibu wanazotaka . 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Pia kuna kipengele c hengine kimeangazia ya kwamba idara ya Fedha na B ajeti ama 
Finance imeweka lawama na shutum a kwa idara zetu ya kwamba zina kuwa polepole katika 
matumizi wa fedha za maendeleo . Mheshimiwa Spika hili limec hangia pakubwa na utepetevu wa 
Kamati zetu za B unge k wa sababu kama tumeimarika na uf uatilizi ya kuwa bajeti tul iopitisha ni 
hii na katika  Programme Based Budget  kuna timeframe  ya miradi ambayo kila idara imeangazia 
kwa uf uatilizi wa karibu ndani ya kile kipindi walichosema idara inaweza kufanya jambo fulani . 
Mheshimiwa Spika na kuhoji kwa  nini hakijafanyika ingewalazimu na kuwashurutisha 
wasimamizi wa Idara hizo yaani Chief O fficers  kuweza kuwa wepesi wa ufu atilizi wa bajeti zao 
na kuhakikisha kila kilichokusudiwa kinatendeka  kwa wakati unaofaa.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika nikimalizia ni wito wangu kw a Waheshimiwa wenza na hususan 
Mwenyekiti wa Kamati za B unge kuhakikisha Kamati zetu tunazipeleka mchakamchaka 
tukizingatia m uda tuliobaki nao kuhudumia wananchi wetu wa Mombasa ya kwamba makusudio 
yao na matarajio yao yam eweza kufikiwa kutokana na bajeti tulizokuwa tunapitisha kila mwaka 
kwa kuhakikisha idara zinatenda uadilifu na uwajibikaji katika utekelezaji wa bajeti zao hususan 
katika bajeti za maendeleo  na sio tu zile za matumizi ambazo zina manufaa kwa watu wachach e 
lakini kwa miradi ya kimaendeleo ambayo ni natija mwafaka kwa wananchi wetu wa M ombasa . 
Mheshimiwa Spika na n asimama kuunga mkono ripoti ya K amati kwa sababu imezingatia haki 
na ukweli , uwazi na mapendekezo ya wananchi kuhusiana na  yale yaliojiri kwenye bajeti 
zilitangulia.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon. Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon. O mondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity offered to me . Mr. Speaker 
maybe before I talk about this report I would just like to in form fell ow M embers that this is a 
House of procedure s; we are guided by the Standing Orders and the C onstitution and it is very 
much unfair  for a M ember to show something that he himself cannot substantiate or even give 
facts … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Kitul a: Taarifa Mheshimiwa Spika!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Ibrahim there is a M ember up.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesema niko na ushahidi wote na nimeshaupeana 
sasa sijui anazungumzia kuhusu nini an iambie ni kitu gani anataka k ujua nimpatie sasa hivi . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay Hon . Ibrahim focus on this report, 
the Hon. Member has laid a report before this House and it has reached the desk of the Speaker 
so let alone what he has alleged we will look upon  that and then we will look for a way on how 
the report he has laid is going to be debated in this House.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Yes that one just to inform him that one has not given him the threshold 
of saying that his report is authentic . Mr. Speaker by him lay ing a report does not mean he has 
substantiated ; as the C hairman  for Education you know this matter has touched me when it was 
said that there is no E CDE constructed . We have to have the facts  and there are so many ECDs 
that I can mention  that have been co nstructed and they are working.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  Okay let me concentrate on this report, first of all Mr. Speaker I want very much to 
concentrate on education and ICT where  I head as the C hair; basing on this report I  can see a 
total of Ksh.972Million allocated to  this p articular department and I  can see that we have the 
recurrent expenditure of around Ksh.372Million , personnel l emolument s of Ksh. 269Million, 
Ksh.200Million  for bursary, development Ksh.311Million  and of course  this excludes the 
Ksh.110Million  which is goin g to be included in our supplementary budget after our schools 
reopen . We all know that for now we cannot be able to open schools because of the uncertainty 
which is facing the country . 
 Mr. Speaker S ir, I would like to say that this C ommittee to me ha s me t the threshold and 
they have done their best and I am basing on facts ; when you look at development as far as 
education is concerned it had been allocated Ksh.311M illion , you will find ou t that there are 
some of the EC DEs that have been done a lmost 90  per cent,  some 80  per cent and  some 100 per 
cent. T his one is going to help , it is going to assist those particular projects and I also want to say 
Mr. Speaker you know that when you talk about education we should also talk about how are we 
going to educate our children because that is where  there is a big problem in our C ounty .  
Mr. Speaker whereby you find out that most parents are not able to take their children to 
school because of school fees and as I  can see there is Ksh.200M illion  for bursary  which has 
been allocated and therefore am very optimistic that now our parents are going to be able t o take 
their children to school. I  want also to support this particular document on the issue of school 
milk whi ch we have already talked about which is s upposed to be allocated KSh.220 M illion , but 
it has not been put there , we are going to pass it after the supplementary budget which this one 
has always been a recipe to our children and it has been helping our children to improve t he 
attendance of the sch ool.  
Mr. Speaker Sir … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Your time is up , one minute.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : And therefore Mr. Speaker S ir I stand to say that I stand to su pport this 
particular document. Thank  you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon. Tobias?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. A t least you see, whenever you see Hon.  Bomoa  
is up  Mr. Speaker Sir  you will always wish you ar e given an opportunity first because he always  
exhaust s every poi nt but due to the time factor, I think we should  start b y giving Bomoa  first 
priority then we talk after him. Thank you Hon. S peaker, I am up to support the report and to 
adopt the report. Hon. Speaker, I  have got two observations t hat I have made; o bserva tions and 
findings number 11 which my fellow colleague was also up on during the departmental hearings 
on the budget estimates some of the departm ents complained of underfunding . 
 Hon. Speaker it has been a problem whenever sometimes when we have programs and 
projects that the department wish to initiate or put in place, the issue will be that there is no funds 
and I think this is not the first time I am up complaining that whenever we do  not have funds  
everyone will be shouting there is no funds, there are  no fund s but whenever there are  funds, you 
will never hear that there are funds and we can now put on the projects that were stalled.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Hon. Speaker, the C ommittee should have come up with a proper and clear mechanism to 
ensure ..., to make sure that each and every department consumes it s allocation properly and the 
issue of re -allocation  of funds during the supplementary budgets, some of the departments have 
never even enjoyed their budget allocations . That one also the C ommittee should have come up 
with a  proper mechanism and a clear way to tackle that.  Another issue Hon. Speake r is the issue 
of pending bills ; pending bills, the Auditor G eneral was very clear, the deadline was supposed to 
be March, March , 2020, the deadline … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Yes, Hon. Spea ker another issue is the pending bills, pending bills has b een a problem  
not only in our C ounty but in the entire country. Hon. S peaker, there are some of the suppliers, I 
know one but due to the statement of facts I will not mention the name , he did some  work at the 
Governor’s office and the County owe s her only shs1.6 million . Now this is the second and a 
half year she  has been coming to the County Assembly T reasury department to  no avail.  Hon. 
Speaker, some of the people took loans to fund the projects that they are do ing and some have 
even given up.  I think the only, the major issue and the major point that the Committee should 
come up with a proper and clear way to contain  the issue of pending bills .  
 Hon. Speaker, it will be sad for me to say yesterd ay I was here till late, I was here till late 
because  I was just doing some of the findings here and you find that whenever there is money  
that  people are supposed to be paid, the doors are locked. They lock both doors even they do  not 
want to care whethe r we are Honourable Members and  we have the right to access that place and 
at some given point you can find yesterday I was there when the Hon. Chairman F inance came 
and he went back because he could not access that place.  
 Hon. Speaker it is high time th e issue of pending bills  is sorted;  we should compel the 
Finance department to come up with a clear mechanism  to contain and tackle the issue of 
pending bills. We might not be the victims for now, but one day at a time you might fall the 
victim of the cir cumstances  or maybe your friend a colleague or your relati ve might happen to be 
a victim s o through the department of F inance  kindly look for a way we can handle that.  Another 
of m y concerns, this is out of the M otion Mr . Speaker, can we have our key wher e whenever we 
want t o access the other side of the T reasury department  we should have a key for Hon. 
Members  to avoid hizo ma aibu ndogo ndogo unasimama hapo  for hours. Thank you Hon . 
Speaker I beg to support the M otion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhil i Mwalimu) : Yes, the Leader o f Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr . Speaker.  Mr. Speaker  I want 
to inform the House on S tanding order number 27 ; 
  
 Unless the Speaker for the convenience of  the County Assembly otherwise directs , the 
County Assembly shall meet at 9 :00a.m  on Wednesday  and (2), unless for the 
convenience of the County Assembly the Speaker or the C hairperson as the case may 
direct earlier or later interruption of the business. ..  
 
 Mr. Speaker you are aware we have t aken more than the required  time so I was 
requesting this A ssembly to be on adjournment to extend up to, to extend for one  hour, so that 
we can be in a very good position according to our S tanding order.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 So I request to amend or to add some more time so th at we are in a proper position with the 
Standing order. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Hon. Shebe to second that.  
 
[Hon. Shebe  Athuman bowed ] 
[Question proposed]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M walimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a question 
that the hours of meeti ng be extended as moved by the Leader of M ajority ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Any input Members be fore I put a 
question? Yes, Hon . Charles?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika naunga mkono Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  
kwa sababu hapa kama Waheshimiwa tumekuja mapema kulingana na ujumbe wa Kiranja wa 
Bunge  wetu lakini kwa sababu mambo yasioeleweka na na muunga mkono Kiongozi wa Wengi  
tuweze kuongeza muda . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now st and to put a 
question that the Motion by the Leader of M ajority of the hours of sittin g be passed in this 
Honourable H ouse? 
 
[Question pu t and agreed to ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, let  us proceed with our previous 
debate. Yes , Hon. Amri ya? 
 
 Hon. Amri ya Juma:  Thank you Mr . Speaker  for giving me this opportunity. Mr 
Speaker,  I have highlighted numbe r 5, 6, 12 and 13 of  the report , and this is very import ant. I 
want M embers to follow with me ; in page 3 number 5 the submission of the C ommittee that the 
County government is expecting to  receive Kshs. 14Billion of revenue and equitable share with 
the expectation  of equitable share will be Kshs.7.4Billion as opposed to Kshs.7.05Billion from 
the previous financial year which amounts to an increase of Ksh.379Million .  I hope everyone is 
following from the previous year, so essentially it leaves the local revenue t hat the County is 
expecting will be about half of the total amount , that is Kshs.14Billion  and my concern is that 
when we came in 2017 /2018 we passed a budget of about Kshs.12Billion  Mr. Speaker  and we 
had an absorption of Kshs. 1Billion and I am seeing as we progress in time things are not looking 
any better and I do  not think that the estimation of Kshs. 7.2 billion in terms of local revenue 
collection … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, what is it Hon . Athman?  
 
 Hon. Athman M wamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika naomba tu kumtaarifu M heshimiwa ya 
kwamba tuliapishwa tarehe 6 mwezi wa 9 mwaka 2017 wakati b ajeti tayari ya mwaka 2017 /2018 
ilikuwa ishapita . Kwa hivyo tu Mheshimiwa Spika  ni kukumbushana tu ya kwamba bajeti yetu 
ilikuwa ya mwaka  2018 /2019 na sio 2017/2018. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 Hon. Amri ya Juma:  Thank you for that correction , it is 2018/2019 Mr. Speaker. But 
anyway,  what I was submitting to this House Mr . Speaker  is that at this time where Mombasa’s 
economy is really on a de creasing scale , I think there will be issues.  There is a danger of issues 
of under absorpt ion; there will be a danger of issues of not meeting the target, the development 
targets, there will be a danger of even pending bills come next year and I think that  it should be 
in record that I spoke this at this particular time because in my view when you look at t he 
economy of Mombasa right now  it is on a down scaling terrace not upscaling  because most of 
the businesses are looking at alternative business opportun ities like home businesses so there will 
be no much businesses in Mombasa according to the projections of business people. So that i s 
my view and I think it should be the view of so many of us that Kshs.7.2 billion as the expected 
local revenue is an ambit ious amo unt Mr. Speaker.  Moving forward  and even the Committee 
here has highlighted that they are expecting a reduc tion in the grants from the national because 
due to the same reasons we are talking about , due to the pandemic and all that. So I think eve n us 
as we speak today  we should do things differently so that we capture th e current economy  so that 
we do  not look like we are in Mars and other people in Mombasa are in the planet earth.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : There is a point of i nformation .  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr Speaker I would like to point it out that the fact 
that the whole world is under the pandemic of the  COVID 19, so me state organs have already 
found means and ways of improving their economies , one of them  being Kenya as a country . The 
Government of Kenya has set a very big and huge amount to revive the economy whereby the 
Chairperson to that is our former Prime Minister Hon. Mr. Raila Odinga,  so the issue of 
financing this budget is not an i ssue.  
 
 The De puty Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok thank you. Thank you for the 
information. Yes Hon. Amri ya proceed.  
 
 Hon. Amri ya Juma:  Mr. Speaker I move on . Section number 6 of the report and I want 
to commend the Committee for doing  a great job and even simplify ing for the Members. This is 
a commendable job Chairman , congratulations for that and it is very  clear that one of the 
hinde rances to the realisation of Mombasa’s projects is due to the high wage bill that ha s been 
inherited even from the Municipal C ouncil Mr. Spe aker. We are talking of a wage bill of 
Kshs.5.3Billion , which is 37  per cent  of the total expenditure Mr. Speaker and above the 35  per 
cent that has been recommended in law , that is the PFM regulation .  
 Mr. Speaker , I think now that we have the mod ule of working from home, on the other 
operations and maintenance, the C ommittee would maybe think of reviewing the budgets 
especially on the allowances and other expenses that are not necessarily the salaries and wages , 
that is my recommendation on that p oint.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18  So movin g on Mr. Speake r, on S ection 12 and I am winding up  I am see ing you are 
looking at the time;  Section 12 and 13 of the same report highlights the pending bills and I know  
some of us we want to pounce on  me for highlighting this but anyway, t his is the right forum 
actually it is not the mandate of the Committee to solve these  pend ing bills which actually  it is 
the mandate of the whole County A ssembly that has the power to pass estimates and the budget. 
So this is the time to solve this issue and Mr. Speaker you know Mombasa had been given a 
deadline by C abinet Secretary  Matiangí of 20th March , 2020 to clear all the p ending bills and 
yesterday the C hairman spoke about it that they are waiting on the Auditor G eneral for 
verification and validati on of the amounts that are being h eld by the County.  
 However, Mr. Speaker  having said that, we are looking at what are the solutions to this 
issue of pending bills ; because as we move forward it appears to me there will be  if the same 
systems are still i n place that br ought forward the pending bills  then we might solve one issue 
and the next day is at the same place maybe in a small amount. So Mr. Speaker I wish the 
Committee considers the open contracting procurement method…  
[Interruption]  
Hon. Kitula : Taarifa Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri jana nilizungumzia 
kuhusu pending b ills nikasema nitazungumza leo wakati wa budget e stimates . Mheshimiwa 
Spika anayeongea sasa ni M wanachama  wa PAC, kwa hivyo pending b ills hakuna hapa mahali 
ameandika  kiwango cha  pending bills, na sisi kama W abunge hatufahamu pending bills ni ngapi , 
na ni nani anatudai. Kwa hivyo sisi kuzungumzia kitu ambacho  kiko hapa na sisi hatufahamu.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Kitula this is a Report from the 
Finance and Budget Committee.  
Hon. Kitula:  Yes. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Which is in front of all the Hon. 
Members in this House , so by excluding the Hon. Member from debating this because she is 
from PAC Committee Hon. Kitula you will be out of order. Because she is the Chair of Legal 
and Justice Committee and she is a Member of this Hon orable  House so she can debate on this 
report which is in front of us , when PAC bring their Report then when we are going to question 
their report.  
Hon. Kitula : Mheshimiwa Spika maoni yangu ni kwamba pending bills kulingana na 
ufahamu wetu ni k wamba  zimekuwa cleared  lakini katika Ripoti hii zipo  na sisi kama Bunge 
hatufahamu pending bills hata moja . Suali langu ni kwako kama M wanachama wa PAC 
angetuambia katika pending bills kweli ziko na ni k iwango fulani ili tuweze kuendelea kujadili 
suala hili, l akini wa sasa kusema pending b ills kwenye r ipoti ya Kamati ya Fedha wakati 
Mwanachama  wa PAC hawezi kutuambia hata kiwango  Mheshimiwa Spika sidhani kama 
itakuwa ni saw a. Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Kit ula for the kind of 
information. Yes  Hon. Amriya proceed and you have one minute to wind up.  
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Ok Mr. Speaker . I would not wish to waste my time to respond on 
that, I wish to continue with my submission; t hat one of the recommen dation of the President on 
the pending b ills moving forward 2020 /2021  is to have an open contracting procurement 
processes . These  will be transparent and open to the public, the public will be a ble to know what 
the County or the c ompany is see king to have and at what amount, h ow many are applying and 
who is qualified in an open system that is called open contracting, who has been awarded and 
who has been paid  all will be in public know how, that w as the President highlights of the 
pending  bills. 
So that was my final submissions that I was hoping that the Finance Committee during 
their recommendation will capture r eduction on the expenditure  and also the solutions to the 
pending bills and slow absor ption of development funds. Otherwise this is a good r eport and I 
support with reservations with what I have highlighted. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you. Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
Hon.  Bwire:  [Inaudible]  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Bw ire in terms or seniority am 
more senior than you. Mr. Speaker being the norm today I was about to carry the Bible but 
because of time I will not do that. Mr. Speaker I would like to rush directly to Section 1 3, we 
have been told about the pending b ills an d everything. Mr. Speaker I think it is very important 
that moving forward we should highlight this project and know which are these projects per 
Ward so that  after passing this budget the C ommittee should do a site visit to ensure that all the 
pending pro jects had been done before any new project is started , anyway  it is a very good report 
and I do support. Thank you.  
 
[Applause]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . First I would wish to inform Hon. Ogutu that in 
this Hon ourable  House am senior than him, am the Speaker’s Panel Member and I should be the 
first to talk . Hon. Speaker one ; am very afraid because if you go through this report you will find 
out that this report is not signed , it is an unsigned report and we have been taking back the 
reports that were not signed even those that were brought by the departments so...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
         The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Bwire the report with me  is signed . 
 
 Hon. Bwir e: And the one that am having  is unsigned, there might be different cop ies Mr. 
Speaker, it i s just a concern...  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The one that has been tabled  is signed  by 
the C hair. 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  The one I have is unsigned . 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So you would like to get my copy so that 
you contribute and ascertain that the copy you are having is the same as the one i have ? 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker it might be the same but my concern is tha t it is unsigned , the 
one that I have so...  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The one that has been tabled is signed . 
 
 Hon. Bwire : Thank you then . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok proceed . 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker my second con cern is also about what Hon. Ogutu has just 
said; if you remember last financial year the last budget we pass ed here it was just the Program 
Based E stimates Budget (PBB) and with such kinds of budget it becomes very difficult in terms 
of oversight . It is n ot indicated an ywhere in my W ard how much will be allocated ; what wi ll be 
done under this 2020/2021, s o let  us be having the budget that indicates like the one tha t was 
passed in the first year. M y first budget indicated… . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 I am on the flo or… 
 
[Inaudible ] 
 
 I do not want to be informed...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : What is your information ? 
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  If the Hon. Member for sure is echoing what I have said then h e is very 
wrong . I was precise on  the issue of pending bills not the whole budget ; Section 13 there are 
projects which are stalled  and I want those ones completed first then we can do new projects.  
That is exactly w hat I said.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you  and Hon. Raphael  projects 
which you are talking about were captured in the Annual Development Plan (ADP), we are 
discussing the report.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker that  is why I said first I support the report and my concerns 
were the issue of the signature that i s one ; two am also raising the issue of this Program Based 
Budget Estimates that  is my concern and with an issue of Hon. Ogutu I echoed your sentiments 
and you should be appreciating that the senior Member has tabled your sentiments otherwise 
thank you Mr. Speaker , I support the report.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Abrari?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika ripoti ilioko 
mbele yetu ni nzuri lakini katika hali halisi mashinani  sioni ikiwa sawa. K wa kusema hivyo n i 
kuwa nimepitia ripoti hii lakini nikiangalia kuna baadhi ya vitu ambavyo tukiangalia miradi  
amba yo tumeipitisha tangu 2018/2019 kwenye  mashinani  bado hata zengine hazijaanza . Nikitoa 
mfano na toa mfano kwa bajeti 2018/2019 kulikuwa na barabara nne am bazo zilikuwa kwenye 
bajeti ile hata moja mpaka sasa haijaanzwa ! Naregelea tena hapo hapo , 2018/2019 tulipitisha 
Wodi ya Junda kuwe na Social hall  na Kongowea kuwe na Social hall , hiyo Social hall  ambayo 
tuliweka kima cha Kshs. 20M ilioni  haijaanzwa, haijaguswa kokote. 2019/2020 hapo hapo kwa 
Social hall  ikawekewa Kshs.3.5  Milioni Wodi ya  Junda na Kongowea zikawekewa Kshs. 3.5 
Milioni  ya ma rekebisho  hakujafany wa lolote.  
Tukienda kwenye ECD kuna vitu vingi sana vimewekwa ; kuna ECD ya Kengeleni 
iliwekewa pesa mwaka wa 2014 huko na mpaka sasa haijaanzwa , ni juzi tu tumeona wana 
Kandarasi  walikuja kwenye site kupima pima lakini kusema kweli hapa kwenye pending bills  
hapa kuna mchezo ambao wachezwa kwa sababu tukiangalia  hata kwenye ripoti ya Mhasibu 
Mkuu tunapata Kshs.  214 Milioni  2014/2015 zilitumika kutengeneza ECD na wakaweka vizuri 
ECD nane ziwe zimeisha lakini mpaka sasa hizo ECD nane ziwe zimeisha lakini mpaka sasa 
hazijaisha .  
Mheshimiwa Spika sisi hapa twaenda mbele miguu minne twarudi nyuma miguu kumi , 
tutakuwa  kila siku tukiregelelea kuzungumzia ripoti nzuri lakini hali halisi kwenye ground ... 
Mheshimiwa Spika kusema la kwe li sisi wenyewe kwenye W odi zetu twataka Mheshimiwa 
Hatimy ama Mheshimiwa wetu wa F edha twende naye kwenye mashinani  akaone sisi ambao 
tunaw akilisha Wodi zetu aende akaone ile miradi  tunazozungumzia hapa. Hapa tukija kila siku 
itakuwa twazungumzia hivi kupakana mafuta lakini ile hali halisi mashinani  mambo ni tofauti.  
Kwa hilo mimi Mheshimiwa Spika naipinga ripoti hii.  Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Sp eaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Athman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kunipatia mimi ruhusa na 
mimi kuweza kuchangia mawili matatu ambayo niko nayo. Natumai yangu yatakuwa kwa 
muktadha wa dondoo ya dukuduku  ambao niko nayo, pili niweze kuangalia ripoti nzima 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa hii ripoti itoe mapendekezo yangu na fikira zangu … 
 
      [Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Athman Shebe as far as the 
Assembly is concern ed you h ave not dress ed properly , so please Hon. Athman Shebe I 
understand that you are o n the floor but just leave the C hamber s and dress properly and you still 
have time you can come and proceed with the debate . 
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ni kweli Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i samahani lakini kabati yangu 
ilikuwa sina  mbadala ... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : No, respect the House please...  
 
      [Laughter ] 
 
 Yes Hon. Members I can see there  is a P oint of information and Hon. Members put into 
the consid eration the time passed by the Leader of the M ajority is about to elapse. Yes Hon. 
Charles?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa F edha  wakati 
anajibu aweze kutufafanulia sisi wanachama  wa Kamati ya Vijana , Michezo na Jinsia  kwamba 
katika ADP tumeweka construction of a modern County Stadium  pale Tononoka kwa bajeti ya 
Kshs. 1B ilioni,  lakini kulingana na estimates  ya Idara  nzima ya Vijana, Michezo na maendeleo 
ya Jinsia  ni Kshs. 485M ilioni. Sasa nashangaa ikiwa S tadium imechuk ua Kshs. 1 Bilioni  na kwa 
estimates Idara  ni Kshs. 485M ilioni , hizo pesa zengine zitatoka  wapi Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok thank you Hon. Charles Kitula. Hon. 
Moham ed Hatimy you are required to reply on what Ho n. Kitula has raised but I would like to 
inform Hon. Kitula what I understand it  is the budget or the stadium that you have mentioned it 
will come in phases but I will le t Hon. Chair to respond on the M otion and the issue that you 
have raised. Yes  Hon. Cha ir, the Mover of this M otion?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri hivyo  ilivyo  ndivyo 
ilivyo ; kuna pesa zishalipwa kwa hiyo Stadium  inakwenda kwa phases  kwa hivyo anaweza 
kwenda kufanya  uchunguzi kama anavyofanya ataju a kuwa wale wana otengeneza tayari 
wameshalipwa...  
 
      [Interruption ] 
 
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Moha med Hatimy that i s not a 
good way of responding to this Hon ourable  House, respond to the Chair and in a proper 
parliamentary way . 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mhes himiwa Spika hapo hapo alipoongea yeye ni Mwenyekiti wa F edha ... 
 
      [Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula you are now out of order 
because he is replying to this Motion. Proceed . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mimi nasema ana weza k wenda kuangalia aende a thibitishe,  
achunguze  kufahamu maneno ninayosema sikuse ma kwa ubaya na kama nimekosea N yumba...  
 
      [Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : You said kuchunguza...  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A  certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23  
      [Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hati my: Kuchunguza ni kuangalia pengine kama kuchunguza 
nimekosea basi kuangalia a thibitishe  maneno ninayoyasema. Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la 
kusikitisha sana kuwa sisi tunachukua hili Jumba kama ambaye ni baraza ; kuna sheria hufuatwa 
ndani ya hili Jumba kwa hivyo yangu ni  kuambia W aheshimiwa kuwa tuwe tunafuata sheria 
ndani ya hii Nyumba.  
Pili Mheshimiwa Spika ni kutaka kuwashukuru Wanachama  wale ambao wamezungumza 
na wanaleta s uluhisho  na sio tu kulalamika na ha waleti s uluhisho;  nafikiri itakuwa si sasawa 
unakuwa unakosa na useme s uluhisho  lake sisi kama Kamati  tumekaa na tukaangalia na kama 
unavyojua Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa  wasaa  wa watu kuleta maoni yao ilikuwa imekwisha 
lakini kama Kamati  tulikaa tukaongeza muda kwa sababu ya mambo ya COVID  yaliku weko na 
shida zilizoko watu wa Civil S ociety  wote waliungana  na wakatuomba tuongeze na sisi 
tukaongeza na wakaleta maoni yao na tukaangalia maoni yote ya watu walioleta.  
Kwa hivyo wale ambao watasoma hii ripoti kwa njia ya ukweli na sawa sawa bila ya 
kuwa na duku duku lolote ataona kuwa hatu tegemei mahala popote tumesema maneno ya kweli 
kabisa hatukuficha neno hata moja. Kamati  zimekuja ku tetea  bajeti na sisi tukawaambia kama 
mwenzangu Mheshimiwa Abrari amezungumza habari za miradi  amba yo haijaanza na sisi 
nafikiri  jana tumeyazungumza ya kusema hakuna mradi  wowote mpya utaka ofanywa kwenye 
Idara ile ama  Wodi  zile iko kab la haijamalizwa ile ya zamani.  
Kwa hivyo na sisi kama K amati , kwa niaba ya  Kamati ya Fedha  tutawahakikishia 
kwamba jambo hilo limefanyika na kuzunguk a pia tutazunguka Mheshimiwa wa Kongowea ni 
kuwa sisi twataka ionekane kuwa kweli na haki Kaunti si kampuni ya baba yetu sisi wala si 
kampuni zetu sisi lakini twataka watu wapate haki zao na sisi kama vile wanavyosema watu 
wam ekula kiapo hata sisi tumekula  kiapo tutatumikia watu wa Mombasa kwa njia ile ambayo 
inatakikana bila ya kumbagua mtu yeyote na haki imetendeka . 
Mheshimiwa Spika  nachukua fursa hii kwa  ku shukuru  Wanachama kwa mchango wao;  
wamezungumza vizuri na kusema kuwa twaomba tuendelee tuipitishe  hii kusudi  Kaunti ipate 
kuendelea na kazi . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Now Hon. Members I put a questi on that 
the Motion by Hon. Moha med Hatimy on the report of adoption on the Mombasa County 
Program me Based Budg et Estimates for the Financial Year 2020/2021 as amended be approved 
in this Honourable  House ? 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
 ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members the Hous e stands adjourned until Tuesday 30th June, 2020 at 2:30p .m. 
 
The House rose at  1:15p.m. 