February  23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained f rom the Hansard Editor  
Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thur sday, 2 3rd February, 2017  
The House  met at 2 :42pm. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Clerk . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Honourable Members  I wish to  bring to  the attention of this Honourable House  that we 
have visitors from  Sagher Kings High school  from Bakarani, Mombasa.  
We therefore recognise the presence of the delegation  which  consists of: -  
Teachers – Mr. Kalama, if you can stand up  for the House  to see, thank you very much,  
Mr. Maulana.  
Form four students – Rashid Athuman, Saumu Kamadi, Zeinab Yusuf, Lubna Mahadh, 
Halima Muhamed, Hayaa Abdalla h, Maryam  Salim, Mary Wamboi, Philip Thoya, Daniel 
Kimbio, Juma Mgandi, Ali Said, Said Mohamed ;  
Form 3 students – Pili Mshenga, Yahyah Yusuf, Swaleh Said, Khadija Noor, Idd Juma, 
Fatma Nassor, Anthar Nassor, Mazima J uma, Mumba Mgandi, Raphael Rama, Baraka .... 
(All the student s bowed after the ir name s were  mentioned)  
....thank you very much teachers and stud ents; on behalf of the As sembly, I welcome 
you all and I hope that you will learn more about the Assembly after this sitting.  Karibuni 
sana!  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
Yes, Hon Murfad Amur.  
Hon. Amur:  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr Speaker S ir I stand t o request a 
statement from the D epartme nt of Trade Industry;  sometimes back in this Honourable House  
we had brought this issue, but it’s unfortunate  that the business is still going on, the roads w e 
had been told that  temporary  permits had been revoked, yet Mr. Speaker the business of 
mobile selling at Nkrumah  road is still going on.  
Mr. Speaker S ir I want  to get a proper report on the C ommittee, if these  persons are 
untouchable or they are above the  law because we had bee n tol d the licence s were revoked  
and they were planning to open their shops but still people are being mistreated, people are 
being conned money because of the se counterfeit goods and yet we see them on the roads on  
daily basis . 
As I was walking here this after noon  these people are still there and we want to know 
whether these people are untouchable or are covered  by somebody within our County 
because it is unfair for other phone shop sellers to be subjected to their rights, they pay rates 
they pay single busine ss permits yet  this person doesn't have all these and he is continuing 
with the business as usual.  
Mr. Sp eaker Sir i t's very sad  that this House  passes a M otion but enforcers are letting 
us down, whe n they let us down we as e lected Members  feel that we ha ve not been respected 
or this House  has not b een respected.  
Mr. Speaker sir I  want to know if possible by next week Tuesday if this person is 
untouchable, so that we can know who is protect ing him or who is defending him . Thank you 
Mr. Speaker S ir. 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Chairman  Ibrahim Kondo? Deputy 
Chairman Fatuma K ushe.  
February  23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained f rom the Hansard Editor  
Page  2 Hon. (Ms) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii.  
Mheshimiwa Spika kama tunavyojua ni kwam ba hili jambo lilijadiliwa hapa  na tuliweza 
kulif uatilizia sisi kama Kaunti hatujatoa ruhusa ya watu kuweza kuuza vitu reja  reja katika 
upande wa barabara lakini nashangaa wenye kuf uatilia hili jambo mpaka sasa 
hawajalistopisha , lakini kufikia wiki ijayo  tutajua. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Next by when?  
Hon. (Ms) Fatma Swaleh : By Thursday . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : By Thursday . 
Hon. (Ms) Fatma Swaleh : Yes. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Honourable  what is it?  
Hon. Onje : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesikia vizuri 
vile Mheshimiwa ambaye ameuliza maswali kuhusiana  na watu wanaofanya biashara 
barabarani, kwanza amesimama akasema anashang aa, anashangazw a na yule ameleta hii hoja 
Bungeni, angetuambia anashangaa ferry ama anashang aa nini…. 
(Laughter ) 
...Kwa sababu yenye ameulizwa ni kitu c ha maana sana, mimi Mheshimiwa S pika 
hata vile ninavyomu ona amefanya tu guess work  ya kuwa ataleta hii ripoti lakini hakuwa 
tayari kwa  hivyo tusipite hivi  hivi atuambie  kwa sababu  wale watu ni  conmen pale hata mimi 
juzi nilipita pale mmoja alishika koti yangu pale kidogo koti yangu kidogo kuna mahali 
iliraruka, kwa  hivyo inafaa watoke pale.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Let’s give the C ommittee sometime to do 
their work, until Thursday to giv e the report; if they fail to give the report on a Thursday then 
we will take the c ourse of action. Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon Mary Akinyi.  
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi : Thank yo u Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. S peaker S ir it was last year when 
we passed a M otion on identificatio n of smoking zone s, and up to n ow nothing has been 
implemented.  
So Mr. Speaker I seek to know from the Chairman Committee on Environment and 
Natural resources whether there are unidentified smoking zone s in this County of  Mombasa,  
thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Chairlady of Committee on Environment 
and Natural Resources?  
Hon. (Zainab ) Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Mr. Speaker sir I will  respond 
on statement on next week Wednesday afternoon.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Next we ek Wednesday afternoon, please 
work on it , thank you.  Yes, Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon Ebrahim Omar . 
Chief Whip  (Hon.  Ebrahim Omar ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity to present this statement concerning, the lack of proper lighting in Kongowea  
Market.  
Mr. Sp eaker I seek to know from the Chairman Committee of Energy and T rade 
whether he’s aware t here is no proper lightning in K ongowea market ; on what measures the 
department of trade is taking to remedy the situation and remove the inconvenience  to traders 
as members  of the public,  because I have be en there during the early hours  in the morning 
and I saw the hardship s the traders are going through . 
Mr. Speaker  most of them they are using their mulika mwizi  phones  to get  the lights to 
do their bus iness,  and by the time it reaches 9:00am the phones are off  and you know as these  
people operate in business most of the transactions nowadays  are being done by M -pesa and 
February  23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained f rom the Hansard Editor  
Page  3 the phones are also use d to communicate to the customers about the good s or if the  orders 
have arrived . 
So I will seek to know the  measures that the department has taken to consider ing the 
lightning of the Kongowea Market.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : This question goes to the Committee on 
Transport and Infra structure not trad e, so Hon Amir Thoya . Hon Amir Thoya can you 
respond to that question please ? 
Hon. Thoya: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumjibu 
Mheshimiwa aliyeweza kuuliza ambaye ni Mwakilishi maalum ambaye  pia ni M wenyekiti 
wa v ijana  na jinsia ameuli za katika taarifa yake kam a tatizo hili liko na nalijua j awabu lake ni 
kwamba ni kweli na ninajua kuwa tatizo hili liko Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
(Laughter and a pplause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Amir Thoya can you sit down . 
Chief Whip (Hon. Ahme d Omar Ebrahim ): Mr. Speaker I think according to my 
question is what measures has the department taken considering that issue Mr. Speaker, the 
measures which have been taken by the department concerning this...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Amir Thoya I think the question is 
very clear .  
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na mjulisha kuwa ni kweli tatizo hili 
liko na idara ya miundo msingi imeweza kushughulikia na kuhakikisha kwamba huduma hizi 
zinarudishwa kwa haraka. A hsante. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : When will  we get the comprehensive 
answer to this issue?  
Hon. Thoya:  Nafikiri Mheshimiwa Spika wiki ijayo Jumatano ? 
(Loud Consultations)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Jimmy Odari what is it?  
Hon. O dari:  Mheshimiwa Spika hili sw ala la Mheshimiwa Meti alioleta kwenye 
Bunge ni sw ala nyeti na si kwa Kongowea pekee yake. Mheshimiwa Spika mambo ya stima 
ni tatizo kubwa sana Kaunti nzima...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Jimmy Oda ri we are not discussing 
the statement ... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Odari:  Am not discussing the statement ... 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : This is a statement we are waiting for an 
answer, we cannot discuss ... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Odari:  Am just informing the House ... 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It is not proper, yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon Kibwana . 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon Speaker mine is replying to a statement 
which was raised by Hon Fadhili  Mwalimu .  
Hon Speaker I would like to give a statement in response to a request for the same by 
Hon Fadhili Mwalimu at the Twentieth sitting of the House  on 16th February , 2017 regarding 
mitigation measures against the doctor's strike.    
(Hon Kibwana Swaleh read st atement)  
February  23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained f rom the Hansard Editor  
Page  4 Mr. Speaker Sir, as all are aware, the strike by the doctors is country wide and affects 
all Counties ; today is the 81st day since the strike started over grievances by doctors seeking 
among other t hings, the implementation of a C ollective Bargaini ng A greement  (CBA)  
purportedly signed between their unions and the national government in the year 2013.  
The matter is now in  court awaiting resolution and C ounties, thr ough the Council of 
Governors are party to the same Mr. Speaker.  
The C ommit tee wrote to  the department of H ealth services room on the subject  and 
received a reply by their letter COH/ MSA /FIN/05 dated 22nd February, 2017 and which is 
circulated to all . 
Mr. Speaker in our C ounty the only cadre doctors  that are on strike is that of Medical 
Officers, Dentists and pharmacists; while  the rest of the health workers are on duty and 
provi ding basic essential health care services.  
Hon Speaker, the following mitigations and measures were put in place ; 
1. Hon Speaker , Mrima health centre through the suppor t of MSF has put up a 1 
container temporary maternity u nit with an operating theatre (W orth Kshs  17 million) 
that is already functional . They have employed three Medical officers, C linical 
officer , Anesthetist and N urses to enable continuity of care and se rvices to the 
pregnant mothers and those in labour Mr. Speaker.  
 
2. Mr. Speaker, some few doctors still go to CPGH to review patients whenever they are 
called upon to do so.  
 
3. Mitigation; there is a proposal for establishment of a fund to  pay private doctors in a 
locum Mr. Speaker.  
 
4. Mitigation Mr. Speaker; five  doctors have  been employed to ease in the burden at the 
coastal hospital but there are yet to  report due to threats from other striking doctors.  
Hon. Speaker, this is a big crisis and needs urgent atte ntion to save the lives of our 
people, lives of our citizens.  
As we know, life is priceless and ever y effort should be done to protect and preserve 
life Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, we would like to come up with solutions, if any are available, and would 
appreciate if we can learn how other C ounties are coping especially those with heavy 
population with a view to replicating the same in our C ounty.   
(End of statement)  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Kibwana , yes Hon Thoya 
what is it?  
Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nilikuwa niko na taarifa . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Saad Faraj, what is it?  
Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker we don’t know w hat 
has being presented by the Hono urable M ember, is it a report or is it a response what was 
read in the previous meeting because normally if there is a statement which has been 
raised then what followed is a report ; a comprehensive report which shows us all the 
details that are needed but  unfortunately for us, we don’t understand whether it is a 
response or the report to be that is supposed to be tabled to this House . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It’s a report , he said clearly it's a response. 
He is responding from the request of Hon Fadhili Makarani.  
Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi nikiwa 
ndiye niliye uliza swali hili katika Bunge  hili nashuk uru ndugu yangu Saad amenieleza 
February  23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained f rom the Hansard Editor  
Page  5 kuwa ku na ma jibu ya ripoti hii. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kusema kwe li Mheshimiwa  
Spika…  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Hatimy what is it?  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni Jumba  ya sheria, Mheshimiwa  
anayeongea sasa hii aliuliza s wali, swali  limejibiwa sijui nini sa sa anatafuta k ama ana 
jambo lolote nataka sheria if uatwe kwa House  Business  akuje kwenye House  Business  
kama anataka kuleta Motion  au ataka jambo jengine lakini hili limeshughulikiwa na 
nafikiri biashara imefungwa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, if  it is Hon Fadhili he came late and 
he did not hear the response. Yes please.  
Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika. .. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Just have  a sit, just have a sit .  
Hon. Amur:  Point of O rder, this is a respected House  and Hon Saad  they are 
changing their ties, it is not a changing room.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Sergeant at Arms!  Sergeant at Arms can 
you check if the Honorables...  a certain Honorable  is not in proper attire.  
Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker. .. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No we are waiting for Sergeant at Arms 
first please.  
Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker, I raised the issue that Hon Saad is not on proper tie i n this 
Honourable House . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Sergeant at Arms I need your answer. .. 
(Loud  consultation ) 
(Sergeant at Arms ejected Hon Faraj from the Chambers for improper attire)   
 Hon. Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Laughter ) 
 Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes please.  
 Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiw a Spika mimi ni 
Mwanakamati wa Kamati ya Afya , lakini swala nililouliza mimi ni mikakati gani amba yo 
serikali yetu ya K aunti imeweka kuhakikisha katika hu u mgomo amb ao unaendelea wa 
madaktari .  
 Mheshimiwa S pika ni mikakati gani imewekwa kuangalia wale watu chini 
wasiojiweza na vilevile twaelewa mpaka sas a wengi sana wameathirika na huu  mgomo na 
katika hiyo ri poti hakuna vile imeandika mikakati ambayo itachukuliwa kufua ta 
kuhakikisha watu wetu wamepatiwa katika hifadhi nzuri ripoti yote imezungumza mambo 
mengine hatujauliza mambo ya outpatient  ripoti niko nayo lakini haion yeshi...  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Just a minute, let’s follow procedu re. 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili have a sea t, let’s follow procedure,  If you are not satisfied with this 
then you can bring the matter in the House  Business C ommittee and we make  a Motion  
out of it.  
(Applause )  
 Mheshimiwa Fadhili  that is the answer, that  is the answe r that he has at moment ...  
(Interruption with loud consultations ) 
 Just have a seat, the matter has been put to rest you take the matter back to the House  
Business C ommittee.  
February  23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained f rom the Hansard Editor  
Page  6  Hon.  (Ms) Zainab  Kithinzi:  Mheshimiw a Spika tunajua wodi anayotoka 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili   na madaktari wamegoma ... 
(Laughter ) 
 Hon. Amur: Mr. Speaker he must respect this House ...  
(Interruption with loud consultations ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members  Order! Members  Order!  
(Hon Speaker st ood) 
 ...This is a House  of rules  and regulation s and all we have to follow the same 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili is not satisfied with the statement there channels to take and those 
channels cannot take it here ..... 
(Applause ) 
 ...So M ember s have your seats, keep calm and we continue with th e busi ness of today. 
 Yes C lerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much. Honourable 
Members  there being no other business t his House  is adjourned until next week Tues day 
at 2:30pm.  
 
The House  rose at 3:10 pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 