March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 28th March , 2019  
The House met at 3:47p.m. 
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable Members you may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
PAPER  
STATUS OF EMPLOYMENT O F MR. IDRIS ABDIRAHMAN  
 Yes Hon. Renson Juma Thoya please table the report.  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I take this opportunity on behalf of the Labour 
Committee to table the report on the status of employment of Mr. Idriss Abdi rahman . Thank you.  
(Paper laid)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Juma. Y es Clerk?  
INVOLVEMENT OF THE S UB-COUNTY AND WARD ADMINI STRATORS ON GOING FAGIA BUNGE 
INITIATIVE  
 Yes again Hon. Juma Renson Thoya.  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . On behalf of the Labour Committee we were 
required to report back on the involvement of the Sub -County and Ward Admin istrators on going 
Fagia Bunge initiative ; unfortunate ly the people that we called upon could (??) turn out for that 
investigation. We have r eport s that the Chief Officer, Ms. Mwikya is out of the country, the Sub -
County Mr. Dan Abwayo of Jomvu Sub -County just fell ill on the very day and we gave them 
another opportunity we will be meeting them on Wednesday next week.  

March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  I would request this Hou se to give us the opportunity to listen to them next Wednesday 
and then we will be reporting back in due course. Thank you.   
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson. Y es Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON EDUCA TION HON. OMONDI  ON INVITATION OF 
THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE  MEMBER (CECM ) FOR EDUCATION , THE CEO AND DIRECTOR S OF 
EDUCATION  TO ATTEND A COMMITTE E MEETING AT THE COMMITTEE ROO M 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi please give the response.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for the gr anted opportunity. Mr. Speaker Sir 
I would like to respond ; the Committee of Education indeed had a meeting and seriously they 
deliberated on this issue and I remember yesterday they this role that today we give evidence to 
the invitation to the Assembly  Committee that is the C ECM for Education because we had 
already invited him. And today with me I have ev idence or a response from the CE CM 
Education, the C EO and all the Directors of Education who are going to appear before the 
Committee tomorrow at 1 1:00a.m. in the Committee room. Mr. Speaker Sir with your respect if 
you wish I would like to give this evidence.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you can give the evidence.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you.  
(Paper laid ) 
 Mr. Speaker Sir as you go through that evidence it  indeed state s that the CE CM, the 
CEO and the Directors of Education have confirmed that they will appear before the Committee 
tomorrow at 11 :00a.m. in the Committee room and therefore I also want to undertake with due 
respect to invite the Members who wil l appear as the amicus curiae  in the Committee room or 
the friends of the Committee. Thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire ? 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , just for the interest of time and we still have a lot 
of business to transact to day I would just wish to tell the Chairman that already he has submitted 
the evidence that the Committee will be appearing before them next week so he cut short the 
speech so that we can continue with some other businesses in the interest of time.  
 The Sp eaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Bwire. So H on. Ibrahim you 
will bring the S tatement on Thursday next week after sitting with  the Deputy Governor. Yes 
Clerk?  
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON HEALT H SERVICES HON . KIBWANA SWALEH ON 
SHORTAGE OF DRUGS AT JUNDA DI SPENSARY  
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh . 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I wish to bring the 
statement that was raised by my colleague from Junda Hon. Musumba Raphael Bwire.  
 Mr. Speak er Sir, I would like to give a  Statement in response to shortage of drugs at 
Junda Dispensary as requested by Hon. Musumba Member of County Assembly from Junda 
Ward, during the 13th sitting on 12th March . 2019 of this House.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, p ublic facilities have been experiencing st ock out for some essential  
medicines and medical supplies; t he shortage has been occasioned by some technicalities in the 
processing of the payment for the previous supplies from KEMSA through IFMIS.  
 Mr. Speaker , the County Executive Committee Member  (CEC M), Department of 
Health  wrote a commitment letter to CE O KEMSA dated 13th March, 2019 to request that the 
orders for Mombasa be processed urgently as the Department undertakes to promptly sort out the 
payment. Mr. Speaker the request was finally approved last week and the drugs have now been 
dispatched to the transporter. All facilities including Junda are expected to start receiving drugs 
in the course of this week.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, in order to ensure that we do not end up with the same problem, the 
Depa rtment of Health has arranged for a meeting with KEMSA Regional Manager to streamline 
the ordering and documentation process.  
 So Hon. Speaker I think this will probably will shed light on how the drugs will be 
supplied in every Ward as this process has b een done  (??) the agreement and I have stated here 
that the meeting will also help w here there would be a problem like this in future. Thank you 
Hon. Speaker .   
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Kibwana. Yes Clerk next 
order please?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY  COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERV ICE BOARD MEMBER HON . 
MAIMUNA SALIM ON PAYM ENT OF WARD RENTS  
 Hon. Maimuna Salim ? 
 Hon. Maimuna  Salim:  Ahsante sana Mhesh imiwa Spika . Nimesimama kujibu sw ali 
ambalo lililokua limeulizwa na Mheshimiwa wa Wodi ya Kipe vu kuhusu mambo na pesa za 
Wodi akaulizia kwa Bodi kwa hiyo mimi nimesimama kulijibu sw ali hilo ya kwamba sisi kama 
Bodi tuliandika requisition  tarehe 7/2/2019 mpaka sasa hivi ni mwezi wa tatu hatujaweza kupata 
pesa hizo na sisi kama Bodi kazi yetu ni ku weka maombi , Kamati ya Fedha  inatakiwa ifuatilizie . 
Nafikiri mimi nimejibu kulingana na sisi tumefanya kama Bodi, k wa hiyo hilo sw ala nafikiri 
sasa hivi litatakikana pia tujue kwa upande wa  Kamati ya Fedha  watalifuatilizia vipi lakini sisi 
tulifanya maombi y a fedha . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Maimuna, yes Clerk?  
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON JUSTI CE AND LEGAL AFFAIRS  HON. AMRIYA 
BOY  ON UNLAWFUL DETENTION O F MEMBERS OF THE PUB LIC BY COUNTY INSPEC TORATE   
  
 Yes Hon. Amriya please give the response . 
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker the floor is highly honoured. Mr. Speaker 
as a Committee we are  happy to inform the House that we have written the necessary 
correspondence to the Department on Devolution o n the same since the clarification came in mid 
week but the Clerk 's were in position and acted in fastidious to send the correspondence and we 
are anticipating the response to come in due course.  
  So the Committee  through your indulgence Mr. Speaker we ar e seeking two weeks 
leave for us to come up with a comprehensive report as you see arrest and harassment is a very 
wide scope and we need to delve back to our previous laws and upcoming  laws. So two  weeks 
would be ample time for us to respond. Thank you ve ry much.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Kitula ? 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mhesh imiwa Mwenyekiti wa masuala ya h aki kusema 
wiki mbili kwa sababu ya kujibu masuala kama haya mimi ni mkaazi wa Nyali, watu wanazidi 
kushikwa pale Kongowea wakivuka barabara hakuna ishara  yeyote wanaletwa kortini  
wanachajiwa na hakuna sheria. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hasa wiki mbili wakipatia wananchi 
wale zile pesa zinatumia kwa sheria gani? Hakuna  ishara  barabarani kwamba ukivuka barabar a 
unastahili kulipa pes a fulani, l akini hakuna ishara  hizo leo wanasema wiki mbili sasa wakiletwa 
kortini  wanatumia sheria gani kuchaji wananchi wetu?  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kama ni hivyo basi wale wote waliochajiwa kulingana na kesi 
kama hizo waregeshewe pesa zao au wiki mbili  hizo sijui pesa zitatoka wapi Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti…  
(Applause)  
 Ahsante.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. A mriya when did you receive the S tatement?  
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Thank you again Mr. Speaker. M r. Speaker the request came in two  
weeks before this date  but there was a controversy on the same because your brother when he 
was seated there Hon. Fadhili gave a directive that the mover of the S tatement to give a written 
clarification to the Committee. But Mr. Speaker because he was committed he went to Nairo bi 
and came back the Committee was able to receive the written request on Tuesday, so that 
informed us to write the correspondence on Wednesday and as we stand the Committee is yet to 
receive correspondence.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, thank you Hon. A mriya. So I am going to give you 
one week and so by Thursday make sure you have the response please.  
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Very much obliged  
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERS ON ENVIRONMENT , WASTE MANAGEMENT AND ENERGY 
HON. SHEBE ATHMAN ON ILLEGAL  DUMPING SITE AT KAA CHONJO , TUDOR WARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Shebe Athuman? Please give the response . 
  
 Hon. Shebe Athuman:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Suala la Tudor 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimewasiliana na Mheshimiwa M wenza wa Wodi ya Tudor na 
amepata safari ya dharura na kulingana na hali ya Kaa Chonjo  aweze kunipatia wiki moja kwa 
sababu nilituma shovel  ilikwenda pale lakini that place is a wetland hakuna vile shovel  inaweza 
fika pale kwa hivyo Idara  husika imesema it aweza ku  mobilize  vijana wa mkono Mheshimiwa 
akirudi ahakikishe kuwa ile kazi imefanyika . Kwa hivyo naomba kupitia kwako Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti takriban ya wiki moja ndio tuweze kushughulikia hili suala la Tudor Kaa Chonjo  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe. Yes Clerk , next order please?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Hon. Prischillah Mumba? Please give the response, sorry Hon. Hamisi Musa 
Mwidani, please give the response .  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I would 
request the House in fact I have got the response but it was brought on my table today 28th, to be 
a leader whom to be seen very transparent I was asking t ime so that I can sit with the C ommittee 
we peruse the issue so that  we can bring it here while all the Members  know what is contain ed in 
the reply . So Mr. Speaker I would like to have more time so that I can bring it on Thursday next 
week. Thank you Sir.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Hon. Hamisi you said on Thursday . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thursday next week .  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay thank you Hon. Hamisi. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON CLOGGED DRAI NAGE SYSTEM AND MANHOLES AT WAYANI , 
BOKOLE AND BOMU CATH OLIC CHURCH  
 
 Yes Hon. Prischillah Mumba, please give the response?  
 
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I respond about clogged drainage system and 
manholes at Wayani, Bokole and Bomu Catholic Church.  The Department has applied for some 
funds to employ youth s directly to unclog the drains in all af fected areas including Airport W ard 
open and close drains.  
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  The y ouths will be employed to clean the drains and be paid directly while the C ounty 
will pro vide the  vehicles to cart the s oil away. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON CLEANING OF MAGONGO MAINLAND TO AKAM BA HANDICRAFT 
DRAINAGE SYSTEM  
 
 Yes again Hon. Prischillah Mumba, please give the response?  
 
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker once again cleaning of Magongo Mainland to 
Akamba Handicraft Drainage system.  The D epartment has applied for some funds to emplo y 
youth directly to unclog the drains in all affected areas including Kipevu Ward I correct there 
Mr. Speaker because it was written Airport W ard so that will be a typing error it should be 
Kipevu ward open and close drains.  Youth will also be employed to clean the drains and be paid 
directly while the county will provide the vehicles to cart the dirt away . Thank you Mr. Speaker 
Sir.  
  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk , next order please?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF TRA NSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON THE STATUS O F ROAD FROM JUNDA DI SPENSARY TO JUNDA 
NG'OMBENI AND JUNDA MIS SION 
 
 Yes again Hon. Prischillah Mumba? Please give the response .  
 
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Again this is about sta tus of road from Junda 
Dispensary to Junda Ng’ombeni and Junda Mission.  The work on Junda access road commenced 
and quite substantial works has been accomplished such as: - 
 Reinstatement of the cabro road section.  
 Reclining the cut off section near the wate r mass.  
 Improvement of storm water drainage  
 Reinstatement of the cut section uphill.  
So far the contractor has raised certificate of payment which is yet to be paid. Works were 
undertaken as an emergency after the previous rains . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk next order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS ON THE STATUS OF BOMU CATHO LIC CHURCH ROAD TO M WIDANI HALL AND WAYA NI 
ROAD TO ST . JUDY ACADEMY IN AIRP ORT WARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Prischillah Mumba? Please give the response . 
 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am on status of Bomu Catholic Church  road to 
Mwidani hall and Wayani road to St. Judy Academy in Airport W ard. The road leading to 
Mwidani Technical Institute is earmarked for improvement during this financial year. Works will 
commence in the next two weeks.  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir  I am sorry to interrupt because there i s no road leading  to 
Mwidani Technical Institute, it is the road leading to Mwidani Social Hall not Mwidani 
Technical Institute.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you for correcting that. Y es Hon. Prischillah?  
 
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker then it should be a typi ng error maybe but that is 
the response.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk next Order please?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON. MUMBA ON THE STATUS OF BWA GAMOYO TO MAUNGUJA P RIMARY SCHOOL 
ROAD  
 
 Yes again Hon. Prischillah Mumba?  
 
 Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think this was my day today, status of 
Bwagamoyo to Maunguja Primary School Road.  Mr. Speaker we had a meeting wi th the area 
MCA and agreed that  the deserving road to be given priority is the main road to Mwakirunge 
dumpsite, a section of 2.0km.  Since the allocation for roads was for access roads in Mwakirunge, 
priority will be given to spot improvement of the road around the dumpsite.  
It was pointed out that Mwakiru nge main road is important for not only Mwakirunge 
residents but the County as a whole due to the dumping site.  The County should give more 
attention to this road to reduce the maintenance costs of our garbage trucks and also reduce 
accidents.  Thank you Mr . Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim  Omondi ? 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker I withdraw . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry ? 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  I withdraw.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Withdraw what?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir I was to stand on the issue but I have just withdrawn . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay. Y es Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I think you have read Number 19 and without maybe bringing 
to the attention as to why you  have gone to Number 20, some Members are being disgruntled 
here I think you let them air out what is going on to this House because Number 19 and then 
before we continue you  have gone to Number 20 . Kindly can you address what is going on Hon. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk?  
  
(Consultations)  
 
 Thank you very much Hon . Thoya for reminding us a bout the Motion.  Hon. Renson 
Thoya I can see you have laid down the P aper, am going to give directio ns through this House, 
for the Motion to be taken to the House B usiness next week on Monday or Tuesday, when we to 
sit down and then we can bring the M otion next week. Yes Cle rk? Y es, Hon . Renson Thoya.  
  
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker as it pleases you, I have clearly indicated I as the Chair and on 
behalf of all the M embers  my report is ready I have table d it and everything is ready, but if it 
pleases you that the same report is ta ken to the House Business Committee , I cannot go against 
the Speaker but am ready , I am prepared with the report with all the necessary evidence. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Renson Thoya it  is not about pleasing me, it  is about 
the proc edure  so that  is why am telling you, it  has to pass through the House B usiness it will 
come back nex t week for sure, you know this H ouse is a House of procedures, so please Hon . 
Members next week it will be brought back to the House, after it has passed th e House B usiness . 
Yes Clerk . 
 
MOTION  
ALTERATION OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY CALEND AR 
 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Yes, Hon . Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon . Mwidani) : Thank you Mr . Speaker let me move the 
following M otion, alteration of County Assembly Calend ar. Mr. Speake r Sir, I beg to move the 
following M otion;  
 
THAT , pursuant to Standing O rder 25(4) of the County Assembly S tanding O rders, this 
House resolve s to alter the County Assembly Calendar for the year 2019 to continue 
with the normal sittings and forego the short  recess which was scheduled to commence 
on Friday 29th March , 2019 to 8th April , 2019.  
 
AWARE THAT  the House was proc eeding for short recess for one week ; tomorrow 
Friday, on 29th March Monday to resume on Monday 8th April .  
 
Mr Speaker S ir the County Assemb ly has business that each should be conclude d within 
a limit ed time, form and busine ss is the consideration of the Select C ommittee report, on 
the Impeachment of Hon . Taufiq Balala, the Select C ommittee which is Ad hoc  in 
nature was constituted on Tuesday 26th March , 2019 and pursuant t o Standing Order 
40(3)(b), the C ommittee shall report its finding s to the County Assembly within 10 
days.  
 
Mr. Speaker S ir the 10 days will lapse on Thursday 4th April , 2019, a time which if the 
calendar is not altered, the Ho use will still be on recess.  
 
I THEREFORE  urge Hon . Members that, one week short recess to be forgone and if 
need be after the adopti on of the report of the Select C ommi ttee we may agree to go for 
one week recess.  
I will request Hon . Murfad to second the Motion.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr Speaker, I second on that recess . Thank you.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you.  Hon. Members I now propose the question that 
the Motion by Hon . Musa Hamisi Mwidani on Alteration of County Assembly Ca lendar for the 
year 2019, be considered in this House in the same te rms as moved?  
 
 (Applause)  
 
 Yes, Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon . Mwidani) : Thank you Mr . Speaker, I just  want to  say 
thanks to all M embers who actual ly knew the i ssue of the recess. I t was very important because 
now we have a very important item, so am very happy that the Assembly  has agreed with my 
request so thank you Mr . Speaker and let  us move on, thank you.  
 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon . Members . Hon. Fadhili?  
   
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika mimi naunga mkono hoja iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Kiongozi w a Walio  wengi katika  
Bunge hili.  Mheshimiwa Spika aliyeleta hoja amefikiria mambo muhimu ambayo ba do yako 
mbele ya Bunge letu  na yanastahiki kufanyika . Itakuwa tutakwenda kinyume kama leo 
tungekwenda  kwa mapumziko mafupi, alafu bado kuna maswala mengi ambayo yako mbele 
yetu, alafu tena  tuingie kwenda kuitana kupitia kwa vyombo ya magazeti ingekuwa 
Mheshimiwa Spika kimimi naona in gekuwa ni kinyume cha mwelekeo. K wa hivyo nawaomba 
wenzangu tusimam e pamoja maana Mheshimiwa Spika  hata serikali kuu jana iliweza 
kurekebisha ratiba y ake kwa sababu walikuwa wanataka kumfanyia ukaguzi  Inspe kta General i 
wa P olisi.  
 Kwa sisi kurekebisha kalenda yetu hatujako sea popote na vile vile nina i mani yale ambao 
bado hatujamaliza kuyatekeleza tutaweza kuyatekeleza na  dhihirisho wazi tunaonyeshwa 
kulingana na Order P aper ya leo yaonyesha wazi bado mambo ni mengi na tuna mam bo mengi 
ambayo bado yako chin i ya Kamati ya N yumba, House Business Committee . Kwa hivyo 
nawaomba wenzangu tushikane pamoja tuhakikishe mambo yote ambayo yako mbele ya Bunge 
hili tumeweza kuyatekeleza kwa manufaa ya wana nchi wetu . Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Fadhili . Yes  Hon. Mwam wiri. 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti nimenyanyu ka kwa nia ya kuunga mkono kwa H oja ilioletwa na ndugu yangu 
Kiongozi wa Wengi katika Bunge hili na nainga mkon o kwa sababu hajatumia kauli mbiu yake 
ya mpango kabambe safari hii ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Aliyodhamiria na aliyoyazungumzia yametuwacha sisi kuendeleza vikao hi vi; ni 
maswala mustakbadhi kwet u na wananchi wetu walio tutuma  na wala sio mipango kabambe ya 
serikal i. Kwa hivyo Mhes himiwa Mwenyekiti naunga mkono H oja hii ya Bunge h ili kuongeza 
siku zake na japo W aheshimiwa wanajua tumekuwa na mda mrefu na shughuli nyingi tuvum ilie 
tuhuridhie kwa sababu yanaokusudia ni kwa ajili ya wale waliotutuma na ni maswala nyet i 
ikiwemo Hoja iliyo ahirishwa leo hadi juma lijalo ambalo wananchi wanaingoja kwa hamu na 
ghamu kwa sababu serikali yetu imekuwa na changamoto nyingi ikiwemo na wafanyi  kazi gushi 
na ri poti ndugu yangu Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya u ajiri amekuwa yuko tayari na h ilo 
tunalisubiria kutaka kuinasua Serikali G atuzi na kuleta manufaa kwa wananchi wa Mombasa . 
 Kwa hivyo hata ikilazimu tuendel ee wiki z aidi ya hizo zilizokusudiwa lakini hili 
Mheshimiwa  lije katika Bunge hili Mwenyekiti sisi tutalivumilia tutalisubiria na tutakuwa tayari 
kupambana nalo . Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon . Shebe Athman . 
 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Hon. Shebe Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Ningependa kutia uzito 
Hoja ilio mbele na Mheshimiwa Hamisi Mwidani, Kiongozi wa We ngi katika  Bunge . 
 Ni bayana na dha hiri sha hiri kuwa majukumu ambayo tuko nayo  mbele yetu 
Mheshimiwa ni mengi na ni muhimu sana kwa hivyo sisi tuko tayari kuhakikisha kwamba H oja 
zote ambazo ziko mbele yetu tunaweza kukabi liana nazo  hususan  zile ambazo muhimu sana 
katika maswala mazima ya kijam ii.  
 Kwa hivyo mimi pia nime penda kuunga mkono na nawaomba W aheshimiwa wenza, 
Waswahili  wanasema subira huvuta heri;  ilikuwa natokota Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , nilikua 
natokota sana hapa, kiti kilikuwa moto lakini ikawa sina budi  kwa uongozi wako ambao umetoa  
na tunataka kuonyesha kuwa ni J umba la sh eria na lina nidhamu yake . Hivyo basi  natumai In 
shaa Allah wiki ijayo tutakuwa hapa kutekeleza majukumu yetu ya Bunge . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshim iwa. Naam  Hon. Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr . Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker S ir also as I  stand to actually 
support the Motion  I just want to confirm that the Mombasa County residen ts rather the 
electorate  gave us the power to fulfil their dreams, the wi ngs to fly their message of hope and the 
words to speak to the expectant masses and it  is very important t hat the person who brought the 
Motion has put that in consideration.  You know very much that the things that we have b efore us 
are of great magnitud e to the residen ts or to the electorate of Mombasa ; they are  matters touching 
on the preparation of the rain, matters touching on the drainage system, matters touching on the 
maintenance of the road, matters to uching on the issues of bursary ... 
 
(Interrupt ion) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Order! Hon . Members  let the Hon . Member talk ! 
 
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you  Mr Speaker Sir. M atters touching on the bursaries which is 
very important for the education of pupils and even matters  touching on the issues of e ducat ion, 
of the people who had been employed in this particular County and therefore it  is very important 
for us to have the chance . Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon . Ibrahim . Yes, Hon . Renson 
Thoya.  
  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr . Speaker Sir, as I put my ways to the M otion that has been 
brought by Leader of Majority, I’m very happ y that you ha ve ext ended but as much as you 
extend  you need to pu t into consideration two issues; the M otion that you have taken it to 
Tuesday and the iss ue of  the CEC in charge of Transport.  I think we should not go for recess 
until we dispense all these matters ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 That is my take Mr . Speaker, these two matter s we should remain in this House until 
tutakapo enda tujue mbivu na mbichi . Thank y ou. 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Renson Thoya . Yes, Hon . Fahad. 
 
 Hon. Fahad Ka ssim: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. N ingependa kuunga mkono 
Mswada huu ulioletwa na Kiongo zi wa Wengi ndani ya Bunge letu.  Ningeomba wenzangu tukae 
ndani ya Bunge  hili hata hizi siku walizo omba kama itakuwa hazijatosha basi kuna watu 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni lazima, mimi sitaumauma maneno kama anavyosema Gavana wangu, ni 
lazima tuwafute alafu ndio twende tukapumzike. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika ndani ya Bunge la M ombasa Kaunti ama ndani ya serikali ya Kaunti 
ya Mombasa kuna watu wen gi sana wameandikwa bila stakab adhi zinazo stahili na niko na imani 
kubwa na Mwenyekiti w a Kamati ya Leba ataweza kuwabainisha ili tuweze kuwafagia wote kwa 
sababu sasa wakati umefika laz ima tuwaondoe hawa wagonjwa wagonjwa na walemavu ambao  
nikisema walemavu sikuma anisha mama Ramla ....  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Fahad I think that  is not the agenda we are talki ng 
about.  
 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : So just withdraw whatever you are saying.  
 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika. N aomba msamaha lakini ningeomba 
Mheshimiwa Spika, uweze ku  consider  na viongozi walio hapa mbele, tuweze kufanya ile kazi 
imetuweka hapa ndio tuweze k wenda mapumziko ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes  Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon . Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. P ia ningependa 
kusema nawashukuru Waheshimiwa wo te kwa kuweza kuunga mkono hii Hoja  na nimeona  
kweli iko haja ya kuwa watu wabaki kwa sababu  hali ilivyo katika B unge, tuna mambo  amba yo 
ni mazuri ya maana yanataka yatekelezwe  hata mimi  nikaona naiunga mkono na ndio nikaona ni 
lazima tuweke s iku zaidi tuweko kuliko kwenda kupumzika nyumbani.  Kwa hiv yo Bwana Spika 
nimeshukuru kwa wenza ngu wa Bunge kuiunga mkono hii Hoja, na In shaa Allah Mungu 
atatujalia mambo yatakuwa vile tunavyotaka , ahsante.  
 
(Question put)  
 
  The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  Hon. Members I 
now put th e quest ion that this House adopt this M otion by Hon . Hamisi Musa Mwidani on the 
Alteration of the County Assembly calendar for 2019 in the same term s as moved ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
     
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Yes Clerk?  
BILL  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2019   
 
FIRST READING  
  
 (Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk you can continue.  
 
SECOND READING  
 
 Yes Clerk read the second reading? Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you . Yes Mr.  Speaker Sir  this is a 
Supplementary  Bill, 2019 . The Committee on  Finance, B udget  and A ppropriation sat and looked 
into the  Bill and the C ommittee is sa tisfied and I request that the B ill is read a second time.  
Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Kh atri): Thank y ou Hon . Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  Hon. Members 
now that the B ill has been read…  
 
(Consultation s) 
 
 Yes Clerk please read the Bill? 
 
(The Clerk read the Bill for the second time)  
 
 Hon. Members now that the Bill has been read a second time pursuant to Standing order 
122, the Bill stands committed to Committee of the Whole House.  
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair)  
 
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
 
(The. Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu)  in the Chair ) 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Welcome to the Committee  of the Whole House, in 
this Committee we shall  be reading the Clauses of the Bill. Yes Clerk?  
 
(Consultations)  
 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members we are waiting for some  copies, we are 
looking at our Standing Orders if it will allow us to adjourn for some minutes so tha t we get the 
copies , in the meantime let us be patient the copies will c ome as soon as possible. Order 
Members!  Yes Clerk?  
 
 Clerk:  Clause numb er two; the County Treasury may issue the sum of fourteen billion, 
five hundred and ninety one million seven hundred  and seventy one thousand, eight hundred and 
ninety one Kenya shi llings only  out of the County Revenue Fund and apply it towards the supply 
granted for the service of the year ending on the 30th June, 2019.  
Clause numbe r three the sum granted by the Section two shall be appropriated for the  
several services and purposes specifi ed in the second column of the First Schedule in the 
amounts specifi ed in the third column of that Schedule.  
Clause number four in the add ition to be the sum granted by Section 2, t he sum specified 
in the fourth column of t he First and Second Schedules shall be applied for the several services 
and purposes specified  in the second column of those Schedules out of revenue directed to be 
applied outside the consolidated fund under Artic le 206 (1) of the Constitution.  
 
 Appropriations in Aid  
  Clause number five; the  supply granted for the services of the year ending 30th June, 
2019, in respect of votes R3011, R3012, R3013, R3014, R301, R3015, R3016, R3017, R3018, 
R3018. R3019, R3020, R302 1, R3022, R3023, R3026 and D3011, D3012, D3013, D3014, 
D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, D3019,D 3020,D3021, D3022, D3023, D3026  in accordance 
with Supplementary Appropriation Act.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I propose clause two, clause three, 
clause four, clause  five be part of the Bill ? 
 
 Any input Hon. Members?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
(Question put)  
 
  I now put a question that clause two, clause three, clause four and clause five be part of 
the Bil l? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
(Loud consultation ) 
 
 Clerk:  Schedule; recurrent expenditure, vote numbers R3011, R3012, R3013, R3014, 
R301, R3015, R3016, R3017, R3018, R3018. R3019, R3 020, R3021, R3022, R3023, R3026…  
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 (Consultation s) 
 
 Amounting to supply in the third  column of Kshs.10, 250, 623,878, donor f unds in 
column four, amounting to K shs.138, 925,307 and Appropriation in Aid in the fifth colu mn 
amounting Kshs.3, 877,016,823.  
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I propose that clause R3011, R3012, R3013, R3014, 
R301, R3015, R3016, R3017, R3018, and R3018. R3019, R3020, R3021, R3022, R3023, R3026 
be part of the Bill ? 
 
(Question put)  
 
 Members I can see you are all in acceptance of that vote. I now put a question that clause 
R3011, R3012, R3013, R3014, R301, R3015, R3016, R3017, R3018, R3018. R3019, R3020, 
R3021 , R3022, R3023, R3026?  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Let us move to the development vote.  
 
 Clerk:  Development vote; expenditure vote numbers  D3011, D3012, D3013, D3014, 
D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, D3019,D3020,D3021, D3022, D3023, D3026 totaling amount in 
the third column Kshs.4,341,148,013, d onor funds in the fourth column, K shs.600, 000,000,  
Appropriation in Aid in the fifth column totaling K shs.974, 158,799 .  
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): I now propose that clause D3011, D3012, D3013, 
D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, D3 019, D3020, D3021, D3022, D30 23, and D3026  be 
part of the  Bill?  Yes Hon. Members any input?  
 
(Silence ) 
(Question put)  
 
I now put a question that vote D3011, D3012, D3013, D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, 
D3018, D3019 , D3020 , D3021, D3022, D3023, D3026 ... be part of the Bill ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
 Clerk:  Clause number one, this Act may be cited as the  Supplementary Appropriation 
Bill, 2019, issue of K shs.14, 591,771,891 o ut of the Consolidated Fund for the service of the yea r 
ending on the 30th June, 2019.  
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 (Question proposed)  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I propose that clause one of the short title be part of 
the Bill? Any input Hon. Members on the short title?  
  
(Silence)  
(Question put)  
 
 I now put a question that clause one of the short title  be part of the Bill? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
 Clerk:  Long title; T he Mombasa Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2019. An Act of the 
County Assembly to authorize  the issue of the certain s ums of money out of the County Revenue 
Fund and their a pplication toward the service of the year ending on 30th June, 2019  and 
appropriate those sums for certain public services and purposes.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I propose that the long title be part of the Bill ? 
 
(Question put) 
 
 I now put a questio n that the long title of the Mombasa Supplementary Appropriation 
Bill, 2019 be part of the Bill ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
PLENARY RESUMED  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
 Have your seats?  
(Loud consultation)  
 
 You can proceed . 
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwida ni): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Let me take this 
opportunity that the County Assembly does  agree with the said report of the Appropriation Bill 
2019. So M r. Speaker I want to thank the Members who have really stayed here for all those 
hours because of this exer cise, so I do here agree with Members  what has been reported to the 
Committee , so thank you .  
(Silence)  
 
March 28, 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  So Mr. Speake r I now request the Clerk to  read the third reading of the Supplementary 
Appropriation Bill.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
(Question put)  
 
 The Deputy Speak er (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now put a question that the 
Assembl y do agree with the Committee in the said report ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
THIRD READING  
 
 Clerk : The Mombasa County Supplementary Appropriation  Bill 2019, An Act of the 
County Assembly to authorize  the issue of the certain sums of money out of t he County R evenue 
Fund and their application toward the service of the year ending on 30th June 2019, and 
appropriate those sums for certain public services and purposes.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
  
 Hon. Members there being no any other business the House stands adjourn ed until the 2nd 
of April, 2019 at 2 :30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 5:09p.m. 
 
 
  
  
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 