February 25, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic vers ion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thur sday, 2 5th February , 2016  
The House met at 2: 43p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
        Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Let’s have our sea ts Hon. Members . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
        Ladies and gentlemen I have communication to pass;  one, there is a l etter that has 
come from Member of County  Assembly ( MCA ) Kipevu ward, it reads as , 'Invitation to 
Kipevu Ward Free medical camp '. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi)  read)  
        I would lik e to invite you for a free medical camp which will be held on Saturday, 
27th February,  2016 at Kwa Hola  Primary School from 6:00 a.m till 6:00 p.m. 
(End of communication ) 
        So M embers those who are interested make sure you attend.  
(Applause ) 
        The next communication;  we have received tw o reports from the O ffice of Controller 
of Budget and the reference  is, FY 2015/2016 1st Quarter , County Budget Implementation 
Review Report.  
(Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi)  read) 
        The Office of the Controller of  Budget was established under A rticle 228 of the 
Constitution of Kenya, 2010 to among others;  oversee and report on the implementation of 
the budgets  of the national and County g overnment to each House of parli ament every f our 
months.  Pursuant to Article 2 28, 6 of  the  Constitution of Kenya 2010, the Office has 
prepared the First Quarter County Budget implementation review report for FY 2015/2016 
covering the period July to September 2015.  Forward herewith, please find a copy of the 
report for your necessa ry action.  
(End of communication ) 
        Now ladies and gentlemen , I forward this to the relevant Committee ; that is the 
Committee  on Finance  and Budget, so the C hairman please, so the same Committee is 
advised to co ntact the O ffice of the Speaker.   
      Finally ladies and gentlemen  I have a letter before me ; it is an invitation  to the launch 
of Mombasa City P olytechnic and Governance Awareness program ( GAP ) graduatio n. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi)  read)  
       Mombasa County has been reforming existing a pproaches to education through the 
County's  Department of Education and Children ( DoEC ).  
February 25, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic vers ion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2         We have been working on rebranding the Youth  Polytechnics under our jurisdiction 
into City Polytechnics  in order to meet our strategic objectives of increasin g our transition 
rate from basic education to tertiary and from tertiary into the global economy. The 
department in its strategic plan has envisioned the City Polytechnics to be world class  centres 
catering for the technical and professional needs and tale nts of the growing youth population 
in Mombasa . As we celebrate  this achievement, I would hereby like to invite you to the 
occasion of the official launch  of the Mombasa City P olytechnics  presided over by His 
Excellency  Hassan Ali Joho, Governor Mo mbasa County  to be held at the new Mtongwe C ity 
Polytechnic  on the 25th February 2016, starting at 2:00pm.  The occasion  will also mark the 
graduation  ceremony of 398 trainees who have successfully completed their programs  at the 
various institutions under the Governor ’s award program  (GAP ). 
 Kindly invite all the MCAs and your presence will be highly appreciated. Kindly 
confirm your participation.  Thank you for your continued support in transforming the lives of 
the people of Mombasa.  
Sincerely . 
Lewa Tenda i Mtana  
County Executive Member  
Dept. of E ducation, Children and Environment”.  
(End of communication ) 
        So make sure you also consider that . Yes Hon. Paul Onje ? 
        Hon. Onje: Ahsante Bwana Spika, ni furaha yangu kufika hapa na kupewa nafasi ya 
kuongea mbele ya hii N yumba tukufu;  mimi nimesimama nikiunga mkono barua ambayo 
umesoma kw amba sisi ambao tuko hapa kama W aheshimiwa tumeletwa hapa k wa sababu 
tuliweza kupata elimu.  Bwana Spika bila elimu sisi wengine hatungekuwa tunaonekana hapa 
bali ni  wengine wangekuwa hapa.  Kwa h io mimi naomba tuweze kupeleka Bunge mbele 
tuahirishe mbele ili sisi wote kama W aheshimiwa  tuweze kwenda kujiunga na Gavana wetu 
huko seminar ...  
(Applause ) 
        Hii Mhe shimiwa Spika itaon yesha wazi kwamba sisi kama serikali ya  Kaunti  pamoja 
na executive  ambayo inaongozwa na Mheshimiwa  Hassan Ali Joho kwamba sisi ni kitu 
kimoja na  tunapenda maendeleo ya Kaunti  yetu. 
        Mheshimiwa Spika wakati kama huu inatakikana tuon yeshe kwamba tuko na umoja 
na huu umoja Bwana Spika ndi o utafanya w ananchi wajue kweli wamechagua viongozi 
ambao wamebeba misalaba yao na kuwafanyia kaz i kulingana na vile walikuwa wanatarajia . 
Mimi  nashukuru umenipatia nafasi na nitakuwa namb ari ya kwanza  kwenda huko sehemu za 
Mtongwe, Ahsant eni. 
(Applause ) 
        Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon. Siminyu . 
February 25, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                24 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic vers ion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3         Hon. Siminyu: Mr. Speaker I would like to second the prayer by Hon. Paul Onje  that 
the House adjourns for this important occasion at Mtongwe, and it is about matters of 
education of our children. I would urge M embers to join and  support this so that  we can go 
and support them.  
(Applause ) 
(Question proposed)  
        Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : I want to believe that the prayer by one Hon . Paul Onje 
is pursuant to S tanding orde r 30 of this Hon. House and  we have limited time to make 
contributions on this matter , we have just five minutes so just for information from the House  
for the proposal that the p rayer by H on. Paul Oswago Onje be considered in this House . 
(Question put and  agreed to)  
        So ladies and gentlemen each and every one of you is having five minutes and 
consider that it is also reading 2 :00p.m and we are past two so limit the time of contributions. 
Yes Hon. Maimuna Salim . 
        Leader of Minority Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Salim:   Mheshimiwa Spika, a hsante kwa 
fursa hii ningependa kwamba tuweze kuanza msafar a kwa sababu muda hauko kwetu, kwa 
hivyo naunga mkono hoja hii na ningependa sisi tuwe wa kwanza kabla Gavana  wetu 
hajafika kule. ..  
(Applause ) 
(Question proposed)  
        Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Yes any other contributors? Okay I put this to question 
that the prayer by  Hon. Paul Onje be considered in this House.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
ADJOURNMENT  
        Ladies and gentlemen the House stands adjourned unti l next week Tuesday at exactly 
2:30p.m which will be on 1st March 2016.  
The House rose at 2:58p.m. 
            