Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for i nformation 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 29th March , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Twent y Fourth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  10:10a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Abdulrahman Abdikadir ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdul rahman A bdikadir): Pleas e take your seats. Clerk?   
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Honourable  Members , the County Assembly is privil eged to welcome students and 
teachers from Perryville  Academy. They include ; and  I will call up your names:  
 
1. Yusuf R ajab 
2. Samir Mohamed  
3. Moses Amani  
4. Rodney  Kiva  
5. Adrian John  
6. Ashley Shantell  
7. Jacinta Mueni  
8. Siham Abdallah  
9. Mohamed Hamza  
10. Fauz Mohamed  
11. Ian Mwaghogho  
12. Moha med Said  
13. Aisha Haidar  
14. Sahla Haidar  
15. Fatma Yahya  
16. Aisha AbdulRahman  
17. Aisha Omar  
18. Aisha Hamza  
19. Swabra Ali  
20. Fatma Kara ma  
 
Last but not least, they are accompanied by two teachers ; 
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for i nformation 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor   Page 2 21. Mr.  Brighton Owino – Teacher  
22. Ms. Khadija Reagan – Teacher  
 
We also have the last teach er, sorry !  
 
23. Mr. Hussein Mwanza – Teacher   
 
Welcome once again to the Co unty Assembly of Mombasa. Thank you. Ye s Clerk?  
 
PETITION S 
BUXTON  ESTATE WELFARE COMMITTEE  
 
Mem bers, the County Assembly received a petition from the Buxton Estate Welfare 
Committee . I will go directly to their prayers :  
 
(a) Demand  that the private devel oper (Gulf Cap Africa Limited ) provide them with 
at least Kshs. 20,000/= per month unt il they are handed the keys of P hase I housing unit s 
as per the tenancy termination agreement which they have enclosed the copy ,  
(b) They have also ordered the County governm ent o f Mombasa and the private 
developer (Gulf Cap Africa Limited ) to grant former Buxton tenants’  owners hip through 
tenant purchase scheme as promised before the project commenced ,  
(c) Lastly, they are demanding that the County government of Mombasa and the 
private developer to furnish them with the list of Buxton Phase I beneficiaries by uploading 
the same in  the County website.  
 
Honourable Members , Pursuant to Standing 201 (1) and (2) , this petition stands committed 
to the Committee on Lands, Urban Planning a nd Housing who shall not more than sixty c alendar  
days respond by way of a report to the petitioners and la id on the Table of the County Assembly. 
Yes Clerk?  
 
CONSTRUCTION OF FEEDER ROAD ON VILLAGE PLAYGROUND ALONG MWINGO KWA 
MZEE BAKARI / VOI VILLAGE , PORT  REITZ WARD  
 
Honourable Members , the County Assembly has received a petition from the res idents of 
Mwingo , kwa Mzee Bakari Voi/Village in Port  Reitz Ward on the construction of feeder road on 
village playground. I will briefly read their prayers.  The pray ers are as follows:  
 
(a) To stop any construction along the above said footpath from the dated of  this petition , 
(b) CFS to pay those houses along the peri meter wall with affected cracks , 
(c) Any construction within the community environment must be a public participat ion 
process , 
(d) Any construction within the community must be guided by the Bill of Quantity 
showing the proposed outlet and inlet , 
(e) We, the community following our prayers, if not going to be honoured within seven  
working days from the date of this petition th ey wi ll be force d to undertake their only 
right stipulated in Chapter 4, Article 37.  
 
They have attach ed photos of the area and the community signatures  for support.  
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       24 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for i nformation 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hans ard Editor   Page 3  Honourable Members , Pursuant to Standing 201 (1) and (2) this petition  stands committed 
to the Commi ttee on  Transport and Infrastructure  who shall not more than sixty  calendar  days 
respond by way  of a report to the petitioners and laid on the Table of the County Assembly. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
ADJOU RNMENT  
 
 This House  stands adjourned until Wednesday, 29th March , 2023 at 2 :30 p.m.  
 
The House rose at 10:21a .m. 
 