November 30 , 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                      25  
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 30th November, 2017  
The House met at 2:44p.m. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): May you have your s eats. Yes, Clerk ? 
STATEMENTS  
 Yes, Hon. Fahad . 
(Silence ) 
 Hon. Ali Shariff: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I seek to know from the Leader of 
Majority on whether he is aware of various incidents of insecurity within the County ; 
particularly in Likoni and Nyali Sub -Counties where some alleged gangsters were killed and 
what specific measures are being taken to address the situation . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): So are you permitted by Hon. Fahad?  
 Hon. Ali Shariff:  Yes Mr. Speaker, he is abse nt and he gave me permission.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Ok, Leader of Majority there is a 
question on insecurity in the County.  
 Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Yes Mr. Speaker, well I do not mind but 
actually Mr. Speaker you know if there is any statement it is now to be given time so that we 
can come up with the report of the statement. So, Mr. Speaker we do not mind if you can give 
us tim e to prepare the report of the statement. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): So in the mean time you are not aware 
of any insec urity particularly in Likoni or  Nyali Sub -County?  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Yes Mr. Speaker am not aware as y ou can 
see it has just appeared in the order paper ’s of today and the Statement is insecurity within 
County of Mombasa.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): It is ok the Leader of Majority, the 
House has permitted  you to bring back the report on insecurity precisely in Likoni and Nyali 
Sub-Counties in a week ’s time the House will need the report. Yes Clerk ? 
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari . 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I seek to know from the Chair 
Committee on Educa tion, Information Technology & Vision  2035 whether he is aware of 
those students who underperformed in the completed Kenya Certificate of Primary Educa tion 
(K.C.P.E ) examination within the County and if there are any plans by the County 
Government to enrol them to vocational institut ions. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.   
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): The Chairperson for Education, 
Information, Technology and MV 2035 ? Or the Vice Chairperson, y es, Hon. Ali Shariff . 
 Hon. Ali Shariff: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, the Committee is aware of those 
students who have  under performed  in the recent ly K.C.P.E and pl ans are underway to enrol 
them to vocational institut ions and we are ready to table the information by one week.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): And you are also aware that the Ministry 
has said that all the students or the pupils who have s at for K.C.P.E are going to be enrolled 
in secondary schools.  
 Hon. Ali Shariff: Yes Mr. Speaker we are aware all those students they will be 
enrolled in secondary schools and we also have to know that the other students who do not 
wish to conti nue for secondary education studies and they want to use vocational institut ions. 
November 30 , 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                      25  
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): So you have requested for a week ’s 
time?  
 Hon. Ali Shariff: Yes Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Ok. Permission granted.  
 Hon. Ali Shariff: Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk ? 
STATEMENTS  
GARGABE PILEUP S WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 Hon. Mary Naliaka . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Wafula : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity, I 
seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Environm ent, Waste Management an d 
Energy whether he is aware of g arbage pile up within the County and what measures the 
County Government has in pla ce to redress the situation . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Shebe Athman do you have any 
immediate response ? 
 Hon. Shebe Salim : Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker am fully aware of 
the challenge which has been brought up by Hon.  Member here . Mr. Speaker Sir today I had 
a priviledge with my Committee , we had an opportunity to have a healthy discussion  with the 
Chief Officer in charge of Environmnet ; we have discussed various challenges and offer ed 
solution s to the problem affecting our great County . Though Mr. Speaker I humbly request 
for a  week’s  time to co me up with a proper statement that will go to please the Hon.  
Members in the Assembly , so I kindly request you Mr. Speaker to give me one week time so 
that I can come up with a proper statement . Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Permission granted. Yes, Hon. Aran, are 
you up on a point of order?  
 Hon. Oindo: Mr. Speaker Sir, kindly allow me to seek leave of this Hon.  House to 
give a statement on  Motion  regarding People’s Assembly.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Ok, let us finish the next order then will 
give you that opportunity. Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENTS  
 Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari . 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee on Education, Information, Technology and MV 2035 the status of the model 
ECD centres and when they will become operational . Thank Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes the Committee Chair Education, 
Information, Technology and MV 2035 d o you have any immediate response ? Or any 
Member from that Committee?  
 Hon. Ali Shariff: Thank you Mr. Speaker, the status of the model ECD centres 
currently we have requested the same from our Clerk of the Committee and we are yet to 
receive the report and being operational, the ECD’s are currently operating although now is 
holiday but from J anuary they will continue operati onal and reports like the previous 
statement will be delivered in one week ’s time.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you, permission granted. House 
as Hon. Aran had proposed he was seeking lea ve from the House for his statement for him to 
give a statement for the People’s Assembly, I do now propose a question that the statement 
on the Bunge la Wananchi  be given at this moment . 
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
 …continue Hon. Aran Moses . 
 Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker Sir, like I said before  that I seek leave of this Hon.  House 
to allow me give a statement , Motion  regarding the People’s Assembly . 
November 30 , 2017            MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                      25  
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 (Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): It is a statement Hon. Aran , not a 
Motion.  
Hon. Oindo : It is a statement. Mr. Speaker Sir, the People’s Assembly is the only sure pack 
to our freedom and sovereignity as people  and our people will have the opportunity to discuss 
the highest sense of m arginalization the Coast region has h ad since independence. The 
People’s Assembly is coming at a time when the Government of the day is worki ng day and 
night to transfer  Port of Mombasa to Naivasha as a way of making the Coastal people more 
vulnerable, mis erable and marginaliz ed; that is if do not rise up today men, women, children, 
youth, people with disability and everyone from the Coast we risk losing the little thing we 
have today. They want us to cripple and we, as the people of Mombasa should embrace a  
People’s Assembly. The People’s Assembly is an empowerment;  it is an opportunity to our 
people t o design their own designity to a walk to freedom . Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Aran, the issue will be 
taken to the relevant Committee, the House Business Committee to discuss when they are 
going to allot the time for the Assembly to discuss your statement and am sure it will be back 
in a Motion form, so the next Hous e Business Committee will allot day and time when the 
House will discuss this issue. Yes, Clerk ?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon.  Members there being no other business the House stands adjourn ed until 
Tuesday, 5th December , 2017 at 2 :30p.m. 
The House rose at 2:58  p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 