June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 30th June, 2020.  
The House met at 3:14p.m  
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  
[Loud Consultation s] 
 Yes, Clerk?  
BILLS  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2020  
 
FIRST READING  
 
[The Clerk read the Bill for the first time]  
 Yes Chairperson , Hon. Moham ed Hatimy, Committee on F inance , Budget and 
Appropriation.  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speak er. Mr. Speaker this is an Appropriation 
Bill No. 5 , 2020 /2021, the b udget estimate s were taken for Public Par ticipation. I request that the 
Bill be read for the second time and ther eafter to proceed to the C ommittee of the Whole House . 
Thank you Mr. Speak er, I beg to move . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: The Vice Chair.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Leader of Majority?  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I arise here to second 
the Bill.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a ques tion 
that the Bill by Hon. Moha med Hatimy, on Mombasa  County Appropriation Bill No. 5 , 2020 be 
now read for the second time ? 

June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 [Question proposed and  agreed to]  
 I can see there are no inputs to that and I now put a question that the  Motion by Hon. 
Moha med Hatimy, be read  for the second time . 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 Yes Clerk ? 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2020  
SECOND READING  
[The Clerk read the Bill for the second time]  
 Yes, Clerk. Okay Hon. Members as it was passed by the Hon. Chair of Finance, the 
House now dissolve s into Committee of the Whole House to discuss the Bill.  
COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE  
 [The Serjeant -At-Arms lowered the M ace] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) exited the Chair]  
ORDER OF COMMITTEE RE AD 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair]  
 The Chairman  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Members we are on C ommittee of 
the Whole Hous e. Hon. Chair of Finance please approach the Chair, I need to discuss with you 
some issue s before we proceed … 
[Consultations]  
 Yes C lerk?  
 Clerk:  The Mombasa County Appropriation Bill 2020.  Clause number 2. The County 
Treasury may issue the sum of Ksh s. Fourteen Billion, Six Hundred and Thirty -Four Million, 
Five Hundred and Seventy -Nine Thousand, Six Hundred Eighty -Seven only, out of the County 
Revenue Fund and apply it towards the supply granted for the service of the year ending on the 
30th June , 2021 . 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:   Thank you  Mr. Chairman I propose to amend.  
 
[Off - microphone]  
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Than k you Mr. Chairman I propose the figure for Kshs. 14, 
634, 579, 687 to change and read as Kshs. 14, 934...  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 [Interruption ] 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Mohamed Hatimy wait first I propose 
a question and then you bring whatever amendments t hat you want to bring. Hon. Members I 
now propose a question that Clause number 2 be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
 
 Any input Hon. Members?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Chairman I propose C lause 2 figure Kshs. 14, 634, 
579, 687 Billion  to be amended to read Kshs. 14, 934, 579, 687. Thank you Mr. Chairman.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : And a reason as to why we are amending 
this one ? 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  The reason a s to why we did amend the figures in the mo rning 
is so that the estimates m ust go with the appropriation , the Kshs. 3 00Million  we amended in the 
morning. We are requesting this House to approve an addition of Kshs. 250M illion  to the C ounty 
Assembly Program Based development Budget (PBB) to finance the Speak er’s residence, 
renovation of the Mombasa County Assembly B uildings at the Treasury Square Mombasa and 
the offices for Members of the C ounty Assembly. Number two it is Kshs. 50M illion  for the 
Program Based Development Budget 2020/2021 to finance car and mo rtgage loans. Thank you.  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chair are you through?  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Yes am through . 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : And who is your seconder?  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  The Vice C hair. 
 
[The Leader of Majority ( Hon. Mwidani ) bowed]  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose  a question on 
the amended C lause to be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
 
 Any input on the amended Clause? Yes Hon. Bwir e? 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Chairman the total figure might have bypassed me, I  would like just to 
know af ter the amendment now that the C hairman is amending how much in total will it be . It 
might have surpass ed me.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I have said  Kshs. 300M illion  so the Kshs. 14, 634 Billion   plus 
Ksh.300M illion . 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So what is the total?  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  The total is Kshs. 14,934,579,687 Billion . 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Bwire are you satisfied with whatever 
you have asked for? What is it Hon. Charles? Hon. Bwire switch off your mic rophone.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Ningependa kumwambia Mwenyekiti 
wa F edha  aweze kutuambia hiyo vote aliyopendekeza itakuwa vote ya development  au ya 
recurrent ? Na i kiwa ni vote ya development  katika Bunge la Kaunti  tutakuwa na Kshs. 
375M ilioni, au itakuwa nimekosea Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ? K ulingana na zile pesa 
tunawekeza saa hii ni recurrent ama development ? Sasa tuna Kshs. 25M illioni  kwa hiyo itakuwa 
imeongezeka kwa kiasi gani ? 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nafikiria hatujafika huko tuko 
kwenye Clause 2  hatujashika recurrent wala hatujashika development so tukienda taratibu 
tutafika huko  tutaeleza zinaingia wapi?   
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok Hon. Charles Kitula , when we go 
through our Bill there’s a column of schedules that shows development and recurrent budget  are  
so reserve your observations when we reach to the Schedules you will ask the Chairman . 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Most obliged . 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now put a question that 
Clause 2 as amended be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
 Yes? Clerk?  
 
 Clerk:  Clause 3.  Appropriation of money granted . 
  
 The sum granted by section 2 shall be appropriated for the several services and purposes 
specified in the second column of the First Schedule, in the amounts specified in the third 
column of that Schedule.  
 
 Clause 4.  Appropriation in Aid .  
 
In addition to the sum granted by section  2, the sum specified in the fourth column of First and 
Second Schedules shall be applied for the several services and purposes specified in the second 
column of those Schedules, out of revenue directed to be applied outside the consolidated Fund 
under Art icle 206 (1) of the Constitution.  
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Clause 5.  Vote heads . 
 
 The supply granted for the services of the year ending 30th June, 2021 in respect of Votes 
R3011, R3012, R3013, R3014, R3015, R3016, R3017, R3018, R3019, R3020, R3021, R3 022, 
R3023,R3026  and D3011 , D3012, D3013, D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, D3019, 
D3020, D3021, D3022, D3023, D3026 in accordance with the Appropriation Bill , 2020.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that Clause 3, 4 
and 5 be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
 
 Any input Hon. Member s on Cl ause 3, 4 and 5 before I put a question? Yes Hon. 
Charles?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Clause  4; 
 
In addition to the sum granted by section 2, the sum specified in the fourth column of 
First and Second Schedules shall be applied for the several services and purposes 
specified in the second column of those Schedules, out of revenue directed to be applie d 
outside the C onsolidated Fund under Article 206 (1) of the Constitution.  
 
 Mheshimiwa  Spika  niliwahi kwenda katika Kaunti ya Kwale kulingana n a appropriation 
kuna annexture , kulingana na zile columns  ambazo tumezijazia kuna annexture  ya kuweza 
kuangalia kuwa tuna  appropriate  nini. Kwa hio  saa hii tunap opitisha hii lakini sisi kama 
Wanacham a hatujui tuna  appropriate  nini katika annexture  ya column ya tatu na ya nne 
Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa hivyo ninge pendekeza K amati ya F edha  wawe na stakabadhi  ambayo 
ni annexture  tujue tuna  appropriate nini katika hii Appropriation Bill  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula , but in the 
meantime I am t he Chair of this C ommittee . Yes Hon. Chair Finance, there i s an issue raised by 
Hon. Kitula , respond . 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. B wana Mwenyekiti  sisi 
tunajua kuwa hii bajeti ni program based  sasa sisi hatujafanya system  yetu tunafanya program 
based , appropriation  siku zote tunaileta namna hii , kwa hiyo ni system aidha inakwenda namna 
hii ama ile program based  inawekwa pamoja na hii lakini sisi tunaenda na mfumo huu wa 
kusema kuwa ukitaka kujua vile vitu ambavyo vimewekwa kwa appropriation , Program B ased 
Budget inakupa outcome  ya kila kitu. Ukiingia kwenye program based  utaona ni kitu gani 
Bwana Mwenyekiti . Ahsante.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kitula are you satisfied?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika  hii ni Appropriation Bill … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The Chair. 
 
 Hon.  Kitula:  Samahani  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, h ii bajeti  k atika Appropriation Bill  
tunatenga pesa kulingana na votes  za recurrent  na development . Kwa hio  tutakuwa sisi tuna  
appropriat e ya nini wakati hatujui tuna  appropriatia  nini? Ndio tuna appropriate  kiwango 
fulani , tuna appropriate  nini wakati budget estimates  tayari ; nimesema mfano mzuri nilienda 
Kwale, Kwale katika kila Appropriation  kwenye stakabadhi  kama hii kuna annexture  
wamepatiwa  pia wao kama recurrent  302 wanaang alia stakabadhi  ya 302 ime wekewa nini na 
nini na nini . Kama ni procurement  ya fishing boats  kama n i procurement  ya kitu fulani na kitu 
fulani imekuwa annexed  katika ile Appropriation Bill ili hata mtu wa kawaida kuwa na ufahamu 
katika supplementary Appropriation Bill ndani ya miezi mitatu  itatengenezewa kitu fulani . 
Lakini sasa hii iko wazi  lakini Mwen yekiti wa F edha  anavyotueleza  ya kwamba  ni desturi  
kupitishwa hivyo  mimi sioni kama kuwa ni sawa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ; lazima tuwe na 
annexture  ya kujua tun a appropriat e kitu gani katika Appropriation B ill. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika Programme Based Budget ... 
(Interruption)  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Am the Chair.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  The Chair , pole tumesahau . Program Based Budget  iko na 
programs  na iko na sub programs . Sub programs  ukiangalia kwenye  stakabadhi  uliyopitisha leo  
ya estimates  asubuhi, utapata inazungumzia kitu gani. Nafikiri ikiwa sisi sasa twataka kuleta 
mfumo ule, itabidi tuje tukae na sisi tufanye mfum o wa kusema k uwa system ya program based . 
Lakini sisi tumekuwa tukipitisha siku zote Appropriation  na hakuna sheria ya kusema kuwa ati 
ni lazima uwe utaweka hizo programs  kwenye Appropriation . Sijui kama atanipa kifungu gani 
ndipo na mimi nipate kusoma nij ue Mheshimiwa.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chair it  is not a must but it will be 
helpful for Members to understand wh at they are appropriating for, so  before I conclude am 
seeing Hon. Mwam wiri is u p maybe he wants to add more in put. 
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti nilivyomuelewa mimi Mheshimiwa Kitula sidhani kama itakuwa kama ni kinyume 
chake lakini pendekezo lake ama ma ombi yake ni kwamba sote tunaju a tuna b ajeti tumetumia 
hio program based  kwa mitandao kama soft copy . Lakini ki yeye kama namnukuu sahihi ilikuwa 
muafaka ya kwamba hii iwe imechapishwa, tukikabidhiwa appropriation  hii tuwe tuko nayo 
kama hard copy . Lakini wengi wetu kama ni hio program based budget estimates  tuko nayo kwa 
soft copy  lakini haijaunganishwa na hapa.  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 Twende kwa annexure  ndio kwamba unapitia hapa lakini uko nayo sambamba kwa 
upande wa pili unaweza kufanya reference  na kuhakikisha hiki ki machoni kimeenda wapi? 
Kama nimemnukuu sahihi katika pendekezo lake ilikuwa ni  copy hii tumetumiwa kwa mtandao 
lakini pia iwe sambamba na hii appropriation  tumepewa. Ahsante Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. So....  
[Interruption]  
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri amew eza kugusia 
vilivyo kabisa lakini la msingi kama  stakabadhi iko au hata kama si baada ya kikao  hiki 
mnaweza kutukabidhi kwamba zile program  zote ambazo ziko katika Bill hii tutakabidhiwa 
maan ake Bill hii ni Estimates , ADP pia Estimates . Tunavyofahamu katik a ADP nikiangalia 
Department ya Education, Trade, Transport and Devolution  Mheshimiw a Mwenyekiti haina 
allocation  yeyote ki sheria ya hii ADP, a mbapo ADP ni lazima iweke allocation, inafanyika wapi 
na itatumia amount  gani Mheshimiwa Spika. Lakini ADP tumep itisha haina allocation  hivi sasa 
appropriation  tunapitisha pia hakuna annexure  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Sasa ninakubali kama 
document  iko kama nitapatiwa baadae pia nitashukuru.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Charles Juma Kitula, but  
for your information ADP there is n o allocation in it Hon. Charles.  
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hapo uko na  Katibu  na itakuwa vibaya kama 
anakushauri vibaya , zaidi kwa sababu ADP iko wazi kabisa na nitakusomea, ‘Every County 
government shall prepar e development p lan in accordance with Article 222 of the Constitution 
that includes ;  
(a) Strategy priorities for the medium term that will affect the County government 
priorities and plans , 
(b) A description of how the government responding to changes to the financial and 
development . 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sikia hapa ; 
(c)Programs to be delivered with details of each programme of ;  
(i) The strategies , priorities to which the program will contribute ,  
(ii) The services or goods to be provided , 
(iii) Measurab le indicators of performance where feasible and ,  
(iv) The budget allocated to the program  
 
Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Kitula , it was just a slip of 
the tongue but I was saying each Department has  an ADP  that shows the al location of the 
programs and plans that are going to be done by each and every Department  as per the Annual 
Development Plan showing th e amounts that you are saying . I am  not opposing w hat you have 
raised in this Honourable  House.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i itakuwa ni uongo n imesema Education, Trade, 
Transport  na Devolution  hazina kiwango  wala hatujulikani mpaka leo twafanya nini mashinani 
na hizi Wizara ... 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwa limu) : From the ADP?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Yes. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Chairman can you respond to what 
Hon. Charles Kitula has raised?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nafikiri juu ya b ajeti aliyosema ni 
kuwa b ajeti haimaanishi kuwa ..., bajeti  huwa ni kusema , ni kukisia kiwango. Kwa mfano 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kulikuwa...  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Just a moment  Hon. Chair ; what the 
Honourable  wants to know, why the said Departments in the ADP have n o allocations .  
 
[Interruption]  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I need some time to go through it to confirm if it is true or 
false.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So as he has raised the issue he wanted if 
possible you provide the document after this sitting ; be it tomorrow or a day after tomorrow for 
the Hon. Members to peruse...  
[Interruption]  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Sawa, the three  Departments?  
[Interruption]  
Hon.  Kitula:  Ni Wizara nne ; Education, Transport, Trade and Devolution  asema 
Mwenyekiti  ungetupatia kwa saba bu ziko kwa mitandao hata kesho nitashukuru, kwa sababu 
ziko mitandaoni.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Member you can proceed . 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 [Interruption]  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Bwana Mwenyekiti  nataka kusema hivi, unaju a kuna 
majukumu ambayo ni yetu sisi kama Kamati, halafu kuna majukumu ya wal e wanatengeneza 
haya makaratasi . Kwa hivyo ikiwa itawezekana kuwa  Karani ajaribu maana yake ni lazima sasa 
azitoe kwenye kila kifungu alicho  nacho... [Off mic rophone].  
[Interruption ] 
The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili  Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone . 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Karani  anajaribu ... [Off microphone] . 
[Interruption ] 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu) : Switch it on . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nasema upande wa ofisi ipeane hizo stakabadhi  kwa sababu  
mimi  siwezi kwenda kupiga chapa 20 napelekea W aheshimiwa , kwa hivyo naomba ofisi ya 
Katibu  ifanye kazi hio.  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : It is ok. The Table Clerks will communicate 
to the Clerk and communicate back to Hon. Members. So Hon. Members I now proceed to put a 
question tha t Clause 3, 4 and 5 be part of the Bill . 
[Question  put and agreed to]  
Yes, Clerk?  
Clerk:  The First schedule,  the current  expenditure. I shall read the vote heads or  the 
respective sums are provided in the Bill before me. R3011 which is for Executive Headqu arters 
Office Mombasa, R3012 for the County Assembly, R3013 for the County  Public  Service Board, 
R3014 for Finance and Economic Planning, R 3015 for Energy, Environment and Waste 
Management, R3016 for Education, Information, Technology & MV2035, R3017 for Health 
Services, R3018 for Water Sanitation & Natural Resources, R3019 for Youth, Gender, Sports 
and Cultural Affairs, R3020 for Trade, Tourism & Investments, R3021 for Lands, Planning, 
Housing & Urban renewal, R3022 for Transport, Infrastructure & Public Works, R3023 for 
Agriculture, Fisheries, Livestock & Cooperative Societies, R3026 for Public Service 
Administration & Devolution . The sub totals supply Ksh. 9,709,238, 106, the sub total for Donor 
Fund is Ksh. 192,389,448, subtotal for Appropriation In A id Ksh. 4,098,699,410 . 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose the question 
that the First Schedule on the current votes R3011, R3012, R3013, R3014, R3015, R3016, 
R3017, R3018, R3019, R3020, R3021, R30 22, R3023, R3026 . 
[Question pro posed and agreed to]  
Any input Hon. Members?  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Charles?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti niko katika R3017 up ande wa column  4 ya donor 
funds , tuko na Ksh.134,639,473Milioni  na kulingana na  budget estima te tuko na conditional  
grants  ya hospitali za Level 5  ambayo ni Ksh.398,439,306Milioni  na tuko  na user fees forgone  
ya Ksh.33Milioni  na vile vile tuko na  ... nafikiri katika kitengo cha afya  ni hizo . Misaada kutoka 
shirika la DANIDA ya Universal Developmen t System P rogram  ya Ksh.20Milioni . Kwa hivyo 
nikihe sabu zote hizi  zinastahili kuwa z aidi ya Ksh.400Milioni  Mheshimiwa Spika lakini katika 
R3017 donor funds  ni Ksh.134Milioni . Sasa nashangaa hizi nyengine zitakuwa zim ewekwa wapi  
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Chai rperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chair, can you respond.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nafikiri alikuwa anazungumzia juu 
ya recurrent donor funds ; inasema Ksh. 134,639,4 73Milioni alafu na Appropriation Bill  ni Ksh. 
1,168,072,015B ilioni, sijui shida iko wapi hapa.  
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti shida iko kwa R3017 ambayo ni grants donor 
funds  ya Ksh.134Milioni  lakini katika budget estimates  Mwenyekiti wa F edha  tuko karibi a na 
Ksh.400Milioni na...  za donor funding  na hivyo katika D pia tutaona kuwa hakuna donor funds  
katika column ya donor funds . Kwa hivyo twashangaa Ksh.400Milioni  na million i itakuwa 
zime enda wapi na hapa katika column  ya donor funds  bado tuko na Ksh.134Milioni , tuko na 
hiyo DANIDA, tuko na Level 5 hospital na tuko na user fees forgone , karibia  Ksh.400 na zaidi 
ya mil ioni.  
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  DANIDA na nini… ? Jumla  ambayo wameweka hapo ni 
ngapi?  
 Hon. Kitula:  Ksh.134,639,47 3Milioni.  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Lakini hii sio  jumla uliok uwa wasema si DANIDA peke yake, 
it is not DANIDA only . 
 Hon. Kitula:  Naam, kuna DANIDA, k una user fees foregone  na kuna L evel 5 hospital. 
Conditional  grants . 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Basi itabidi tuwaulize kitengo cha Kaunti cha Fedha, Treasury  
watueleze kwa sababu  naona kweli grant  kutoka kw a serikali haiko hapa.  
 Hon. Kitula : Naam . 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Hon. M oham ed Hatimy:  Kwa hio tutahitaji kuwauliza Kitengo cha Fedha  wajibu swali 
hilo kwa nini haikuwekwa hapa . 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) : So Honourable C hair, now that you h ave 
said you will ask the F inance department, I am about to put a question to this schedule, please 
inform the H ouse how we are going to tackle R3 017 before we put a question a nd also you had 
an issue with R3012 .  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Bwana Mwenyekiti n afikiri ikiwezekana tuendelee na votes 
zengine ilhali nikiwapigia simu tuwas ikize watasema nini.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : You also had an issue with R3012?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Iko na makosa gani?  La, kwa Bunge  sisi twaenda kwa 
development , it is development  not recurrent.  
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, labda nimshauri Mheshimiwa wa Fedha . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) : Chair,  just approach the Table  because there 
was an issue of recurrent. Yes, Hon. Charles.  
 Hon. Kitula : Nasema ni  kumshauri M wenyekiti wa Fedha  kwamba hii 134 ni pesa 
kidogo tuongezee katika budget estimates  alafu tuipitishe jumla  ambayo tutaipitisha sasa hivi. 
Tuongezee ile ambayo iko katika budget estimates  katika.. .donor funds  yetu ya siku ya  leo ili 
tupiti she kwa pamoja a lafu baadaye a napowasiliana na Waziri, tutakuwa tumepitisha hi cho 
kiwango.  Kuliko kupitisha k itu ambacho hakitalingana na sheria M wenyekiti.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Chair, respond on 3012 and 3017.  
 Hon. Moham ed H atimy:  Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti 3012 nataka kuo ngeza Ksh.50 
million i kwa Bunge  ambayo itakuwa ni 708, isome 708 ... [Inaudible] . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) : Use the mic rophone . 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Isome Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti, badala ya  Ksh. 
658,60 9,194 Milioni , tuweke Ksh. 708,609,194M ilioni . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder ? 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy : I request H on. Vice Chair  to second me, Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti . 
[The Leader of Majority ( Hon.  Mwidani)  seconded ] 
[Consultation s] 
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok Hon . Members, I propose a question, on 
R3012 as amended be part of the B ill? 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 Any input H on. Member as to why you are increasing Ksh.50Million ? Yes, Hon . Chair?  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  [Inaudible].  
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) : We are still in R30 12, R30 12 because it is 
the one that he has proposed an amendment , before we put a question on R30 17 before any 
further amendments. Hon . Members I now put a question that R30 12 as amended be part of the 
Bill? 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 Hon. Members we are still in the First S chedule and Hon . Chair of Finance, Budget and 
Appropriation there is an issue that Hon . Charles Kitula has raised on 3017 . 
  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Naam  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, nimejaribu 
kuzungumza na  waliohusika ni kuwa grant  za serikali haziingii kwe nye Appropriation  kwani 
zile huwa ziko kwenye recurrent . Ile Bill ya serikali inapo  allocate  ndio inaonyesha zile 
donation  zote zinazotolewa, grant zote h apa inaingia donor  lakini grants huwa haziingii.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members, any input before I put a 
question, any further input?  
 Hon. Kitula:  Tumeongezewa Ksh.50Milioni  nashukuru katika  Bunge l etu lakini 
hatujafahamu pia kuling ana na zile estimates umepitisha Ksh.50Milioni  yaenda upa nde gani  
maana ningependa M wenyekiti atuambie kwa maana sisi Mheshimiwa  hatuna hata public 
participation  katika sehemu zetu.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Obey the  Assembly  proceedings you have 
to stand while you talk.   
 Hon. Kitula:  I am sorry. I am sorry . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : No problem just stand.  
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nilikuwa 
nataka kujua katika Ksh.50 M illion i ambayo t unaongeza katika Bunge , sisi ni viongozi ambao 
tunaenda mashinani, lakini awamu zilizopita hatujawa hi kufanya public participation  katika 
sehemu tunapotoka . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  wala hatujawahi kuona bajeti ya public 
participation   kwa hivyo tungependa M wenyekiti aweze kutueleza hii Ksh.50 mil ioni inakwenda 
kwa upande gani ili tuweze kufahamu z aidi. Ahsante . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. C hair just respond on the Ksh.50 
million that you have recommended in this budget .  
 Hon. Mohamed Ha timy:  Hio Ksh.50 mi lioni tumesema ni kwenye mikopo  ya magari, 
ndio tumeweka Ksh.50 million i. Kwa sababu kuna nusu ya Waheshimiwa wamechukua pesa, na 
wengine hawakuchukua kile kiwango, wengine wac hukua kikubwa, wengine kidogo  pengine 
wanataka kuongeza ile mikopo  kwa muda ule uliobakia …[Inaudible].  
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes switch on the mic rophone .  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Na pia kusema Mheshimiwa kuwa hata wafanyi kazi  pia 
wanastahili kupata hi i mikopo, k wa hivyo tumesema tutakwenda phase  1 tuweke hizi na wao pia 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 wapate kufaidika kwa hizi pesa Mheshimiwa. Kwa hivyo hizi zinaenda kwa  mikopo ya magari 
ambay o sisi tunaweka.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok Hon . Members, we can see the 
Assembly is satisfied by the response. I now put  a question that R3011, R3012 as amend ed, 
R3013, R3014, R3015, R3016, R3017, R3018, R3019, R3020, R3021, R302 2, R3023, R3026 be 
part of the B ill and putting consideration that the sub total will also  change as in R3012 as 
amended?  
[Question put and agreed t o] 
 Yes, C lerk? 
 Clerk:  Second schedule, development expenditure and I shall read to  you H on. 
Members the votes and respective departments which they represent and the figures are prov ided 
in the B ill in front of you.  
 D3011 for the County Executive, D301 2 for t he County Assembly, D3013 for t he County 
Assembly Service Board , D3014 for Finance a nd Economic Planning , D3015 for Energy, 
Environment and Waste Management, D3016 for Education , Information Technology and 
MV2035, D3017 for Health Services, D3018 f or Water , Sanitation  and Natural Resources, 
D3019 f or Youth , Gender , Sports a nd Cultural Affairs,  D3020 f or Trade , Tourism a nd 
Investment,  D3021 for Lands Planning, Housing a nd Urban Renewal,  D3022 for Transport 
Infrastructure a nd Public Works,  D3023 f or Ag riculture, Fisheries, Livestock and Cooperative 
Services, D3026 for Devolution and Public Services Administration. The total for supply is Ksh. 
4,925,341,580 Billion , the total for donor funds Ksh. 1,100,000,000 Billion total for Appropriation 
In Aid is Ksh1,153,748,953 Billion . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose a question  that the second 
schedule D3011,  D3012, D 3013, D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, D3019, D3020, D3021, 
D3022, D 3023, D3026 be part of the Bill.  
[Question propose d and agr eed to] 
 Any input Hon. Members? Yes Hon. Hatimy .   
[Technical hitch]  
 Hon.  Hatimy Ju st move forward , use Hon.  Milka’s mic rophone.  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Thank you C hair. I propose vote number D3012 be amended 
to read Ksh. 272,424,673 Million  instead of Ksh. 25,773,748 Million . Thank you Mr. Chair.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : And who is your seconder?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  My Vice C hair. 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hamis i Musa.  
[Interruption ] 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mwenyekiti, a ngeiso ma vizuri maana hesabu haijaingiliana kabla 
kuipitisha . 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Moha med Hatimy before you get a 
seconder ascertain on total.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mwenyekiti  vote D3012 inasoma Ksh. 25,773,748 Milioni  
nasema tunaondoa h iyo na tunaweka ukiongeza Ksh.250M ilioni  itakuwa ni Ksh.272Milioni .  
[Consultations ] 
 Hon. Kitula: Ksh. 275,773,748M ilioni.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ksh. 22,424,673M ilioni  plus Ksh. 250Milioni.  
[Consultations ] 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : D3012 . 
 Hon. Kitula:  D3012 Mwenyekiti na sio  D3011 . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Samahani,  nilichuku a ya juu, nakubaliana na jumla iliotolewa 
na Wanachama . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay then for the Hansard records.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  It is Ksh.250Million plus Ksh. 25,773,748M illion. 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : So is it Ksh. 275,773,748M illion ? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes, thank you.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
[The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) bowed]  
 I now propose a question of the a mended D3012 to be part of the B ill? 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
 Any input before I put a question?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Naam , na pia kwenye sub total iwe amended  badili ya Ksh. 
4,925,341,580 Bilioni  tukiongeza hiyo Ksh.250 million tutapata Ksh.5, 503,41,580B ilioni.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) : It’s okay . So any other input Hon. 
Members?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Give me the proper figures , Clerk?  
 Clerk:  It is Ksh. 5,175,341,580B illion . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you . 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now put a question that th e amended 
D3012 be part of the B ill? 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 Any inpu t on the second schedule? Hon. M embers?  
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Hon. Kitula:  Mwenyekiti kwenye D3014 maendeleo  ya Wizara y a Finance  and 
Economic planning   tume weka development  ya Ksh415,537,693 Million  lakini kulingana na ADP 
development yao ni Ksh.302Milioni na tumeacha haikuwa kwa Fiscal Strategy P aper na 
haikuwa katika Big 4 A genda . Ukiangalia Wizara ya Mazingira ambayo iko katika  Big 4 A genda , 
Elimu  ambayo iko katika Big 4 A genda  zote zilikuwa chini zaidi ya Wizara ya Fedha. K wa hivyo 
napendekeza iregee ile kiwango cha  Ksh.302Milioni  ambayo iko kwa ADP iongezewe a ngalau  
kwenye Elimu  ipewe kipao mbele  zaidi bora tu isi tatize  bajeti yote  kulingana na sheria.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Vice Chair any or C hair?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  ingekuwa jambo  hili limekuja 
kwenye estimates  tungeweza kubadilisha lakini kwenye estimates  imepita . Kwa hivyo hapa chini 
hatuwezi kufanya kitu na pia Wizara ya Fedha zile pesa wanazopelekewa ni zile za pending bill  
ambazo ni kama ni za development  kulipa madeni ya zile development , ile miradi   iliyofanywa 
ndio maana unaona kuna pesa nyingi zimewekwa upande  wa Fedha.  Ahsante Mwenyekiti.  
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Charles.  
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti kulingana na r ipoti ya Fedha  ya 2018/2019 tayari 
walikuwa washa lipa pending bills  sasa nashangaa akisema kuhusu pending bills  waka ti kwenye 
ripoti walikuwa wame maliza  hata ADP ambayo wameleta sasa hivi ya bajeti ya 2020/2021 
wame weka Ksh.302Milioni lakini sasa kwa Appropriation  tuko kwa  Ksh.415Milioni . Sasa hapo 
ndio nashangaa vipi Appropriation  iko na Ksh.415Milioni  na kwa ADP ni Ksh.302Milioni  
ambayo pia Wizara ya Fedha  haiko katika Big 4 Agenda  kinyume na Wizara ya Elimu , 
Mazingira na Afya Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti .  
 Kwa hivyo bora ingekuwa Ksh.302Milioni hizi pesa zengine ziende kwa Wizara ya Afya  
ama Elimu  kulingana na maoni yangu , hivyo basi hiyo ripoti ya Fedha  wame lipa pending bills  
lakini sasa hivi nashangaa pending bills  bado zipo , sasa sielewi.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Which report?  
 Hon. Kitula:  Financial report ya 2018/2019 f rom County T reasury.  
 The Chairpe rson (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) :  2018/2019?  
 Hon. Kitula:  Yes.   
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti labda 
nimfahamishe M heshimiwa  mwenzangu hapa ripoti yetu ya fedha  ambayo tumesoma asubuhi 
imeeleza wazi kwamba pending bills  bado zi ko na inatafutwa njia ya kuweza kumalizwa sio 
kwamba zishafanywa zikamalizika . Tuwekane tu sawa, pending bills  zililipwa lakini bado ziko 
standby  ndio tukasema kwenye ile ripoti yetu kwamba tunatafuta njia mwafaka ya kuweza 
kumalizwa na nafikiri pia hii ri poti ya kwamba twataka kuhakikisha kwamba  ikifika  mwezi wa  
Agosti  - Septemba  iwe wa meweza kumaliza hizo pending bills . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
pending bills  bado zipo hazijamalizika zote . 
 Hon. Kitula : Sasa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sasa hiyo ndio ilikuwa yanish angaza kwa 
stakabadhi  hakuna pending bills ; hakuna pending bills  katika  stakabadhi  zetu za bajeti na 
hawakuweka katika  stakabadhi  ya budget estimates  kuwa kuna pending bills katika b ajeti ya 
2020/2021.   
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  Ripoti inasema kwamba  walilipa wakamaliza katika mafanikio yake ya  Finance and 
Economic planning , sasa hapa twashangaa bajeti katika pending bills  ni Ksh. 3.2M ilioni , hapa 
kwa [??] ni Ksh.415M ilioni,  sasa hapo ndio wanishangaza.  
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So you were proposing an amendment?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Yes. 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay propose the a mendment at what you 
are saying.  
 
 Hon. Kitula : Napendek eza mabadiliko Mheshimiwa Spika;  angalau Wizara ya Fedha  
ibakie na hiyo 302 ambayo iko kwa  bajeti.  Kile kiwango kilichob aki ielekezwe kwa maendeleo  
ama kwa Wizara ya Elimu am bayo iko katika Agenda  four kulingana na Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ikiwa atakubaliana na mimi lakini ikiwa atakataa pia ni sawa.  
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
  
 Hon. Amriya  Jum a: Mheshimiwa napenda kusoma hiyo Bill B maanake naona kwa 
finance … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Amriya we re you seconding Hon. 
Kitula’s M otion or…?  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : I am scared that he is misleading, the ame ndment part  is a bit 
misleading;  before you even respond to that the figures are misleading , that is why I have come 
up befo re we can even respond to this M otion on amendment. Yes I am afraid that when I look at  
the ADP  I am seeing ... have said that the department o f finance is set to spend  
Ksh.415,527,693M illion  in development in the next financial year that is according to the report 
we have and I am worried that I do  not know where the figure is coming , maybe he shall give us 
the exact page that he has withdrawn the figures so that we can counter check…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Page 74 of the ADP.  
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay leave alone the page Hon. Charles 
Kitula , who is your seconder to the amendment and give us the figures on that D304  and a 
seconder so that we proceed.  
 
[Loud consultations ] 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Point of order!  
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa na simama chini ya kifungu cha 126(2)  mara 
nyingi sana nimeiregelea , Kanuni za Bunge nambari  126(2). 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Charles Kitula! Hon. Charles Kitula!  
Hon. Charles Kitula ! I have been informed by the Clerk for us to proceed give us a seconder so 
that we propose the amendment that you want  D3014 , the figures to be reduced.  
 
 Hon. Kitula : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na pendekeza  hii D3014 tupunguze Ksh. 
65,537,633M ilioni, tuongeze kwa D3016 E limu itakuwa Ksh. 3,765,867,189B ilioni . 
Napendekeza  Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi  aniunge mkono . 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon.  Kitula:  Kiufupi nilikuwa nimemueleza Mwenyekiti  wangu kuwa tutaongeza 
kitengo cha  Elimu  ili kuwa D314 tumeongeza Ksh. 65,537,633M ilioni . Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwa limu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi : I don’t second.  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay  Hon. Charles Kitula then your Motion 
fails.  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
 Hon. Members , I now proceed to put a question that D3011,  D3012 as amended, D3013, 
D3013, D3014,  D3015,  D3016,  D3017,  D3018,  D3019,  D3020,  D3021,  D3022,  D3023,  D3024,  
D3016,  D3026 and the subtotal as amended be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question put  and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
 Clerk : Clause number 1.  short title;  
 
 This Act may be cited as Mombasa County Appropriation Act, 2020.  Issue of Ksh.14, 
34,579,687B illion out of the County Consolidated F und for the service of the year ending 30th 
June, 2021.  
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose the question 
that clause  one be part of the Bill. 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 [Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
 Any input? Yes, Chairman Finance budget and Appropriation?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nachukua 
fursa hii kupongeza Wanachama … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Chairman we are in clause one putting 
a consideration that the total s have changed in the schedules by Ksh.300M illion  so give us the 
new total so that we put a question to that.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : The total to read Ksh . 14,934,579,687B illion.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : And who is the seconder?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : My Vice Chairman.  
 
[The Leader of Majority ( Hon. Mwidani ) bowed ] 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now put a question that clause o ne as 
amended be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
 Clerk : Long title : The Mombasa County Appropriation Bill , 2020; An Act of the C ounty 
Assembly of Mombasa to authorize  the issue of ce rtain sums of money out of the County 
Reve nue F und and their application towards the service of the year ending on the 30th June, 2021 
and to appropriate those sums for certain public services and purposes.  
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that the long title 
be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
 Any input Hon. Members?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Any input before I put a question?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
June 30, 2020                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            25 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19  Okay I now proceed to put a question that the long title be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes, Ch airman?  
  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Bwana Mwenyekiti . Nafikiri tumepata kupitia hii Bill 
na tumeweza ku rekebisha,  kwa hivyo naomba turegee kwa plenary  ili tuweze kuendelea 
kupitisha hii Bill. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhi li Mwalimu) : Hon. Members the C ommittee has gone to 
plenary.  
 
PLENARY RESUMED  
 
[The Serjeant -At-Arms raised the Mace]  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Yes Chairman Financ e 
Budget and Appropriati on Committee kindly report back . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Hon. Members for reporting the Bill 
it will enable the residents of Mombasa to continue rece iving better services from the County 
government . Mr. Speaker Sir I no w request the Bill to be read for the third time, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk?  
 
THIRD READING  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY APPRO PRIATION BILL , 2020  
 
[The Clerk read the Bill for the third time]  
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 There being no other business the House stands adjourn ed until 1st of July, 2020.  
 
The House rose at 4:30 p.m.  