March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 1st March, 2016  
The House met at 2:31p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Kindly have your seats Hon.  Members , yes Clerk  can 
you confirm whether there i s quorum.  
(Clerk confirmed lack of  quorum)  
       Yes Sergeant At A rms?  
(Sergeant At Arms rung quorum  bell for five minutes)  
(A few Hon. Members enter ed the C hamber s) 
(Clerk confirmed q uorum )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Yes, hold on, just to inform the Hon.  House that in the gallery of this H ouse one of the 
special guest s is Hon.  Owiti;  Hon.  Owiti  is actually the Deputy S peaker of Migori County  
Assembly , at the same time he is the acting Speaker for that same Count y Assembly.  
(Hon. Owiti stood and bowed ) 
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI FROM WALLS  
       Hon.  Kizito Opeya  Okoth?  
       Hon.  Opeya:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker I beg to give the Notice of M otion on the removal 
of graffiti from walls.  
 (Hon.  Kizito read  the Notice of M otion ) 
 
       AWARE THAT Mombasa is a tourist destination County , both locally and internationally;  
       FURTHER AWARE THAT; Graffiti has got several disadvantages which include usage of 
abusive words and inappropriate images in th eir graffiti;   
       CONCERN ED THAT public companies and private homeowners pay a lot of money to remove 
graffiti from buildings and other structures, several people including our tourists consider graffiti as a 
vandalism, abusive words which are painted every where can be disgusting or even offensive, as a 
result graffiti gives our County  bad image and it shows that Mombasa is not a respectable County . 
       I therefore URGE this Hon. House to put this matter into consideration and give mandate to the 
County  Inspectorate Department to arrest any person caught painting whatever anywhere, it should 
be banned completely.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  
 
STATEMENT  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Wangudi?  Not in the House .  
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Mohamed Chiro Nda nda... 
(Silence)  
        Mohamed Ndanda is not in the H ouse.  
STATEMENT  
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Allow me to just inform the H ouse that if there is any Hon.  Member  in the H ouse with 
any gadget that will produce any sound he or she will be reprimanded ; those gadgets should 
eithe r be off or any other mode that will not produce sound,  next is Hon.  Jimmy Odari . 
       Hon. (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa niaba  ya Mheshimiwa Stephen 
Wangudi  ningeomba  nitoe  taarifa  juu ya hizi soko  mbili  ambayo  moja  iko Chaani  na nyingine  
iko Changamwe.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Unfortunately you are not allowed because this was 
business number seven and we are not going to have any other direction on that matter , am 
therefore going to call upon Hon.  Jimmy Odari. Hon.  Jimmy Odari?  
(Murmurs and consultations)  
       Hon.  Mary is insisting on this business , be reminded that it is Hon.  Stephen Wangudi 
who was on business number seven,  I do not know if we have two Hon.  Stephen Wangudi’s 
in the H ouse. I want to believe this is one person  who has decided to let his chance go ; first of 
all you have to confirm to the H ouse whether  that particular  business was presented in the 
House.. . 
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
       What is it Hon.  Mwidani can you allow Hon.  Mwidani to intervene? Yes Hon.  Mwidani?  
       Hon.  Mwidani:  Mr. Speaker I think Hon.  Mary is right because it is the issue of ….but 
the o ther is concerning our markets … 
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Mwidani can you sit down, you are very right let me 
remind you and the Hon.  House that if you cannot get concern ed about your health then 
maybe we should not talk about a market,  so maybe take care of your health first….yes Hon.  
Akinyi?  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Mheshimiwa S pika….lakini  mimi  ameniambia  nije nimtolee  taarifa  
kuhusu  soko  ambazo  ziko wodi ya Chaani vile hakunipa  nafasi  ya... 
(Interruption)  
        
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Mswabah?  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I think Hon. Mary 
Akinyi is ….because we are now in business number ten we are expecting Jimmy Odari to 
give a statement .. 
(Laughter)  
       Hon.  Mary we have passed that business so I think that it is not in order,  she is taking us 
back.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well I think first of all Hon. Members , ladies and 
gentlemen it is important maybe for our future reference in this particular matter there have 
been certai n matters that you need to know;  if one Hon.  Member is not in the H ouse and they 
know there is any other business that you need  to carry out on behalf of the said Hon.  
Member , the said Hon.  Member then you have to do it before that time comes . Otherwise I 
will just make a sanction because the same Hon.  Member is not in the H ouse and t hen there is 
no other business unless you want to convince the H ouse further and the burden of proof 
matter comes from your side Hon.  Mary ; that yes you were actually nominate d by the same 
Hon.  Member to take over this that would include even presenting that statement in written 
form . So if that is mis sing Hon.  Mary , if you do not have anything written then it is not 
allowed to make this important statement on behalf of Hon.  Stephen Wangudi,  yes Hon.  
Mary?  
       Hon. (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir , since I do not want to set that precedent 
that you have said I withdraw the statement that I have just said ... 
(Laughter)  
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3        Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you so much , yes we move on to Hon.  Jimmy 
Odari?  
       Hon.  Odari : ...Something  needs to be done!  
      Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Jimmy you cannot address the H ouse from  that 
position … 
      Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon.  Speaker  for this… I'm requesting for this H ouse to be 
furnished with information about Local Authority Transfer Fund  (LATF) and Local Service 
Delivery Action Plan  (LASDA P) funds . Hon.  Speaker previously during the Municipal times , 
before the conception of the devolved system  there used to be a fund called LATF and 
LASDAP . Hon.  Speaker this fund used to play a very big role between Ksh.6M illion , and the 
effect of this fund  used to be felt in the wards . This fund was ward based and therefore the 
former Councillors  used to get money in the wards and this money was used to develop their 
projects in the ward and in the same system or in the similar system as the Constituency 
Development Fund ( CDF ) fund the head of the ward who was the Councillor who used to call 
his people to a central place like the social hall and they would sit together and prioritize their 
projects and come up with a project befitting the money that had been  allocated . Mr. Speaker 
the reason  why I ’m coming up with this ; requesting for this statement is because a vacuum 
has been created in the absence of LAFT/LASDAP . A vacuum has been created in the roads 
right now  and it’s very easy for the MCA 's to be blamed  for not being able to come up with 
projects in their respective areas because there is no  kitty for the MCA 's unlike the Members 
of P arliament  (MP's). I therefore wish to request this H ouse to be furnished with what 
became of the LAFT/ LASDAP because M embe rs of this A ssembly do not know the status of 
this fund and we are calling upo n this government and for this County  to progress unless w e 
reallocate the money to each W ard every year , to each W ard for developme nt we cannot have 
any progress.  Therefore Hon.  Speaker I’m requesting for a statement from the government to 
be told what became of the LATF/LASDAP because we cannot assume that we know what 
became of it , we  want official communication from the government and also we want 
something to be done to fill this vacuum that has cr eated a lot of problems in the W ards 
because we cannot develop our roads because  we do have the kitty like the M embers of 
National A ssembly .  
Hon.  Speaker therefore I wish to request for that statement from the government so 
that we can be able to make progress and also in the old disp ensation  there was some money 
which was pending to be spent on the projects because there was some money which was 
allocated per wards but which was never spent . While we realize that some of the project s 
have stalled up to now ; for example in Changamwe there is a market and other allocations 
which were supposed to be used like the roofing  of the old Changamwe estate which have 
stalled because of the ongoing LAFT/LASDAP projects this has caused a lot of 
disenchantment amongst my people because the assumption was that they expected with the 
coming of the County  government a lot of money would be allocated in the wards , 
unfortunately there is no money in the wards that is the reality on ground and it’s very easy 
for the MCA 's to be blamed.  Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Jimmy as much as you want your presence to be felt 
in the same context that you are putting in fact that  is very much correct that  you have just 
mentioned but you are demanding for official response from the government . You will agree 
with me that once you want something official you must be also very official in your 
communication . However you have been making a submission but before me I have not seen 
any writ ten submission on your statement so it is important that if you have it you table it , 
and if you do not have it the C hair is not going to direct that the department responds until 
such a time that you make an official statement and you are given a period o f not more than 
48 hours on that submission. Hon.  Jimmy?  
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4        Hon. Odari:  Most obliged Mr. Speaker , I promise to resubmit the statement in written 
form by tomorrow afternoon.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Ok. Yes Hon.  Hudson I hope you are not doing  some 
exercise?  
       Hon. Karume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir, I would like to make a statement that is not 
in the O rder paper but kindly allow me to do so but it’s an urgent matter.  Mr. Speaker sir with 
regards to County  education bursary for Persons Livi ng with D isabilities  (PLWD 's) I seek 
that you allow me to give this statement.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Go on Hon.  Karume.  
 
STATEMENT  
       Hon. Karume:  The realization that the forms that were given out to Hon.  Members , the 
various W ard represe ntatives and in recognition of the fact that person with disabilities 
cannot access the same;  we are receiving very many complaints from a number of them and 
myself a s their representative and the C hairman of Equal Opportunities Committee . 
       Mr. Speak er I think it is upon myself together with my colleagues like Hon.  Mary to 
lobby with the Governor together with the County  executive for E arly Education 
Development and V ocational training and as I ’m speaking for my fellow Hon.  Members I 
want to confirm t hat the County  government of Mombasa are pushing forms to my office for 
persons with disabilities . 
       Mr. Speaker Sir  that is a step in the right direction towards inclusivity and I just wanted 
to make a plea to my fellow colleagues  that in the event t hey get to meet persons who are in 
need , persons with disability of course including parents of children with disability in need of 
bursary then they refer them to my office and I will be ready to assist them.  Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : I want to say in this H ouse that is in the right direction but 
it is important also I w ant to believe each and every one of us has received the same . 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Fadhili Mwalimu. Hon.  Fadhili  Mwalimu?   
(Silence)  
Yes? Next?  
(Statement deferred ) 
MOTION  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Tom Ogalo?  
       Hon. Ogalo:  Thank you Hon.  Speaker , I would like to move the M otion on the 
inves tigative Report  on the Mombasa A pparel (EPZ) termination of workers. I beg to move. 
Thank you.  
(Question proposed ) 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now I propose that the M otion on the adoption the 
investigative Report  on the Mombasa apparel (EPZ) termination of workers be deliberated in 
this H ouse in the same terms as tabled.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
       Yes Hon.  Tom?  
       Hon. Ogalo : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba  Nyumba  hii waunge  mkono  
huu mjadala kwa sababu  Mheshimiwa Spika watu  wetu  wako  na shida  watu  wanafanya  kazi 
wanafukuzwa  na hata wale wenye  kiwanda  hawashughuliki  nao ningeomba  Nyumba  hii 
waunge mkono  huu Mswada . 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj Ahmed?  
       Hon. Faraj:  Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa fursa  hii, swala la Mo mbasa Appare l 
EPZ ambalo  kuwa kina wafanyi kazi  zaidi  2,002  ni swala  ambalo  kwamba  linatuat hiri sote 
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 sisi kama MCAs wa Mombasa Kaunti.  Mheshimiwa  Spika ukiangalia  ile mandhari  ambayo 
hawa wafanyi  kazi ni kuwa  wanatoka  katika  sehemu  zote za uwakilishi  katika  jimbo  hili la 
Mombasa na  athari ambazo  kuwa  wamekuwa  wakizipata , shida ambazo  kuwa  wamekuwa  
wakizipata  kazini  na matatizo  ya kila leo ambayo  kwamba  wao wanakumbana  nayo  katika  ile 
hali ya pishe  pishe  ya kazi zao. Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo  ambalo  kwamba  linasikitisha  
yeyote  ambaye  kwamba  ana roho za ubinadamu  na anapenda  haki na ukweli .        
Mheshimiwa  Spika watu  2,400  ukizitafsiri  zile hesabu  ni zaidi  ya 2,400  kwa sababu  ni 
familia  2,400  ambazo  kwamba  zimewekwa  kazi kwa hali ambayo  kwamba  ni ya utata  bila 
kazi na kisa na maana ni kuwa wafanyi  kazi hawa wanataka kutetea haki zao kupitia kwa 
‘union’ ambayo kwamba wao wameitengeneza ili kuangalia shida na matatizo ambayo 
kwamba yako kwao . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika Katiba kama tunavyojua ukiangalia katika  kifungu cha  ‘Bills of 
Rights’ kila mmoja ana haki kwa vile ambavyo kwamb a yeye ni mwananchi wa n chi hii huru 
ya Kenya ; walakin wafanyi  biashara wengi wakuu ambao wengi wao si wananchi wa Kenya 
wametumia kila mbinu kuhakikisha Mkenya alioko katika hali duni ya kimaisha 
amenyanyasika zaidi huku katika ile hali yakunyanyasika na ameweza kutengeneza utajiri 
zaidi kwa wale ambao kwamba wanafanya biashara zao humu nchini ambapo kwamba hii ni 
kinyume na sheria yeyote  ya kibinaadamu zil ioko nchi hii yetu ya Kenya na k imataifa.        
Mheshimiwa Spika wafanyi kazi  hao kama nilivyotangul ia hapo awali kusema wanamgusa 
kila Mheshimiwa ambaye yuko hapa lakini pia iwe hawamgusi sisi kama binadamu ni wajibu 
wetu kuweza kusimama na kutetea haki hii ambayo kwamba tunaona nchi inadhalilishwa 
kupitia kwa ubepari ambao uko na hawa matajiri ambao wa ko na hizi kampuni za EPZ katika 
Kaunti yetu. Mheshimiwa Spika mtu huyu yuko na sehemu zaidi ya tatu tofauti ya 
kuendeleza biashara zake kwa sababu ya kuwakandamiza wale ambao wanapigania haki zao 
kupitia kwa ‘union’ ; amehakikisha ile kampuni ambay o iliopo pale ameifunga halafu 
anafanya kazi usiku kwa siri kutekeleza yale mambo yote kulingana na utafiti ambao 
kwamba umefanywa kupitia kwa ripoti ya Mwenyekiti wetu Mheshimiwa Tom Ogalo 
pamoja na wanakamati wake . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hii n i mbinu wazi kuonyesha huyu Bwana hana haja ya 
kusikizana na sisi kwa sababu  tulimuita mpaka hapa kupitia kwa Kamati yetu ya Leba kuja 
kumhoji yeye pamoja na wafanyi kazi  na wao lakini haki ilifichuka wazi ya kuwa wao 
hawana haja ya  kuwasaidia watu wetu ba li wamekuja kuwanyanyasa na kuwakandamiza kwa 
kutajirika wao. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba hii ripoti ama Mswada ambao 
umeletwa wa kuweza kupitisha ripoti kwa niaba ya wale ambao wananyanyasika mashinani .        
Mheshimiwa Spika, kwa niaba ya zil e familia 2,400 ambazo kwamba hivi sasa hazijielewi 
kimaisha zimeathirika ambazo kwamba ziko na watoto wanaokwenda shule na zina watoto 
ambao wanahitajia lishe ya kila siku naomba Nyumba hii iunge mkono na tuje na mbinu 
mwafaka ya kuweza kuhakikisha kampun i ambayo kwamba itafunguliwa katika jiji la 
Mombasa yeyote na kwa sababu ni lazima watahitajia leseni kutoka kwetu mwanzo 
zikaguliwe vilivyo ziweze kuangaliwa zilivyo kabla hazijapatiwa ile nafasi . Ama kweli 
twataka wajasiria mali yaani ‘investors’  waje ka tika hili jiji letu la Mombasa kwa sababu hii 
nafasi itakuwa ya kuwafungulia wale ndugu zetu ajira lakini isiwe sababu ya kuwafungulia 
watu mahali ambapo watakuwa wanaathirika kimaisha wanadhalilika kimawazo Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Kwa haya machache , Mheshimiwa S pika nimesimama kuunga mkono vikali. A hsante .  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Siminyu Patrick . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity, I was part of the 
Committee ; in fact am a M ember of that Committee during th e proceeding s of that meeting 
we saw that Kenyans are suffering in the hands of investors. Mr. Speaker yes we want people 
to invest in our County  but we don't want those who come to hurt our people and treat our 
people in such an act that human rights are violated. Mr. Speaker , imagine some of the EPZ 
restricts the number of times you are going to the toilet ; that is unacceptable , the labour  
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 offices are reluctant to act on issues pertaining to l abour laws and where justice is denied to 
workers that are belo nging to Mombasa County  it is unfortunately the labour  which  is not 
involved into County  matters . Mr. Speaker some things are need ed to be looked even the law ; 
Members of the national g overnment should work hard and see the labour laws are revisited 
so tha t they can suit our people.  We have not seen labour laws that are pertaining to this 
function because they are not under County  but under n ational government , so these laws 
need to be looked into so that we can know what our people are going to be subjecte d to and  
if it is a rule to no communication nor going to the toilet we have to know and even the 
Member s of National Assembly. Mr. Speaker if we adopt this Report  because of the good 
recommendation that have been brought by this Committee and if you look at the Report  
itself it recommend s that frequent visit to these companies because even in those factories 
people are suffering up to today under th ese companies , I would like to beg this House to 
adopt this Report  so that we can see justice to our people. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well just before you continue from there ladies and 
gentlemen I would like to get more information from this business because if we look at that 
Report  we see certain contradiction s from this ; (i) the issue that was raised by the workers 
themselves and  i see a letter that was written by the Chief Company concerning those 
particula r issues.  I need to get it clear and who is going to inform this Hon.  House by saying i 
was in that said Committee and  there's a letter of some individuals where the contract was 
terminated that  is what we want to get , so Hon.  Mswabah , yes... 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah  Rashid ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi 
nimesimama kwa kuunga mkono ripoti hii , nafikiri h ii ripoti imetengenezwa vizuri sana na 
imeonyesha manyanyaso ambao wafanyi kazi  wetu hawa wanapata na tuliwahi kuwa na hawa 
wafanyi kazi .  
       Mheshimiwa Spika hawa wafanyi  kazi wetu wa hii kampuni wameachishwa kazi kwa 
sababu ya kuingia katika chama ch a kuwatetea yaani ‘union’  na chama  ni haki yao ya 
kimsingi kwenye sheria za Kenya zinasema mfanyikazi yeyote anaweza akajiunga na chama 
chochote kile ama ‘union’ yeyote ile.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika hawa hawakuingia katika ‘union’ hiyo ama chama kile cha wafanyi 
kazi kwa kupenda tu lakini kuna matatizo mengi sana ambayo wanayakumba ndio maana 
wakajiingiza kwa ‘union’ ile.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika wafanyi kazi  wetu hawa wa EPZ wanafanya kazi sana kwa masaa 
marefu, wanafanya kazi zaidi ya masaa manane ambayo ni kinyume cha sheria ya nchi hii . 
       Kufanya kazi kwao kwa masaa me ngi yanaleta matatizo mengi sana katika jamii mpaka 
wengine Mheshimiwa Spika unasikia wakisema ndoa zao zinaharibika kwa sababu akifika 
nyumbani anakuwa amechoka hawezi kabisa kutenda kitendo cha ndoa , kwa hiyo unakuta 
ndoa zao nyingi zimeharibika kwa sababu wanafanya kazi masaa marefu na malipo ni duni ...  
(Applause ) 
       Hawawezi hata kutengeneza watoto kwa sababu ya masaa hayo hayo marefu ya kufanya 
kazi hawawezi hata kushughulikia  familia zao zimekuwa duni kwa sababu wanafanya kazi 
kwa masaa marefu na pia wakifika nyumbani huwa wamechoka zaidi. Mheshimiwa Spika pia 
vile vile sababu ya kujiunga ‘union’ mshahara ni mdogo na hawana hata nafasi ya kufanya 
kijibiashara kidogo ka ma wengine tunavyofanya ama wengine wanavyofanya lakini wao 
hawana hata nafasi ya kwenda masomoni na hawana hata nafasi hata ya kuweka kijibanda 
kidogo cha kuuza mboga kwa sababu hawana pesa, pesa zao ni kidogo na vile vile mtaji wao 
ni kidogo. Mheshimiwa Spika pia kinachowafanya waingie katika ‘union’ hiyo ni mazingira 
wanayofanyia kazi ni mabaya wengi wao wanashikwa na  kifua kikuu yaani  ‘TB’, wengi wao 
wana maradhi ambayo hayawezi kupona kwa sababu ya kutafuta unga wao wa kila siku.         
Mheshim iwa Spika wafanyi kazi  hawa wana haki na wana kila hali ya kuingia katika hii 
‘union’ ili waweze kutetea maslahi yao. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga mkono ripoti hii 
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 mia fil mia na ningeomba pia wenzangu tuipitishe kwa pamoja ripoti hii ili haki iwez e 
kutendeka kwa wafanyi kazi  hawa Mheshimiwa Spika. A hsante sana . 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Jimmy Odari .  
       Hon. Odari : Thank you very much Hon.  Speaker, I would to thank the Committee on 
Labour for coming up with a good Report  for our b rothers and sisters from the EPZ. The 
issue of EPZ is a big problem which comes from both sides at the National and County  level 
so we should come up with the lasting solutions. Mr. Speaker EPZ staff really suffer ; as in 
the case of Mombasa  Apparel EPZ it has more than 2 ,000 workers  who have suffered enough 
in the last two months because every morning they have to Report  to work and spend their 
day inside the gate of their employer. Mr. Speaker I would like to give a brief genesis of  what 
happens previously in the EPZ  which  does not happen anymore but due to the violation of the 
basic human rights which include denial of maternity leave, denial of overtime after working 
for long hours and many other grievances . They decided to look for salvation by joining 
union s and this is where the problem started because when the employer realised that the 
workers join ed a union the y terminated the contract of the workers which we looked at some 
provision s of some laws and we saw that their contract should continue automatically but in 
this case it came like a surprise to the workers because there was no notice of the termination 
to the workers.  
       Mr. Speaker these workers are of the view that they should be reinstated in their 
employme nt or they are given their dues which include their salaries of working hours and 
we conducted several meetings with the employers and the committee , and  the employers of 
this Mombasa Apparel are so arrogant in the extent that they say in Kenya so long as you 
have money you can do anything.  They told us that we have decided not to employ them and 
you cannot take us anywhere, Hon.  Speaker as a government we should not let that to happen 
as an independent country like Kenya we need to see that role and  labour rules are followed 
by everyone whether you have money or not. Mr. Speaker these employers have cease d to 
follow the rules of this country, they don't respect any labour law but the National 
government has been reluctant to address the pligh t of the EPZ workers. Mr. Speaker we as 
the County  government n eed to come up forcefully and flex our muscles as much as labour is 
not a devolved function but these are our people who are suffering and we cannot just sit 
while our people cannot eve n put food on the table , so Mr. Speaker we should help these 
people as they are really suffering we need to do  something to help these people.  We as the 
County  government Mr. Speaker we have the power s to force these people, the em ployers to 
abide w ith these law,  we are the one s who issues work permit there and so we cannot say we 
are not helpless , in fact  they are not following the law we need to revoke their permit . 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Kizito Opeya . 
       Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker I just want to focus on some of contribution s 
which were raised about this Report ; we should look at part 4  on the committee observations , 
(b) That there is an urgent need to find a sustainable solution to the frequent employer -
employee co nflicts experienced in the EPZ factories as this is not the first time that such a 
stalemate has arisen.  Already there are various court cases on such cases in the local courts 
but when we go to the conclusion page 8 which talks about the current ca se whereby we had 
already said the matter is in front of the court, i would like the conclusion to give us the way 
forward of the affected workers and one long lasting solution. I would like to support the 
Report  and thank you very much Mr. Speaker . 
(Interruption)  
       Hon. Speaker (Mr. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Saad Ahmed Faraj . 
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker Sir i stand on a point of information ; from the engagement 
from the l egal the only solution from what Hon.  Kizito is coming up with is part of 
resolutions so i stood up to inform my brother on that information. Thank you so much . 
       
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8        Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, naendelea kuunga mkono ripoti hii 
ambayo imeletwa na Kamati yan gu. Mheshimiwa Spi ka hawa wafanyi kazi  wa Kampuni ya 
Mombasa Apparel EPZ tumekaa na tumekuwa nao na tumejadiliana mambo mengi sana.       
Mheshimiwa Spika mambo ambayo yanajitokeza katika mambo haya yote toka tuanze 
kukutana na hawa watu ni kuwa hawa Wac hina ama wawekezaji hawaheshimu Katiba yetu 
ya Kenya, hawaheshimu sheria za wafanyi kazi  ndiposa walishaenda kortini mara ya kwanza 
wakiwa wamezuilia hawa wafanyi kazi  wasiandamane na korti ikapitisha kuwa inawakubalia 
kuwa waweze kuandamana . Mheshi miwa Spika mambo haya yanajitokeza kila wakati kwa 
sababu hawa wawekezaji wamepawa muda wa miaka kumi ambao huwa hawalipi chochote 
sasa huwa wanaona kama wanaelekea ile miaka kumi wanaleta matatizo ili waweze kuhama 
ili waweze kuanza miaka mengine kumi yal e ambayo wanapewa bila kulipa. Mheshimiwa 
Spika tulipokuwa tumewaita hawa wawekezaji katika Kamati hii ya Wafanyi kazi  tulipowaita 
kwa hii Kamati mara ya kwanza walikataa kuja, tukawaita mara ya pili hawakuja mpaka 
mara ya tatu tu lipotoa ukali kwel i ndio wakaja.  Mheshimiwa Spika tulipokuwa na hawa 
wawekezaji tulikubaliana kuwa watuletee yale makaratasi ama stakabadhi za  mkataba yaani  
‘contract’ ile ambayo waliweka sahihi na makubaliano, na mpaka leo hii hatujaona hizo 
stakabadhi za makubalian o ya hawa wawekezaji ya  kuwa walikubaliana na kuwa 
waliwasimamisha hawa wafanyi kazi  kutokana na sheria ambazo walizopanga.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika pale tunapoelekea ningeomba Jumba hili tuweze kuchukulia jambo 
hili kwa haraka haraka kwa sababu jambo la h awa wafanyi kazi  kusimamishwa kukosa 
kufanya kazi hata watu wengine pia wanaumia wale ambao wanafanya biashara zao pale 
ambao wanawauzia chakula au wale ambao wanawabeba katika boda boda pia .        
Mheshimiwa Spika jambo hili tusipolichukulia kwa haraka n aona kama shida itaweza kuingia 
katika hii Kaunti yetu kwa sababu watu wanaposimamishwa watu 2400 wamesimamishwa 
kazi hiyo ni kumaanisha watu 2 ,400 ukienda hata mara tano ni watu wengi sana katika hii 
Mombasa yetu hawana kazi. Mheshimiwa S pika kusi mamishwa hata kwa hawa wafanyi kazi  
kumefanya hata saa hizi kuna matanga maana mmoja wao ame aga dunia kwa sababu ya 
kupatwa na mshtuko wa moyo  pindi alipoachishwa kazi na hakuwa na mahali pa  kuishi , hata 
saa hii mwili wake uko katika chumba cha kuhifadhia maiti.  
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika jambo hili mimi ningeomba Nyumba hii kwa sababu sisi 
ndio tunapeana stakabadhi  kwa hawa watu ambao wanafanya kazi kwa sababu tuliwaambia 
kuwa hizi vitengo  wako na vitengo vi tatu na katika hizi vitengo vi tatu tuliw aambia kuwa 
tunataka kuona stakabadhi ama vibali vya kuwawezesha kufanya kazi tuone kama wana 
vibali vitatu lakini mpaka leo pia hawajatuletea hivyo vibali ambavyo vinaonyesha kuwa 
wanafanya kazi kwa hizo  vitengo  zote tatu , kumaanisha  wana kibali kimoja l akini wanafanya 
nacho kazi katika kampuni tatu . Mheshimiwa Spika  kisha hawa watu ambao ni wawekezaji 
katika Kaunti yetu wametuekea mpaka dharau hawaja  tuheshimu tuko  katika nchi yetu lakini 
wao hivyo hivyo hawaja  tuheshimu hivyo , tuko na nguvu za ku weza hata kama ni kufunga 
hizo kampuni mpaka watu wote wakose wao wakose kampuni zao kufanya biashara na pia 
hata kama watu wetu watakuwa wamekosa kazi lakini wao pia wakose pesa za hizo kampuni 
zao ambazo zinatokana na hizo biashara. A hsante sana Mheshimi wa Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar . 
       Hon. Ebrahim Omar:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa k unipa fursa na mimi 
kuweza kuchangia mswada huu ; mimi nimesimama pia kuunga mkono hii ripoti iliyoletwa na 
Mwenyekiti wet u Tom Ogalo. Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kusikitisha sana kuona 
kwamba katiba yetu ya Kenya hawa wafanyi biashara wanaidharau . Kama walivyotangulia 
waheshimiwa wenzangu kueleza kwamba takriban familia elfu mbili na mia nne watu wao 
wamekosa  ajira pale kwa kusimamishwa na hiyo yaon yesha hiyo idadi  ni kubwa kwa sababu 
pale iwe wewe ni mw anamme ama mwanamke anafanya kaz i lakini mwanamke yule yuko na 
bwana ana watoto . Bwana Spika  tukiweka hesabu yote itakuwa ni familia nyingi sana 
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 zinaumi a na jambo lile ambalo wafanyi kazi  wamejaribu kupata haki zao za kikatiba lakini 
wafan ya biashara wanawanyima haki zao . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika sisi kama wabunge wa Kaunti ya Mombasa  lazima tuangalie ni njia 
ipi tutatumia tuokoe haki za hawa wananchi wet u kwa s ababu tun ajua ukosaji wa ajira 
unarudisha sana uchumi wetu nyuma na ndipo hapo utas ikia vijana wame enda vichochoroni 
kuanza ukosefu wa usalama , vile vile lazima tujue familia zile wale wako na watoto 
wanawategemea wako na familia vile  vile. Bwana Spika sisi kama wabunge wa Mombasa 
hatuna budi tuliangalie hili jambo , matajiri wale tuwa weke ch ini, mimi naona zile stakabadhi  
wanazotumia kufanya biashara  yao tuzis imamishe mpaka pale watakapopata sheria ya katiba 
yetu. Ningeomba utupe mwele keo na pia stakabadhi  isimamishwe mpaka pale 
watakapokubaliana kuf uata katiba na kuwapa wafanyi kazi  sheria zinazofaa. Kwa hayo 
machache , Bwana Spika  ahsante.  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Caroline . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mheshimiwa  Spika naomba twende kwa ‘findings’, hapo kwa 
‘findings’ twende mpaka nambari ya tano, tayari inatuon yesha kuwa ile ‘union’ ambayo 
wafanyi kazi  wako nayo tayari wamekuwa wafisadi;  hawakuwa wanafanya kazi yao 
kulingana na sheria inavyotakiwa Bwana Spika . Tukienda katika ‘Commit tee Obeservations ’ 
‘c’, Mheshimiwa Spika tayari inaonekana kuna shida , na mjasiria mali  ‘investor’ wa EPZ 
kulingan a na vile tunavyoona hii ripoti.  Nikimalizia kwa ‘conclusion paragraph ’ 2, 
inatuon yesha hakukuwa na ‘breach  of co ntract’ wakati mfanya kazi  anakubaliwa ni mpaka 
kuwe na ‘contract’, hii inaonyesha ni kampuni ambayo haiko kisheria . 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Paul Onje . 
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ku nipa nafasi, nimesimama hapa 
nikiu nga mkono na mimi ni mwanachama  wa kamati ya Leba.  Sisi tulienda huko na hawa 
watu wa EPZ walikuwa wanalalamika kwa kazi yao na tulipofika pale Mheshimiwa Spika 
yale manen o ambayo tulipata kule yalikuwa ya kushangaza na ni maneno ambayo hata 
kibinad amu haifai kwa sababu ikiwa wewe ni t ajiri una kiwanda yako unachuku a majina 
unaweka kwa ‘system’ unasema haw a hawatakikani kwa hiyo  wakienda hata kutafuta ka zi 
sehemu nyengine unakuta wakitoa kitambulisho majina yakiwekwa kwa ‘system’ inaon yesha 
hawa ni w ale w alikuwa kule kwa hivyo hata ka zi wananyimwa na ka zi iko ambapo sheria ya 
Kenya hairuhusu, na vile  vile unapata dharau nyengine ambayo wako nayo wanasema 
kwamba wameingiza serikali mfukoni wanamanaisha kwamba wanaweza kulisha donge nono 
kwa ofisi za se rikali. Hivyo ndio maneno yanatoka kwao, inatakikana sisi tutafute haki za 
watu w etu na ndio maana tuko hapa leo Mheshimiwa  Spika na inafaa kuwa onyesha hawa 
kwamba sisi tulichagu liwa ili tuweze kutetea watu wetu na iwapo huyu tajiri ambae 
anasim amia EPZ a meshindwa kufanya ka zi yake basi ni afunge kampuni na aeleze vile 
ataendesh a hiyo  kampuni maana najua kuna watu wengi ambao wanataka waendeshe 
shughuli kama hii.  Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kusikitisha ukifika unas ikia wanat aja 
mpaka Raisi wa Kaunt i, mimi yangu ni kwamba bila kupoteza wakati hawa wanatakikana 
tuwakazie kamba na ikiwezekana wapate barua ya kisawasawa wasimamishwe mpaka hii 
maneno itatuliwe jinsi inavyotakikana kwa sababu sisi kama serikali ya Mombasa tuna vifaa 
kila aina, tuna  maaska ri kama ni matinga  tinga tunayo tuende pale tufunge hii kampuni na 
hata pia kuwashika  wale kisheria ili tuweze kuwaleta mbele na watuambie wanataka nini ili 
kazi ya wale watu wetu ipatikane, na tukion yesha mfano mzuri na hawa watu  wa EPZ hakika 
hakutakuwa na mtu mmoja Mombasa  atakae  weza kunyany asa wananchi wetu, hiyo ndio 
mfano B wana Spika.  
       Tulikuwa huko na kuna mikutano kadha wa  kadha tulifanya nao, ikiwa hawa watu 
wanakuja hapa kwetu kufanya kazi lazima watuheshimu hata kama tuko vipi kwa sababu 
nyumbani ni nyum bani, hawa watu  wetu wameenda kuomba kazi na wanataka  haki zao, 
lakini ikiwa kandarasi  za siku hizi unaenda nyumbani  unarudi umefutwa kazi , huna wakati 
wa kukaa chini na mwenye kazi na muandikiane mkataba  kwamba nitapata hii na hii, saa 
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 ngapi na wakati wewe uko na njaa yako na ni kibarua unaingia unafanya unalipwa kitu  na 
pale kuna wenye wamefanya kazi miaka kumi na kuna sheria ambayo inasema huyo mtu 
anafaa aandikwe kama mfanyikazi wa kudumu, chama  inatetea tu wafanya kazi  kama wako 
na shid a moja, kwa hivyo lazima tuangalie  hayo maneno Mheshimiwa  Spika i li watu wetu 
waweze kusaidika, ah sante Bwana Spika .  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Ibrahim  Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Bwana Spika, mimi pia nimesimama kuunga mkono 
mswada ulioletwa kwa N yumba hii ambap o Bwana Spika wakati wa ukoloni umepitwa na 
wakati, tetesi zinazokumbwa kwenye  kazi haswa katika nyumba  za EPZ sio tetesi nzuri 
kabisa kulingana na sheria ya kazi . Mheshimiwa Spika swala hili nataka kupitia kwa kit i 
chako liwe funzo na liwe mfano kwa mashirika mengine ambayo ina tabia ya kunyanyapaa 
wafanya  kazi, ukiangalia yale yote ambayo wanalalamika  ni mambo ambayo kisheria 
hayaruhusiwi wala kikatiba katika nchi yetu ya Kenya hairuhusiwi.  Kila mfanya  kazi ana 
haki ya kujiunga na chama anachotaka  na itakuwa yas ikitisha ikiwa mfanya  kazi atataka 
kujiunga na chama alafu chama kile  kile kinachoiong oza kupitia amri ya ko rti inaanza 
kubagua baadhi ya makampuni, wengi w a hawa walioko kwa kazi ni wapan gaji wetu , ni 
ndugu zetu na wengine ni watoto wetu.  Kwa hivyo mimi ningeliomba kupitia kwako kutoke 
uamuzi wa haraka iwezekanavyo,  ikiwa mtu mmoja anaweza kuwa na stakabadhi ya kumiliki 
kampuni tatu na ni cheti kimoja anachotumia hiyo ni kwenda kinyume  na sheria ya Kaunti  
kwa sababu sisi wenyewe tunapoteza ushuru kupitia uwekezaji kama huo na ikiwa mwekezaji 
kama huyo ameshindwa Mheshimiwa Spika ningelipenda N yumba hii ichuku e uamuzi wa 
haraka ili hatua hii itatuliwe, kw a hayo machache a hsante B wana Spika . 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well ladies and gentlemen clause five of this Report  
paragraph 3 on the third line reads as follows;  “Since the matter already is in court the 
Assembly will now work hand in hand  with the lawyer on record on the dismissed wor kers, 
Mr. Abubakar Yusuf. This will be through application to officially join the matter as a friend 
of the court ’. Ladies and gentlemen it ’s important  that I put very clear before you that that 
particular statement is actually referring  to this Hon . Hous e to Standing order 85 of this Hon. 
House, and that S tanding order has so many paragraphs one of Standing order 85 reads;  
85. 1. Subject to paragraph 5, no M ember shall refer to any particular matter which is sub  
judice or which by operation of any written  law is secret.  
2. A matter shall be considered to be sub  judice when it refers to active criminal or civil 
proceedings and the discussion of such matter is likely to prejudice it ’s fair determination.  
       Ladies and gentlemen that aspect has been broug ht to your attention that the matter that 
we are discussing in this particular Report  is already in court and we should not discuss ; 
however ladies and gentlemen  if you move to paragraph four of S tanding order 85  reads;  
85. 4. A M ember alleging that a matt er is sub  judice shall provide evidence to show that 
paragraphs 2 and 3 are applicable. Ladies and gentlemen this particular Report  here has 
failed and thanks for the contributions by one Hon. Kizito Opeya that this particular Report  
has not broug ht to us by giving evidence that we must not discuss it as the matter is in court.  
It is very much in  order for this  House to determine this matter  that is what I wanted to 
highlight ; the second observation that I want to put across is that ladies and gent lemen the 
matter before us is not a simple matter  because one of the reason s why you were elected and 
nominated to be here is to do representation, you are not representing nothing you are 
representing the public, and that's why it is quite unfortunate an d I must say that at a time like 
this that we are supposed to make an important ruli ng so many seats are empty and t hank you 
so much Hon. Jimmy Odari and you have been on this matter for a long time, so this itself 
shows me how serious you  are with this pa rticular issue.  
       Ladies and gentlemen if someone is screaming for help  then we cannot afford to sleep , 
what of 2 ,400 members out there , it is very unfortunate that we are going to make a history as 
a government of Mombasa that within a period of thre e months close to 11,000 have been 
March 1, 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         25 
DISCLAIMER: The ele ctronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 rendered jobless , not long ago the CFS were closed for reason s not clearly stated , 8,000  of 
individuals went home, we are talking about 2 ,400 who are jobless , you want to convince 
each and every person out there that yes you are the government, government will only be 
called an active government if you can die with your people on a general co urse, and allow 
the C hair to remind this Hon. House not long ago in history of Africa there is only one boy 
who cried and said if I d o not get  employed today i don’t  deserve to live, unfortunately that 
particular boy did not get employed and to make it even more worse that boy died . 
       You will agree with me that that is what begun to be devolution in some of the countries  
in Afric a, one life did not get employed then the whole nation stood up and said this 
government must go so that we can create opportunities for our sons, if one person can make 
the whole government go home what do you think 2 ,400 can do.  I’m calling upon this Hon . 
House that we must get out  of our comfort zones and be with our people  let us make sure that 
we de fend them until the last minute.  Ladies and gentlemen we must differentiate between 
talking and acting, we must say what  we want to say and we must do what we must do , there 
is no shortcut in life, and i know this is a very hard position but we must go that direction and 
allow me to remind us so many comments have been made that so and so is powerful we 
have the government in our pockets . I want to say th at if you have the constitution Article 1 is 
very clear , it talks about the sovereignty of the people, and power  belongs to the people of 
Kenya and shall be exercised only on accordance to this Constitution.  Ladies and gentlemen 
I want to emphas ise that there is no other single individual who is more important and 
powerful than the people of the republic of Kenya and the only thing that we need to do is to 
involve the affected individuals in this clauses and i want to assure you that if you invol ve the 
people you will win this, bu t this is not a mater to let go, a nd if we don't do that we will be 
judged harshly, ladies and gentlemen allow me to read something on Article 41 of the 
Constitution  about labour .  
41. 1. Every person has the right to fai r labour practices . 
       The content of this Report  has it that nothing wrong has bee n done by these  particular 
individuals that have been affected , ladies and gentlemen this Report  41. 2 reads as  follows;  
41. 2 
       Every worker has the right  
a) To fair remuneration  
b) To reasonable working conditions  
c) To form join or participate in activities and programs of a trade union and  
d) To go on strike  
       Now if all that has bee n done according to this Report  is within the law what is wrong by 
making sure that jus tice is done, and because there are many issues tha t we need to discuss 
more on these  issue ladies and gentlemen the most prudent thing that the Chair can do is that 
this particular matter is not going to be put into question because that again will close some 
matters that are supposed to be discussed , but from the time we are going to say i want  more 
action taken on this particular matter , it is very wrong for us  because that is what even 
Chapter  6  does not allow and will never invest that the government  has been compromised 
and when we say the government has been compromised there is no difference b etween 
County  executive and legislative arm for this government, when a government has been 
compromised even you as a Hon. Member who is s eated here have been  compromised , and 
therefore you must stand firm and get out and defend your position a s an Hon. M ember, 
otherwise as it is this particular matter is referred unt il such a time that the House  Business 
Comm ittee will determine, thank you .  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen this House stands adjourned until tomorrow Wednesday at exactly 
9:30a.m.  
The House rose at  4:01p.m. 