Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 29th March , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Twenty Fifth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  2:24p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Abdulrahman Abdulkadi r): Please , you may take your  
seat. 
[Silence] 
Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT S 
FIRE OUTBREAK IN KONGOWEA MARKET  
 
Yes, Honourable  Samuel Mwaura MCA Kongowea Ward, please give your Statement.  
Honourable  Katana , please take  your seat. Proceed.  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I rise to seek a stat ement from  the Chair of 
Transpor t, concerning the fire outbreak s in Kongowea and all over Mombasa.  Hono urable 
Speaker, pursuant  to Standing Order 41 (2) (c), I wish  to request for a statement from the 
Chairperson, Committee on Transport and Infrastructure o n whether he is aware that Mo mbas a 
Fire Department has only two fully functioning fire trucks, one in Likoni and another at the main 
station in the C entral Busines s District (CBD) . Both of these  fire trucks although functional, are 
in bad shape in terms of service and that they are  not insured.  Hono urable Speak er, I want to 
commend the Mombasa Fire Department that although they have only two functioning fire 
trucks,  they were able to respond in time together with other well -wishers to the fire outbreaks in 
Kongowea Market on 1st Dece mber,  2022 and 31st January, 2 023. I also want in a special way to 
thank J. Cobra Water Bowser, Zakil Foundation, Crown Petroleum Water Bowser and the Kenya 
Ports Auth ority.  Hono urable Speaker, the residents of Mombasa have been left to the mercy of 
well-wishers despite the fact that  they are paying the fire brigade levies together with the Single 
Business Licenses.  Hono urable  Speaker, wit h the prevalence of fire outbrea ks in the County, 
especially at Kongowea Market which has experienced fire outbr eaks frequ ently, a fully  
equipped Fire department is vital in saving lives and properties.  Hono urable Speakers, in the 
statement, the Chairperso n should inquire into and report on:  
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 1. How many fire trucks does the Momb asa Fire Department have  and how many of 
those tru cks are operational ; 
 
2. How many fire trucks are not operational, and what is the reason behind the non -
operation ; 
 
3. How long will it  take the County government  to ensure that all the Fire Trucks are 
fully functioning and that they are all insured ; 
 
4. What plans d oes the County government have  to ensure that Sub -County Fire 
Stations are reinstated and when do we expect to have them back ; 
 
5. Can the County government consider allo cating one fire truck to Kongowea 
Market due to the frequent fire outbreaks . 
 
Thank you, M r. Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): I believe that statement is 
directed to the  Chairperson on the  Committee of  Transport and infrastruct ure Honourable  Hassan 
Mohamed . I don’t think he is in  and I also  cannot see his vi ce, however I can see a Member of 
the Committee ; who i s willing to respond to that statement ? Please proceed Hon ourable  Manuari.  
Hon. Juma  Manuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika Statement ya ndugu yangu Bwana 
Mwaura tutaikalia chini kama Kamati kwa hivyo atupe muda halafu t utamletea jibu.  Ahsante . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Mwaura?  
Hon. Mwaura:  Ahsante Mh eshimiwa Spika . Ni kweli am eomba muda lakini hii statement  
imekuja mara kadhaa ikirudi kwa sababu hawajakuwepo ili kuipokea na sasa kwa  sababu 
wamekuwepo ili kuipokea kuna umuhi mu w a yeye kusema ni muda gani wanahitaji kupewa ili 
aweze  kujibu . Kwa sababu h ili ni janga  ambalo Mombasa nzima inaath irika nalo na ni  janga 
ambalo tuna umuhimu kuhakikisha tumeliangamiza . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika n ingeomba 
tu aweze kutupatia ule muda ana hitaji kupewa ama ni  lini tunatazamia kupata majibu . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Honourable  
Manuari ...Yes Deputy Speaker, please make your contribution? Ar e you on a point of Order ?! 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika h ili swali aliloleta Mhes himiwa Mwaura ni swal i ambalo linatakikana lichuku liwe kwa 
uzito mkubwa maana kwa kusema ukweli tunat aka tujue wako na magari mangapi na yako kama 
yanafanya kazi . Kwa sababu hivi tunavyo tuzungumza Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa k watokea ja nga 
lolote na hali Mheshimiwa anasema w ataketi na Kamati yake halafu wafik irie watatulet ea. 
Mheshimiwa Spika tutakuwa hatute ndei haki wananchi wetu wa Momba sa tungeomba hata kama 
inawezekana wangekaa leo usiku wakatupatia kama tungekuwa tuna  kikao leo usik u, wangetupa 
majibu leo leo usiku , lakin i vile kuwa hatuna kikao cha leo tungeomba kupitia Kiti chako 
wapatie muda ambao utakuwa si muda mre fu sana watupe  haya majibu ili wananchi wetu wawe  
tutakuwa tunawatendea h aki maana si sawa kuwa tutaketi bi la kujua na hali hatujui majanga 
yanaweza  tokea wakati wowote tukijua k uwa pia huu ni msimu wa mvua majanga huwa  
yanatok ea sana katika misimu hii . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, I have heard you, 
Deputy Speake r. Yes, Honourable  Ogutu , are you on a point of order?  
[Hon. Ogutu off m icrophone ] 
You are a Member of Transpor t Committee? Okay please proceed?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika natumai Ripoti  yoyote ambayo inaletwa hapa iwe 
detail ed kwa hivyo tunaomba tupewe mud a wa kutosha ili tukija hapa na Ripoti  iwe imebeb a 
kila detail  ambayo  Mheshimiwa ameomba . Kwa hivyo tunaomba wiki tatu kwa sababu 
Mheshimiwa Spika tumefunga na saumu ni kali na tutaw eza sema pia ma  Chief officers  hawako 
kwa sa sa tunangoja wapawe nafasi Ripoti ziletwe hapa Bungeni . Kwa hivyo wiki tatu itakuwa 
sawa kabisa Mhesh imiwa Spika . Ahsante.  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Okay are you guys up on any 
point of order ?  
[Hon. Mbelle off microphon e] 
Point of information? Who would you want to inform?   
[Hon. Mbelle off mic rophone ] 
The House? Please proceed . 
Hon. Mbelle : Mheshimiwa Spika, ndugu yetu Mheshimiwa  Bernard Ogutu naf ikiri 
tutampatia jina lake jipya Ismael kwa  sababu amesema amefunga  ametuambia kwamba Wizara  
yao hawana Chief off icer lakini tunavyo  ongea tunae Chief Officer  who can resp ond to these 
matters . So, I like him to clarify what he meant that they do  not have a Chief officer of this 
department and probably when respondin g they shou ld tell us do they have a policy or an Act 
that really talks into the matter to whatever that has bee n prese nted today . Because we truly do 
not have  and if I’m wrong,  they will tell me . But they do not even have a policy that  they can 
refer  to on matt ers of fire outbreak s or anything else c omes w ith any disasters in this County . 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
The Tem porary  Speaker (Hon . Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Amriya Juma, 
are you on a  point of order? You are informing the House again , the Chair an d the  House 
Committee at  large ? Okay proceed.  
Hon. Amr iya Juma : Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker for according me this opp ortunity 
and I want to inform the House  that this statement is very straight forward and this statement  the 
Committee  should  not take it lightly  or co smetic and that it only takes eve n few minutes to  
confirm th ese answers . As Hon ourable  Speaker because there are struc tures and the re are the 
yard managers that can respond to this statement  and are very straight forward . How many trucks 
are available , how many are operatio nal, how many ar e to be serviced , this one that the Membe rs 
can just establish through the phone  call. So, they do  not need three weeks as they purport  to 
send cognizant to the fact that the House is known to be going for re cess in few days and th is is 
important matters t hat we are going to be handli ng at the grassroot level, so seeking three  weeks 
Mr. Speaker  in my view three  weeks is not practical for the Committee.  Thank you.  
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Members , take a seat I am 
making a rulin g on that matter. Honourable  Member s, this statement was first brought to the 
House on 7th of March and I be lieve the Committee  has had sufficient time to go through this 
statement if  at all  there are serious about t hat matter . However , I understan d you ha ve been 
preoc cupied by the vetting  of the Chief O fficers  notw ithstanding  the gravity of this matter , I rule 
that t he Committee furnis hes a full report to this House  next week on Wednesday. There  is no 
vacuum of office, I am sure there  are Directors,  person nel who will pr ovide you with sufficient 
information regarding this st atement , so Members of the Committee please in form your Chair to 
take this matter seriously. Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT S 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATION HONOURABLE KIBWANA SWALEH ON THE SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL DEVELOPMENT 
PLAN  (ADP), COUNTY INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PLAN (CIDP)AND COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY 
PAPER (CFSP) TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Honourable  Kibwana is not in , anyone sta nding in for him?  Honourable  Fadhili Mwalimu 
please respo nd to the sta tement or I can see the Vice  Chair is also there.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Honourable  Speaker , the Vice  Chair is not 
feeling so well, so she has delegated  that I respond to this statement by Hon ourable  Amriy a 
Juma . Honourable  Speaker , after the Hon ourable  Member brought a statement to t his 
Honourable  House  the Committee acted on the matt er and to the department concerned ; as you 
are aware that  the Department lacks a Chief O fficer and it was just recently that we got  the 
Executive Member for Finance . Mr. Speaker , having said so it did not delay  our work , we did 
our mandate , we sat as a Commi ttee and we wrote to the Executive Member  and th e Executive 
Member wrote a response to this H onourable  Hous e. Also Mr. Speak er after receivi ng the 
response , we also sat as a Committee  and wrote b ack to  the Executive Member of Finance and 
requested him to give us timelines as to when the matters at hand  are going to be answered 
properly . Mr. Speaker , to me I have a letter from the Executive Mem ber Mr. Evans Oanda  which 
states that the le tter w as written to the Clerk , ‘Delayed C ounty Integrated Development Plan 
(CIDP) , County Fiscal Strategy  Paper (CFSP)  and A nnual Development Plan (AD P) for the FY  
2023/2024 and the entire budget process for the FY 2023/2024  Mr. Speak er with your 
permission  I can  read the letter  but Mr. Speaker I have the letter with me...  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Hon. Fadhili.. . 
The De puty Speaker (Hon. F adhili M akarani ): Yes Mr. Speaker Sir...  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulk adir) : Is it a one-page  letter ? 
The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhil i Makarani): Mr. Speaker it is a one-page  letter of 
which if the Hon ourable  Members would like to go and read it, they can find it in the offices of 
the Clerk Mr. Speaker to save time...  
[Interruption ] 
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 The Tempora ry Sp eaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Fadhili , I think 
we have sufficient time and the Members ar e interested with the content s of that letter , so plea se 
proceed and read.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving m e this 
opportunity to r ead t he letter . Mr. Speake r, as said the Statement by Hon ourable  Amriya on the 
delayed of County In tegrated Development Plan (CIDP ), County Fiscal Strategy Paper ( CFSP)  
and A nnual Development Plan (ADP)  for FY 2023/2024 and the e ntire Budget process for the 
FY 2023/2024. The le tter was addres sed to the Clerk.  
REF: CECM /F&E/CAS/VOL.1/23 (4)  
Mr. Speaker , the letter as I said was addr essed to the Clerk of the County Assembly of 
Mombasa...  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Fadhili...  
[Interruption ] 
The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Fadh ili M akarani ): The above matter refers. As you may be 
aware  Mr. Sp eaker , the Public Finance Man agement Act, 2012 provides for specific timelines 
within which the budgeting documents should be sub mitted to the County As semblies for 
consideration . Mr. Speaker , we acknowledge that we have delayed submitting the County 
Develo pment Pl ans, Annual Developme nt Plans, the  County government Debt Management 
Strategy Paper, and County Fiscal Strategy Paper as per the set timelines  Mr. Speaker . Mr. 
Speaker , the letter also continues , this has been occasioned by delay from the National 
governme nt in releasing this y ear’s budget policy statement from which we could align the 
County Integrated Development Plan ( CIDP ) as required in law. T here was also need to align the 
County I ntegrated Development Plan (CIDP ) with the Governor’s manifesto Mr. Spe aker and  we 
develop th e said docume nts, we as the Department of Finance develop the documents of the 
Governor’s manifesto and the other documents  Mr. Speaker Sir.. . Mr. Speaker Sir, we have 
completed drafting some of the documents such as the C ounty Integrated D evelopment Plan  
(CIDP)  Mr. Speaker  it is complete d, we have completed drafti ng the County Integrated 
Development Plan (CIDP)  and ready to u ndertake Pu blic Participation Mr. Speaker it must be 
understood that we have to undergo Public Part icipation exercise  in the coming days  Mr. 
Speaker , anytime soon Mr.  Speaker ... 
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Fadhil i... 
[Inter ruption ] 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): ...We might be going for Publi c 
Participation ...  
[Interruption ] 
The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulk adir): Honourable  Fadhili , you are 
trying to delay this whole process ; well understood , however please  just stic k to the co ntent s of 
those letters do not go beyond explaining you rself. 
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Just read for us the content s and am sure the w ord Mr. Speaker Sir  is not part of the content 
so please omit that , just rea d the content s please  be advised !  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Obliged Mr. Spe aker. Mr. Speaker so 
should I start the...  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadi r):  Just start with Mr. Speaker 
and do not repeat it again .  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): I start from where I left...  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporar y Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkadir ): From the second paragraph .  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Okay . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): The s econd paragraph .  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Mr. Speaker , we have completed draft ing 
some of the documents s uch as the  County Integrated Development Plan (CIDP ) and ready to 
undertake Public Participation  exercise in the com ing days.  It is our hope that the en tire budget 
making exercise will be comp lete by the end of the current F inanc ial Year. We, therefore kind ly 
request  you bear with us as we expedite the process.  Yours Sincerely,  For, Mr. Evans Oand a, 
County Executive Commi ttee Member , Finance and Economic Pla nning ,  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker , the letter was copied to His Excel lency the Governor, the C EO 
Commissio n on Revenue Allocation , The Principal Secretary and the Controller of Budget … 
[Interruption ] 
The Temporar y Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Order! Order  and thank you ... 
[Interrup tion] 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Sir. 
 The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you  for taking your 
time. Hon ourable  Amriya?  
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speake r. Mr. Speaker as the Deputy Speaker was 
reading the letter I could not feel be ing amused by the opaqueness and frivolousness of  the letter. 
Mr. Spe aker, the request for the Statement came in on 1st of March, this is 29th of March and 
when I raised this questio n it was cognizant to the fact that there  was delay  so the question of 
delay in his response is not new  but m y question was very clear on when will the Executive 
submit  the Annual Development Plan  (ADP) , County Integrated Dev elopment Plan (CIDP) and 
the C ounty Fiscal Strategy Paper (CFSP) . But whe n I was asking this Statement,  I was cr ystal 
clear that they ha d delayed accord ing to the PFM Act, the C ounty Integrated Development Plan 
(CIDP)  elapses on 30th December, 2022 and the A nnua l Development Plan was to come  1st of 
September, 2022 according to t he PFM Act section 129, the C ounty Fiscal Strategy Paper 
(CFSP)  was supposed to  come...  
[Interruption ] 
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourab le Fadhili are 
you on a point of Order? What is the Po int of Order? Which Point of Order?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): There is no quorum Mr. S peaker .  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Fadhili , take your 
seat please . Yes proceed?  
Hon. Amriya Juma : Mr. Speaker  I wan t the House to be well guided that this is not going 
to be a cosmetic Ho use; this is a House of rules and procedu res and failing there  was one person 
saying that failing to plan is planning to fail. All these planning documents are very important 
and esse ntial as our representative an d oversight capacity so that we know what we are going to 
tell our citizen s because we are accountable an d our days  in this House  are also numbered . So we 
have no luxury of time because we have just sixty months in this House , and we wa nt to know 
what are our  priorities  for this financial year, what are our highlights  and w hat is going to the 
expenditure  and what program s are going to  be undertaken at the Ward Level . So, this is very 
important and that letter Mr. Speaker is not sufficient  and that is not what I asked for ; so, I 
request that you giv e an order  that they relook in to this ques tion I was asking , when will this 
document be submitted because they are already out of time  Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Ab dulkadir ): Than k you.  
Hon. Amriya Juma:  Note that I was cognizant of the fact that they were already delayed ; 
1st of March issued this statement alre ady the ADP,  CIDP, CSFP were already delayed so the 
question of delay he re is not an issue . The material f acts are that am ask ing of the time lines that 
are going to come and tha t timeline should not be prejudiced this As sembly or Members of the 
public becau se even those timelines  should not prejudice our public participation. Mr . Speaker 
all the citizen public p articipation which  is very important and we know that this budget laps es 
on 30th June so  from  30th June the gov ernment will not be able to spend any mo ney outside this 
plan Mr. Speaker , so time of essence  so thank you very m uch. 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank y ou Hon ourable  
Amriya, perhaps I will ha ve an i nput being a Member of Finance Budget and Appropriation 
Committee Member. Yes , Honourable  Fadhili , proceed.  Yes , okay proceed.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,  I 
think I started my statement by sayin g that as a Committee  we wrote  to the County Executive 
Committee Member for Finance them the department to give us a d ocument that shows the 
timeline that shows as to when they are going to bring this document to this Hon ourable  House. 
Mr. Speaker but in this l etter that I have read, i t is clearly  showing that the documents will be 
complete by the end of this financial  year. So, Mr. Speaker as we s it now here today, the 
Executive Members are prepari ng the same document  at White Sands Hotel, they have  expedited  
and am sure Mr. S peaker we…  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Ogutu, what is 
the issue please, what is the i ssue?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiw a Sp ika nilikuwa nauliza tu kwamba, tunangoja  ADP mpaka 
financial year  iishe?  
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 8 Hii Mheshimiwa Fadhili  ajue kwamb a hatufanyi vitimbi hapa na kama anat aka vitimbi, 
angoje michezo ya CASA inakuja waweke hiyo idara hapo  lakini hatuwezi kwenda namna hiyo.  
The Tempora ry Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Ogutu just allow  
Hon. Fadh ili to finish his statement and then you can respond , do not interject aga in please.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,  I 
think am up on  a request by Hon ourable  Amriya and am not doing any vitimbi as said by 
Honourable  Ogutu so Mr. Speaker I would like the Hon ourable  Member to withdraw that 
statement be cause Mr. Speaker if the people of my Ward Port -Reitz Ward and Mombasa  at large 
hear that I am observing vitimbi in this House Mr. Speaker … 
The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Fadhili , please let 
us not concentrate  on that, let us avoid the side shows please . Respond to the matter at hand, 
kindly for the l ast time.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. F adhili Makarani ): Mr. Speaker as I said earlier  that we are 
going to have these all document s before the end of thi s current financial year . This means that 
before the end of this financial year, we shall be having CIDP in  this Hon ourable  House , we 
shall be having  ADP  in this Hon ourable  House and CFSP in this  Honourable  House. Mr. 
Speaker , the let ter is clear ; the delays were done by the National Treasury . Mr. Speaker as per 
the letter and every Member in this Hon ourable  House is aware that we just some few weeks ago 
sworn in the Executive Member s because this process  Mr. Speaker … 
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abd ulkadir ): Honourable  Amriya, please  
just a minute. Hon ourable  Amriya what  is your  contribution?  
Hon. Amriya Juma : I am seeking directio ns Mr. Speak er. 
The Tempo rary  Speak er (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkadir ): Are you on a point of order?  
Hon. Amriya Juma : Yes, I am seeking direct ions f rom your Chair Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): It is not a point of order . 
Hon. Amriya Juma : It is a point of order; whether Honourable  Fadhi li is in order  to 
misrepresent...  
[Interruption ] 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir ): Which point of order?  
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : The Clerk can c heck on misrepresentation to the Assembly.  
The Temporary  Speake r (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): It is okay you can take your 
time a nd confirm it , and  as you confirm  it let me allow H onourable  Fadhili to p roceed as you 
confirm the Standing Order,  please.  Just take a seat , Honourable  Fadhili please wrap up you have 
30 seconds.  
The D eputy Speak er (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank  you Mr. Spea ker. I wou ld like the 
Honourable M ember to bear with  the Committee  and let the Committee  bring back in this  
Honourable  House the timelines as we reque sted as a Committee  from the Executive Member.  
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 9 We have r equested the actual timelines as to whe n and that is why I am saying as we 
speaker here today they have  seated somewhere  preparing the documents and am sure Mr. Su re 
maybe by next week all these docum ents we might be having the d ocuments or the process mig ht 
be going to pu blic participation Mr. Speaker. S o am  requesting the Hon ourable  Member to 
atlea st give us a weeks’ time  and we will bring back the timelines Mr. Speaker , Thank  you.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. From my 
understanding  to the response  made by Hon ourable  Fadhili i s that  the Committee  wrote to the  
CEC M in charge of Finance and Economic  Planning and he has just r ead out the response m ade 
which was not to the satisfactory  of the Committee . The Commit tee wrote ba ck actually  to the 
CEC demanding  exact  timelines ; so, let us wait for the response from the CEC an d am sure the 
Committee  will respond and will give guideline s on when we shall have the C IDP a nd ADP an d 
CFSPs , so Hon ourable  Amriya please bear with us. Thank you, Clerk?  
[Interruption]  
I have just made my ruling o n that matter and I said I repeat  again  for the last time, the 
Committee  wrote back and once the Committee  received  that letter from the CEC M they were 
not s atisfied wit h it because the CEC M kept on saying by the end of the financial year . So, the 
Committee  wrote back through  the Clerk to the CEC M tellin g him to give us the exact  date so 
they are still waiting for the response from the CEC M, they are ex pecting the response from the 
CEC M. Thank you. Cle rk? 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON HEALTH SERVICES , HONOURABLE 
BENARD  OGUTU ON REPURPOSING OF MARIMANI HEALTH FACILITY TO FUNCTION AS A DRUG AND 
SUBSTANCE ABUSE CENTRE  
Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogut u. Chairperson  Commit tee on Health please respo nd to th e 
statement.  
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to resp ond to a statem ent requ ested in this 
Honourable  House by Hon ourable  Mwinyi Mtoto  on Wedn esday 15th February,  2023. The 
Member sought a statement of the  plan of repurposing of Marimani health facilit y to function as 
a drug and substance abuse centre . Mr. Speake r, the County Chief Officer for the Department  of 
Medical Services in her letter refere nce COH/MSA/ADM/CA/ 023 Dated 22nd March , 2023. 
responded as foll ows; 
That the Governo r Mombasa Hon ourable… 
[Interrupti on] 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Order Members ! I want the 
Honourable  Chairman to  be heard in  silence please.  
Hon. Ogutu : The Governor of Mombasa Hon ourable  Abdulswamad Sh errif Na ssir 
establi shed a healthcare s ystem taskforce upon assuming office via Executive  Order No. 1 of 
2022 on 22nd September , 2022 to engage stakeholders to review  and recommend reforms in the 
Mombasa County Healthcare system. Part of the issues and challenges from the task  force 
outlined was  the County lacks any effective and substantial drug and substance abuse 
rehab ilitation ce nters which plays key role in return ing of patients to normal life activities. The 
task force recommended that re-purpose of Marimani Outreach and  Shika Adabu outrea ch to 
function as fully equipped modern male and female drug and substance reh abilitation centers . 
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 10 This will be  in partnership with stakehold ers under the private par tnership program.  The 
Governor issued a directive to effect the recommendation from t he health task forc e; this was 
coupled by the fact that the uptake of services at Marimani Outrea ch health fa cility is very low. 
The mandate to en force was issued to Chief  Officer Medical Services Committee to advice on the 
implementation of the same. The multi -sectoral team was to develop subcommittee that 
comprised of infrastructure, rehab operations  and service  delivery , community and public 
parti cipation.  Honourable  Speaker,  community dialogue at Marimani and Mwakirunge was 
conducted on 9th and 10th February 20 23 by the Sub Count y health management team, the 
community reported not to be able to afford the services off ered at the outreach health fa cility 
and requested the former dispensary to be returned with the affordable rates. The community 
subseq uently indic ated that they have  no objection to have the rehabilitation at the outreach site 
however the dispensary needs  to be fully operational. Benc hmark v isit to Kwale rehabilitat ion 
centre was done by the multi -sectoral team and had insight on the str ucture, oper ations and 
running of rehabilitation. However, advised to visit Jomek in Nakuru as it is the ideal public 
sector rehab. The COMS leadership  is pla nning to conduct communit y public participation at the 
County level to further get community input  and involve ment in the propose d rehabilitation 
centre.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker the remaining part is just on the research  conducted by the 
department.  Thank y ou. 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you Hon ourable  
Benard Ogutu. Yes Clerk?  
 
REQUEST F OR STATEMENT BY HONOURABLE JUMA MANUAR I FROM THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION AND DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION HONOURABLE ALLEN  KATANA ON THE LATE 
DISBURSEMENT OF BURSARY CHEQUES IN THE COUNTY  
 
Honourable  Manuari , pleas e issue your statement . 
Hon. Juma Manua ri: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand pursuant to Standing Order No. 
41(2) (c) to request for the statement from the Chairperson Committe e on Education and Digital 
Transformation on late  disbursement of bursary cheques in t he County.  Mr. Speaker, the County 
government of Mombasa has for the past financial year failed to release bu rsaries to deserving 
students w ho are in need of financ ial aid for their studies. This has caused untold suffering  to the 
students who rely on  the funds to meet their educationa l needs. Mr. Speaker , it is therefore my 
request that the Committee on Educat ion and Digital Transformation t o investigate this matt er 
with urgency and respond on steps being taken by the County government of Mombasa to ensure 
students receive the bursary c heques on time and are ma intained in schools.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker.  
The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abd ulkadir ): Thank you, yo u are directing 
that to the Chair on Education an d Digital Transformation, are  you seek ing to respond to it? You 
have a resp onse? Oh, please do so, be brief.  
Hon.  Katana : I do not know why Mr. Speaker you want it brief but desp ite of me not  
being sure  whether this statement has followed the due process . Though I am not a Member of 
the H ouse Business Committee , but also, I can respon d to it because it is true that so many kids 
were sent from school .  
Marc h 29, 202 3                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       25 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 11 I want to assure this House  that with its consent th en I will be in a good position to respond 
to it after a we ek. Thank you, Speaker.  
The Tem porary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdul kadir ): I thought you  wanted to 
respond to it right now . Nonetheless, thank you so much ; however,  let me assure you that it is in 
order pursuant to Standing Order 40(1) (c), the Speaker may either appoint a day of statemen t or 
direct the statement be issued o n the same day, than k you. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Member s, this House  stands adjourn ed until Tuesday 4th April , 2023 at 
10:00a.m. Thank you.  
The House rose at 3 :18p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 