March 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMB LY DEBATES                                          26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
Tuesday , 22nd March, 2022.  
The House met at 2:44p.m. 
 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Tempo rary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Be seated Members.  Yes Clerk, next order 
please?  
 
STATEMENT  
ALLEGED M ISCONDUCT BY A DOCTO R EZEKIEL AT COAST GENE RAL HOSPITAL  
 
Yes Honourable Boniface Faith Mwende?  
 
Hon.  Mwende : Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek a Statement from  the 
Chairperson, Committee on Health  Services on what disciplinary measures the Dep artment of 
Health Services, County g overnment of Mombasa will take against one Dr.  Ezekiel of Coast 
General Hospital regarding an incident which occurred on Thursday,  17th March , 2022 from 
9:29p.m in the evening whereby he arrived on duty late, was rude to  patients and refused to 
attend to an emergency case of  sick  child in the casualty unit.  Mr. Speaker , I wish to note 
that part of this incide nt is captured on video in my possession . Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank   you H onourable Faith.  Honourable 
Faith  you have the evidence?  
 
Hon.  Mwende : Yes, Mr.  Speaker.  
 
The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Okay . Yes because it is a gr ave allegation 
and must be ba cked up by evidence of the same c hairperson on Committee on Health?  
 
[Silence] 
 
 Vice Chair?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Any Committee Member?  
 
[The Chairperson on Health walk ed into the Chamber]  
 
 Yes I can see the Chair , Chairperson , welcome .  
March 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMB LY DEBATES                                          26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  There is a Statement here touching on your Departmental Committee.  Kindly just get 
your two to th ree minutes get through it and give us instan t response if you have.  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Yes Chair?  
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Honourable  Speak er. Honourable  Speaker , I have 
gone thro ugh the Statement from  Honourable Faith Mwende MCA Kipevu Ward but since it  
is a matter of disciplinary issue at the moment I have no answer  until next week  so that I can 
comprehensively give the report to this issue.  Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Chair  if you read that  Statement  you will 
find out that  Hon.  Faith Mwende has a video  as evidence to back  up her allegation , so sit 
down with you r Committee with Honourable Faith Mwende share with her or she will share 
with you the video so that w hen you approach the Department and I  am sure the Department 
must be aware  of this since its in public domain  so you are satisfied with next week will  you 
be ready with  the response Honourable Chair ? 
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Honourable  Speaker  thank  you for  also helping me on this. I 
think next week  will not be the appropriate time because this is a grave matter which needs 
professional approach so I think I need more time Mr.  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : More time does it mean  two years?  
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Two weeks  Honourable Speaker specifi cally.  
 
The Temporar y Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Okay. Yes, Honourable Samba?  
 
Hon.  Samba : The allegation and the iss ue that has been  raised by Honourable Faith 
Mwende is a sensitive allegation and Mr.  Speaker there is  a norm and tendency in this House 
of requesting for two weeks . I would rather  request  because our time is also limited having 
the fact that we are also heading towards campaign time.  I think if the Cha irperson can 
narrow it down to one  week as he had stated before that by next week he should furnish the 
House with r elevant response so I think Mr.Speaker through your wisdom I thin k two weeks 
is a lot of time  let us have one week . Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank Honourable  Tobias Samba.  Yes 
Honourable  Faith you are up ? then Hon ourable  Ogutu.  
 
Hon.  Mwende : Thank you Mr.  Speaker again.  Mr. Speaker according to the 
misconduct of this particular D octor I do  not think it is appropriate to give more time . This is  
because of the way he handles the patients to an extent of telling a patient is  mad and you 
expect to cure that  person and believe you have given that person the  right medication ! I 
think this  matter should be taken urgently  because we do  not know how many people are 
suffering from the same Doctor. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you.  Yes, Honourable   Bernard? 
Honourable  Bernard you know ver y well  that you are not properly dre ssed up.  
 
March 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMB LY DEBATES                                          26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 Hon.  Ogutu : How? How Mr.  Speaker?  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Your tie is very loose and t hat is not the way 
people put on ties.  
 
 Hon.  Ogutu:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker : Honourable Ogutu put on you tie properly!  
[Honourable  Ogutu tightened his tie assisted by the Sergeant -At- Arms ] 
 
And next time you are required to be doing it outside th e Chamber s. 
 
[Silence ] 
 
Hon. Ogutu: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika kuna mahasidi kama  
akina Mheshimiwa Samba usiwape masikio … 
 
[Laughter ] 
[Murmurings]  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika ? 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : He must be too fat.  
 
Hon.  Ogutu:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon Bwire) : Yes Honourable Ogutu , go on please . 
 
Hon.  Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Hii taarifa  ambayo iko mbele yetu ni 
muhimu sana pia hata conduct  ya Mwenyekiti wa Afya  inakupatia taswira amb ayo iko kule.  
Hata yeye ni mj euri hapa al iniita kwamba mimi ni Mheshimiwa fake… 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order!  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Unatarajia aje … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable Ogutu you are out of order!  
Honourable Ogutu you are  out of order! I though t you are contributing towards the matter 
that is before us.  The other issue does not concern this Hon ourable House Honourable Ogutu 
and I will just appeal that you go  straight  to the matter that is before the House.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.   
March 22, 2022                    COUNTY ASSEMB LY DEBATES                                          26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Ningepe nda hii maneno ipewe kama siku tatu  manake hata wale ambao walitendewa 
huo unyama pia ni binadamu na wanahitaji haki kwa  hiyo Mwenyekiti  awache kichwa kubwa 
alete  majibu . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Honoura ble Ogutu but again you 
also have to refrain fro m using  a language  that is not allowed  in the House.  You are  an 
Honourable  Member.  Yes, Honourable Chair  I think you have heard what the Member s have  
said and it seems to be an urgent matter and since Mem bers are afraid of two  weeks c an you 
kindly work within this one  week and bring back the response ne xt week.  
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Honourable  Speaker with my experience we want to do 
things professionally . Honourable  Speaker  anything to do with misconduct  must  pass through 
various organs within the Department of Health ; there is also a Disciplinary C ommittee 
within the Department.  Let us give it a fair hearing on both sides  and i f you w e want to do 
our work professionally give us two  weeks I have said Mr.  Speak er. We can even engage the 
person, we can even call the Chief Officer to not only giv e us a report but even answering 
this quer ry physical ly Honourable  Speaker . So I think there is no hurry at this  moment; t he 
only thing we want at the end of the d ay is fair hearing on both sides. I thin k that  is to do with 
justice  Honourable  Speaker.  Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :Thank you Chair.  What  is it Honourable 
Tobias?  
 
[Consultations]  
 
Hon.  Samba : Mr. Speaker I do  not know whether he is requesting  for two weeks 
from now or two  weeks as from next week because already today  is on Tuesday if he  is again 
request ing for two  weeks as from  next week that will be around three  weeks . Today is 
Tuesday , tomorrow we have a working day Wednesday, Thursday,  Friday are working days 
so maybe he can elaborate this week and part of next week or as from next week so he needs 
to be clear Mr.  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : You asked for a period of time you intend  to 
bring a response from the very day the  issue is discussed; y eah, so I think Chairman  was 
asking for two  weeks from now . So I think it is this week and next week and then perhaps 
next week but one you brin g the response.  
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker : Thank you.  Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable Members there having been no other Business this House stands 
adjourned until Wednesday  23rd March , 2022 at 10:0 0.a.m . 
 
The House rose at 2:58p.m  
 
 