March 1,  2017                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         26 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 1st March , 2017  
The House  met at 9:11a m. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats . Yes Clerk . 
Yes Hon Mohamed  Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I rise under Standing 
Order 44 . I wish to give a Notice of the following Motion;  
(Hon Hatimy  gave Notice of M otion)  
Mr. Speaker ; 
 THAT AWARE THAT the employment laws and policies require that an officer who 
has serv ed in an acting capacity and has the relevant qualification(s) and/ or experience 
should be confirmed to the substantive position;  
Mr. Speaker ; 
 FURTHER AWARE THAT there are many officers  who are serving in the County 
government and they have the relevant qualifications yet they still serve in acting capacity;  
CONCERNED THAT ; 
 Mr. Speaker this may lead to high turnover and lack of motivation at the place of 
work and hence reduce productivity and encourage vices such as corruption;  
I therefore urge this Hous e to RESOLVE that;  
1. The County Secretary and the County Assembly Clerk to liaise with the County 
Public Service Board and the County Assembly Service Board respectively to have acting 
officers who are qualified and posses s the required technical skills t o be confirmed in 
substantive  positions.  
2. The County Secretary to liaise with the Office of the Governor on deployment of the 
qualified staff.  
Mr. Speaker I beg to move.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon Hatimy, yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
Hon Ami r, yes any Member from Transport Committee? Member with a response ? 
Not just a Member, do yo u have a response to this issue?  If you don't have the response 
please take your seat, if you don't have a response please s it. Do you have a response Hon 
Amur ? 
Hon. Amur : It is not a response but it is a concern to this Committee ; this is more 
than the third time whenever we require a statement from this Committee … it is letting this 
Assembly down , we cannot tolerate  what the Chairman and the Committee are doing to us 
Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon Amur and I o rder the Clerk 
to write to the P ower s and Privileges Committee of this House to act upon what has been 
stated by Hon Amur. Yes Hon Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker you  have not allocated time for my M otion. 
Thank you.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : It was upon you to ask for time because am 
sure it has come as a Notice of Motion and it is now with the House Business Committee to 
allocate time unless you seek permissi on of the House.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you.  
Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk . 
March 1,  2017                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         26 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  2 ADJOURNMENT  
This House stands adjourned until today in the afternoon.  
The House rose at 9:18am . 
 