December  5, 2017              MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                        26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 5th December , 201 7 
The House met at 2:37p.m. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members have your seats . Yes 
Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Yes Hon. Moses  Aran . 
Hon. Oindo : Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir, Mr. Speaker  I beg to move the following 
Notice of M otion ; 
(Hon. Oindo moved the Notice of Motion)  
FORMATION OF PEOPLE ’S ASSEMBLY  
AWARE  THAT  on 8th August , 2017 and 26th October , 2017 the Independent Electoral 
Boundary Commission ( IEBC ) conducted illegal, unconstitutional and undemocratic 
presidential elections;  
RECOGNIZING  the fact that the tu rnout for the presidential elections was 30 per cent or 
thereabouts of the total number of all the registered voters in Kenya and therefore the 
President cannot b y delegation or otherwise, be properly vested with the people’ s sovereign  
power and authori ty;   
OBSERVING  that the exercise of the executive authority by the President has in the past 
few years reintroduced the trappings of the imperial presidency and despotic tendencies in the 
conduct of public affairs;  
Mr. Speaker KNOWING  that Parliament has been legislating unconstitutional, illegal, 
undemocratic and draconian laws, and in particular laws that contravene the Bill of Rights 
and the principles for the electoral system; and , 
ACKNOWLEDGING , the sovereign power of the people o f Kenya, the supremacy of 
the Constitution  of Kenya , 2010 and the sovereign right  or authority of the people , to 
determine the form of governance in Kenya.  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that; 
 
a) The  presidential elections held on 8th August , 2017 and 26th October , 2017 wer e each 
and all invalid, null and void; a nd no government formed and/or \president declared as 
a consequence thereof, and considering the negligible turnout in the presidential 
elections held on the latter date, can have constitutional authority or legitimac y to 
govern;  
 
b) A Peoples Assembly be formed to discuss and determine the affairs of the country and 
recommend a pathway towards and for the achievement of the promise, aspirations, 
objectives and rights and freedoms provided by the Constitution of Kenya , 2010; 
 
c) The House and its membership will participate in the proceedings of the People ’s 
Assembly and will constitute a special college for the appointment or election of 
members, delegations and observers to the People’s  Assembly;  
 
d) A truly Independent Elector al and Boundaries Commission be established with a view 
of holding a fresh presidential election on or before 9th February , 2018;  
December  5, 2017              MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                        26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 e) The action and performance of constitutional commissions including the Independent 
Electoral and Boundaries Commission, the Na tional Police Service, the National 
Intelligence Service, the Public Service Commission, the Ethics and Anti -Corruption 
Commission and the National Cohesion and Integration Commission be reviewed 
with the pur pose of ensuring that the said Commissions are i ndependent to enable 
them protect the sovereignty of the people and to promote constitutionalism;  
 
f) Appropriate measures be undertaken to safeguard and promote devolution and the 
organs and instruments of devolution including ; County Assemblies and County 
Governments and secure their financial viability and security with the ultimate 
objective of the creation of larger and autonomous devolved units within one 
indivisible sovereign nation; and , 
 
g) A review of the Constitution of Kenya , 2010 be undertaken to refor m the structure of 
the Executive and Parliament and devolution and to reinforce concrete measures for 
the promotion of inclusivity, the welfare of the marginalized, the advancement of 
women and youth, the eradication of corruption and poverty and to secure  social 
justice, equality and fairness . 
Thank you Mr. Speaker, yes Clerk . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Hon. Fahad Kassim Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructu re and Public 
Works. Any Member from that Committee? Yes Hon. Mwaka Bakari?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Statement on Involvement of local leaders on Ward 
development i.e. road repairs  for Hon. Fahad Chairperson Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Work s... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Do you have the response with you?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  No but he is my Chairman and am the Vice Chairperson . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : You are the Vice Chair and you 
understand that the House was waiting for this response today, you are supposed as a 
Committee to respond back to  this House . 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  No am not aware of that . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So it means that the Committee has failed 
to respond to this issue . 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Maybe Hon. Fahad is not aware because we have not 
had a Committee meeting . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Clerk you will...  
(Silence)  
...the Table C lerks will communicate to the Committee. Yes Hon. Thoya? Are you up 
on the same issue?  
Hon. Juma Thoya:  I want to str ike the nail on the head, t hank you Mr. Speaker I 
think it i s going to be prudent if we seek statements from the relevant House Committees , and  
we get them in the said time , so we are going to be very happy as Members of this Hon. 
House that the said C ommittee retreats and bring the information in this House . Hon. Speaker 
this is because especially we see some development in our Wards, it was put across by Hon. 
Member from Mwakirunge that there are some development projects  that they are pending in 
that Ward but the area Mem ber of the County Assembly is not aware . And the same will 
happen even to my Ward, so seven days were given out I don't know if the Hon. Vice Chair 
will give us how many days? Thank you.  
December  5, 2017              MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                        26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kitula . 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika kusema kweli suala hili ama 
taarifa  hii iliweza kuwakilishwa takriban wiki mbili zilizopita na kusema kweli Mwenyekiti 
mwenyewe akakiri na amri yake ya kwamba ataweza kuleta ripoti kwa takriban ya wiki moja. 
Mheshimiwa Spik a nafikir i jukumu moja kuu la sisi kama Wawakilishi wa Bunge ni kuweza 
kuleta matakwa ya wananchi katika Bunge hili , sasa ikiwa Mwenyekiti na Naibu wake hadi 
kufikia sasa hawana jibu mwafaka katika suala hili sijui Mheshimi wa Spika utatoa muongozo 
gani? Kwa sababu jukumu hili linafaa kuletwa kwa wakati unaofaa na yeye mwenyewe 
aliweza kukiri kuwa ataleta jibu hili kwa muda wa wiki moja ambapo zimepita wiki mbili . 
Mheshimiwa Spika  twaomba utupatie muongozo manake ikiwa tunaenda hivi itakuwa si 
nidhamu na Wenyekiti wengine wataweza kuchukua mkondo huo. Kwa hi o ningependa 
Mheshimiwa Spika uweze kutoa amri ambayo itaweza kukiri kabisa n a kuweza kuhakikisha 
ya kwamba Wenyekiti wanatekeleza kadri wanavyotimiza katika Bunge hili M heshimiwa 
Spika. Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Samba . 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir and the entire House I just want to echo 
what my colle ague has just said...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes what is it Hon. Aran?  
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker I think Hon. Fahad Kassim is not properly dress ed as 
required by this House , please kindly he needs to dress up not in this Hon. House unless this 
is a bedroom Hon. Speaker let us know. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you it was upon the Sergeant -At- 
Arms, yes Hon. Tobias Samba , continue … 
Hon. Samba : Yes Mr. Speaker Sir going by the events that are currently occurring 
we need the relevant Committees to be res ponsible , the position that they are holding they 
were not just given for the sake of it and I think this would have been the first business that 
we carry in this Honourable House and as my Hon . Member has just stated it is high time 
now the House has to get the business because the issue raised they are really genuine and 
affecting the residen ts of our County and this trend that is now coming up that Chairman 
maybe skips and sometimes even the Committee is not even aware when it comes  to a point 
when even the Deputy Chair doesn’t know how to answer or what to say and we ne ed some 
clarification from  them . Mr. Speaker Sir I think it is high time now you will just have to give 
some direction because it is seemingly that is the trend , we need t o deliver the time is now 
and let each and every Committee Chair head be responsible for his or her Committee. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
(Applause ) 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Chairman Transport, the Vice Chair 
has already stated t hat as the Committee you do not have a response on this issue , before we 
take it to the relevant Committee ; the Powers and Privilege  to take action, do you have 
anything to say on the same statement?  
 Hon. Fahad Abdallah:  Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker a nd my colleagues . I agree 
with Hon. Samba we have a problem Mr. Speaker because we are in no communication from 
the Executive side, I called personally the Engineer so that we can go on a survey on those 
sites and unfortunately he was not in the office for  more than two weeks, his Deputy, in fact I 
had to pay a courtesy visit and I went there thrice personally . Unfortunately he was not in the 
office, nor are they responding to their calls nor to our texts , so it is better that we have come 
here all together we will know how to g o about it . 
December  5, 2017              MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                        26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  It is true we do not have an answer but it is because of lack of communication from 
the Executive side, we are not getting them online, they are not in their offices, nor are they 
replying  to our text s. Thank you , Mr. Spea ker. 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Fahad unless you do not know or 
you do not understand the powers that your Committee has that is why you are proceeding to 
say that you were unable to meet or to call the Executive concerned or the offices concerned . 
You have got all the powers to summon them so the House will give you another two days 
for you to work on it because it is an issue that was r aised by an Hon . Member and as a 
Committee you have got all the powers unless you tell the House that the Committee is 
unable and we reconstitute the Committee so we are giving you other two days for you to 
work and bring back to the House a very good report indeed.  
 Hon. Fahad Abdallah:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I promise you and the House one 
thing, that I personally am going to make sure if there is an yone who is going to enjoy the 
powers and privileges  of the Committee I will be one of them, so am very happy and my 
Clerk ’s can confirm that I responded to them, I have summoned them and I p romise you if 
they do not respond they will go home, full  stop.  
(Applause ) 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Fahad, any response ?  
 Hon. Fahad Abdallah:  Mr. Speaker these were both is sues that were brought 
together on the same day and I have been working on them and still that was the same 
response but I promise you within two days if we are not going to have a concrete repor t then 
at least I will make sure that person in charge will be going home because we are not here to 
joke around and  our wana nchi are looking upon us so am sure , you know how  i am active , 
committed and dedicated to do my duties but it is unfortunate and  I promise that this the last 
time, Clerks can co nfirm and please do the needful . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Fahad but in the two 
days that we have given you we would like you to produce to the House the said letters that 
you have said that you have com municated to the executive and they failed to respond so th at 
you take it to the relevant Committee , Powers and Privileges for action before you take the  
action that you stated earlier . Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Chairperson Health , or a Member from Health Committee, Hon.  Nzai?  
Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I wish and beg to respond on the  cholera issue on 
behalf of my C hairman who is away for essential duties . Mr. Speaker Sir , I wish to give the 
following statement , response on cholera outbreak within Mombasa County.  
RESPONSE ON CHOLERA OUTBREAK WITHIN MOMBASA COUNTY  
(Hon. Nzai responded on behalf of Chairperson, Committee on Health  Hon. Kibwana 
Swaleh)  
Mr. Speaker Sir, the statement was raised by Hon. Moses Aran Oindo on 29th 
November , 2017.  Mr. Speaker Sir, the cholera outbreak started on 15th October , 2017 with 
two cases from Kibarani Mtaan i, Jomvu Sub County. A total of 116 suspected cases have 
been treated with 34 cases confirmed and  seven  (7) deaths.  Most cases are from Changamwe 
(24) and Jomvu (42) Sub Counties with the highest confirmed case in Jomvu Sub County, 14 
(47%). In Jomvu the worst a ffected villages are Kibarani Mtaani and Bangladesh with five 
and three  confirmed cases respectively.  
As part of preventive strategy,  the Department of Health has with immediate effect 
taken the following measures: - 
December  5, 2017              MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                        26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 1. Banned the hawking and selling of food within town and estates and will ensure strict 
enforcement of the directive in line with the Public Act , Cap 242.  
2. Banned the hawking of bottled water in town and estates in strict compliance to the public 
Act, Cap 242. To rid the County of unscrupulous water bottl ers, all companies in the 
sector are directed to immediately present themselves and deposit  their KEBS 
certification with the department failure to which punitive action will be taken against 
them including withdrawal of their products from the market an d the risk of a total ban.  
3. Banned all food outsourced from hotels, suppliers and business entities whose premises 
and businesses are unlicensed and have not receive d a health certificate from the 
department. Any party outsourcing food for any public functio n is required to 
immediately notify the Public Health Department to allow for the necessary inspections  
and approvals. Any subsequent individual or organization wishing to outsource should 
notify the department 14 days prior to their function.  
4. All hotel wo rkers,  food and water vendors in the County should immediately present 
themselves for the registration with the department , for registration medical examination 
and licensing. Visits to hotels can be arranged for organized groups and establishments.  
5. The County G overnment is working closely with water sector players to put in place 
mechanisms for vigorous and random testing of water from all water sources, treatment 
and quality assurance, and to map and repair all broken overflowing sewer lines that 
cause wat er contamination s. 
6. The Department is sensitizing the public through a community focused comprehensive 
multimedia campaign strategy to raise awareness and empower communities through 
health messaging on cholera prevention and control, health education, wate r safety, 
personal hygiene and sanitation, proper disposal of liquid and solid waste, treatment of 
domestic water, proper washing of food and other measures to make the County cholera 
free. 
7. The County G overnment through appropriat e legislation has made p rovision for the 
establishment of an emergency fund to cater for rapid response on emerging  infection s, 
including cholera and other scourg es. Work around development of County, Sub County 
and community health information system is on course.  
8. The Department is already distributing water treatment , chemicals and other sanitation 
consumables to all inform al settlements.  
9. Officials of the Public Health Department will be making random spot checks to ensure 
compliance to these directives.  
10. A multi -secto ral task force has been appointed to oversee the implementation of these 
directives.  
11. The Department of Health Services has set up Cholera  Treatment Centers in all four S ub 
Counties to minimize cross infection at designated sites namely Port  Reitz Hospital, 
Mwembe Tayari Health Centre, Bamburi Health Centre and Likoni Sub County Hospital.  
Mr. Speaker S ir, with the ongoing public health interventions the outbreak has 
significantly  reduced and only few diarrhoea  cases are now managed at the Cholera Centres .  
The last con firmed case was reported on 26th November , 2017.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Than k you the Committee on Health, yes 
Clerk ? 
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon.  Shebe Ath man. 
Hon. Shebe Salim : Than k you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker S ir I wish to give the 
following statement in response to overflowing  of drainage sewers in Chaani Ward.   
December  5, 2017              MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATE S                        26 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6 Mr. Speaker Sir, it is due to poor maintenance that has caused clogging and 
overflowing as a result this has triggered envi ronmental crisis leading to communicable 
diseases such as cholera, malaria, typhoid etc. to the public.  We would like to assure 
Members that the County Government is  fully  aware of the environmental concerns posed by 
these overflowing drainage sewers and c urrently  the County Government  is undertaking all 
necessary remedial measures to ensure that this problem is addressed and put to rest 
completely . Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you, yes Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon.  Members the House stands adjourned until Wednesday 6th December , 2017 at 
9:00a.m. 
The House rose at  3:08p.m.  
 
 
 
 