April 4, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the H ansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 4th April, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Twent y Seventh  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  2:43p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Mem bers have your seats. Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Honourable  Members, may I acknowledge the presence of Shimo La Tewa Boys. I will 
call up your names and when you hear your name , please stand up and bow.  
 
1. Fredrick Ochieng  
2. Yassin Ramadhan  
3. Emmanuel Agore  
4. Omari Guyo  
5. Omari Hami si 
6. Ramadhan Ntsovu  
7. Omar Mwembe  
8. Said Kere  
9. Muga Magange  
10. John Katana  
11. Salim Barako  
12. Abdul lahi Abdul  
13. Thomas Mwangombe  
14. Juma Mumba  
15. Ismail Porwe  
16. Said Amir  
17. Japhet Randu  
18. Hussein Mwame  
19. Nduria Jackson  
20. Mohammed Hamis i 
21. Mohammed Ali  
22. Musa Ali  
April 4, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the H ansard Editor   Page 2 23. Abdulrahman Nasir  
24. Charles Simon  
25. Bwaga Mwinyi  
26. Yakub  
27. Emmanuel Kazungu  
28. Ramadhan Hussein  
29. Simon Ngala  
30. Emmanuel Chengo  
31. Rashid Suleiman  
32. Deniuss Mutinda  
33. Julius Maranga  
34. Hamis Rashid  
35. Abdulkarim Hashim  
36. Katana Maitha  
37. Asiko Baraka  
38. Said Ras hid 
39. Hamid Medo  
40. Osama Salat  
41. Onyango Clement  
42. Abubakar Salim  
43. Ajon Rashid  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Please feel honoured and I will let 
Honourable Patrick Mbel le as a form er student of Shimo La Tewa to welcome the boys.  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. First of all , I would like to acknowledge the  
presence of my fellow sober Members , in the local sc hool language I  would  call them madeka  
wangu  is the de cker mates! So, I want to welcome you here to the Assembly and give you an 
inspiration that wherever you are, whatever you are doing kn ow that  if you contin ue a lot of 
effort one day you might be in a place more than where we are right now. You are the future of 
this generation ; you are what it takes for Kenya  to change to become a better  place so continue 
working hard. W e are here to sup port you through legi slations and Bills that we pass in this 
House and know that you have full support of your brot hers and other  decker’s  in this House. 
The Deputy Speaker today is a former class mate of yours, he is a former  school mate  and am 
here as th e MCA for Bamburi Ward . A former School mate  so I am sure that we can get more 
that can come to this Assembly  and other Assembly within this Country and even a President can 
come out of Shimo La Tewa . Mr. Speaker , allow me also to remind them that the former  Speaker 
Honourable  Francis Ole Kaparo  was also a sober Member. He was also a decker and so many 
other people including the late Honourable  Karisa Maitha, he  was also from Shimo La Tewa. So 
Shimo la Tewa is as mighty as it is called t he mighty Shimo la Tewa so conti nue soaring high , 
you will always continue to be mighty . Thank you and God bless you.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Patrick Mbe lle, 
yes Clerk?  
 
 
April 4, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the H ansard Editor   Page 3 MOTION  
ESTABLISHMENTS AND MAINTENANCE OF ONLINE DATABASE FOR TOURISM AND OTHER 
SECTORS  
  
Yes, Honourable  Milka?  
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to brief for the Motion of establ ishment and 
maintenance for tourism and other sectors which I  will mention  later; so, Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg 
to move the following Motion ; 
 
THAT AWARE THAT,  Part 2 -7(d) of Fourth Schedule of the Constitution  of Kenya, 2010 
provides for local tourism to be one of the functions of County governments;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT,  that the Kenya Bureau of Statistics compiles s tatistics for 
various activities and sectors  at the national level;  
 
NOTING THAT  the County does not have a statistics unit or databases for maintenanc e of 
sector -specific statistics;  
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT  the establishment and maintenance of data bases online  will 
simplify access to information by various stakeholders;  
 
CONCERNED THAT , the lack of databases for sector activ ities and statistics particularly 
the tourism sector impinges on proper planning, service delivery, marketing promotion and 
effective revenu e mobilization in the County;  
 
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
 
THAT , the County government of Mombasa in consultation with relevant national  
government ministries, departments and agencies to establish and maintain online County 
databases for tou rism and other sectors for internal use and for use by the other stakeholders.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Who is your Seconder ?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  I ask Hon ourable  Patrick Mbelle to second.  
 
Hon. Mbelle: I second . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadh ili M akarani ): Thank you. Hon ourable  Members , I now 
propose a question that the Motion by Hon ourable Milka Moraa Ngare on Establishment and 
Maintenance o f Online Database for Tourism and other Sectors  be debated  in this House . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Milka?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and my fellow Hon ourable  Members .  
April 4, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the H ansard Editor   Page 4 I would just like  to say that in connection with the Governor’s manifesto and what we have 
been going through this morning at the boardroom of the Governor’s office we are luc ky that we 
have a Governor  who is in the process of wanting to put everything, every  detail on a database  
for ease of work and ease to maintaining of information.  Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) and GIZ today morning took us th rough the same proce ss for those of you who attended 
and I did not know that we were going to have that session but it is just that it came in good time 
for us to realize how important having a database is, we h ave been informed of Vihiga and Wajir 
Count ies who have put a pro per database in their Counties  all the sectors they have like lands, 
health, education , and so on.  
So simply if we have our data online on the various sectors if I can touch on tourism , 
education , lands and probably businesses because M ombasa is a major tourist attraction area. So, 
if we have a data on the tourism  sites that we have within Mombasa, where they are found the 
transpo rtation availability  to those s ites, even the A ir BnB that we have available we are goin g to 
have  a flourishi ng business es because then the international  and domestic  tourists visiting our 
area will be able to get information  in a very easy manner in  order for them to access those  areas  
and as a Co unty we will know that we are having  maybe 3,000 guests we are approa ching  Easter 
this coming weekend we should have had a data base to show that maybe we are going to receive 
3000  tourists , either local or internation al so that w e can plan for them .  
We know the areas that are more popular for the m to visit so that we have to improve th ose 
facilities  in that area and maybe in the areas where tourists  are not visiting and they used to be 
visited much earlier we find out w hy are t hey decreasing, what can we do so that we can im prove 
and increase the number of tourists  getting to our place . That is one of the areas that we have that 
database wil l be able to help us increase and improve service delivery, the Governor is alway s 
talking about delivera bles, this is one of the areas which really needs a dat abase in order for us to 
reap the maximu m fruits from it. If I can giv e an example of education also … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Mr. Speaker , someb ody is disturbing me from behind …! We have children  entering class 
one for example that data should be there  and in public so that we kno w this chil d is this age , 
entered this clas s this year , this term and that child is followe d the trend of performance up to the 
end. I remember two months back I was f ollowing up o n my child’s  database , she needed a 
document  she is out of the country so she n eeded a d ocum ent I went to the former school and 
was not able to get that information , why…? 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Milka you h ave one  more  
minute ! 
 
Hon. Ngare : Pardon!  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): You have one more  minute.  
 
Hon. Ngare : Really? So, I  was n ot able t o get that  information  simpl y because that 
database was not there so we need to be having a data base on every sector health and lands, 
agriculture .  
April 4, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the H ansard Editor   Page 5 Honourable  Mbel le, you need to have that d atabase so  that even if you are dealing with 
KMA  and others that is blue economy  all those,  you know where you are starting from and 
where you are going in order for our County to r eap maximum benefit from those sectors. Did 
you just say that I end there Mr. S peaker  Sir? 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Milka.  
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Sir, I oblige.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for granting me this opportun ity. I wil l also 
congratulate Hon ourable  Patric k Mbelle, congratulations! If you were an alumn us of the great 
Shimo La Tewa. Now I rise to support my sister on this  Motion because data is always vital and 
very important when one wants to execute the duty  then you  can use data as one of the tools to 
execute that which you want to. I tend to believe that for example you do  not have data base; I 
would like  in you  some day to grope  in the darkness so you will be doing guess work, you  might 
reach wherever you want to reach b ut it i s not because your pa th is illuminated but you just 
guessed away around. I tend to believe that some sort of data base but what is unique with this 
Motion is that the online aspect of it has been indicated. We are living in a technological world 
and we are in the online era so online data is of absolutely important that is why we should 
support this Motion so that our County can move forward. Thank you so much for your  Motion . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Makanga?  
 
Hon.  Makanga:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi pia nasimama vile vile na  kuunga 
mkono Mswada  huu tukijua dhahiri kwamba  lile am balo halija wekwa katika rekodi kulingana na 
maswala ya kiafya  kama halijarekodiwa halijafanywa.  Kwa hivyo hio inama anisha endapo 
tutakuw a na ufahamu wa y ale yanayo ihusu Kaunti hii kutokea kule kwa maswala ya utali i, 
maswala ya elimu, maswala ya afya na kila idara ambayo inahusika ikiwa imelenga maisha ya 
wananchi , basi itakuwa inatusaidia hata kati ka kufanya maamuzi kwa urahisi bila tena kur udi 
mashinani  kuanza kuchakura kupata ufahamu huo. Kwa hivyo mimi nasimama kuunga mkono 
Mswada  huu. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani): Thank you . Honourable  Patrick Mbel le? 
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Thank you Ho nourable  Speaker Sir . With your information before I weigh 
into the matter that has been brought forward by Hon ourable  Milka , which is a very important 
one a nd I beg  to sa y that I support fully. I would wish to clarify the  statement about the  
membership of those that were in Shimo la Tewa High School. I forg ot to mention a very senior 
Member within these chambers that was also a Member of Shimo la Tewa High School , who is 
an Honourable  Clerk ….the Clerk of the National  Assembly , sorry the Clerk  of County Assembly 
of Mombasa … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The other M ember who is within  the precincts of this Assembly is one Member , a staff 
who is in the department of accounts, is also a former Member of  the Shimo la Tewa Boys . 
April 4, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the H ansard Editor   Page 6 So I would also want to remind them that myself  and I think Hon ourable  Fadhil i, I was in 
Apollo 13 and Hon ourable  Fadhili sho uld have been in Luther King … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Kama … 
 
Hon. Mbel le: Kama  yes, so that now justifies a Member  of Shimo la Tewa . So, as I now 
weigh into the matter of Honourable  Milka, I think it very important and very pa ramo unt that we 
have a database and online that you can always refer to when and in  the event  that we need to 
refer to anything  I will give account of yesterday . Honourable  Speaker , I have been call ed by 
some company to hel p them get three  local boys ; that had a tleast a grade of B+ for them to go 
and work in their company and trust you me  within my Ward I could  not find just b ecause I did 
not have a database of people whom I can count on  for any eventuality at any moment . So, it is 
important that the County governme nt in all the functions that we be given by the Constitution  
that we truly have the database  so that we can now m ake it easy for even investors and other 
people within any sector to come and also have that  infor mation.  
I would also want to thank Hon ourable  Milk a for reminding this Assembly that  even the 
economy sector also n eeds a database ; probably just not only the fishermen but the entire 
fisherfolk  within the whole ecosystem of the Blue Economy  Sector . As it is we have projects that 
are happening ; we have  the KEMSFED , we have the projects by SDSP wh ich are anchored in 
the County but even when you go to the offices and ask for data of whom they  have helped and 
who ha ve challenges it becomes a challenge to give you that data . So, it is important  and I 
support you f ully Honourable  Milka that we should have a databas e that talks on behalf of the 
people for us to know our problems and how we can solve them going forward.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker , I support.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Before bringing back th e mover to 
respond I welcome Hon ourable  Hawa  Abdulrahman Omar , then mover to respond . Yes, 
Honourable  Haw a. 
 
Hon. Hawa Abdulrahman : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving this opportunity in 
contributing to this Motion . First, I would like  to congratulate my Hon ourable  Member Mi lka 
Ngare for bringing up this Motion to th is House and thank his Excellency the Governor 
Abdu lswamad Shariff Nass ir because he  has already foreseen the need for technological 
advance ment in this County . There is need for maintenance and establishment of onli ne 
databases for tourism and other sector s because it will not only improve on marketing promot ion, 
effective revenue mobiliz ation , service delivery as it was put in this prayer but it will also 
improve transparency and accountability for this County becau se everyone will have that access 
to the datab ase and it will prove that sector  of accoun tability and transparency . Otherwise , I 
stand to support this Motion. Thank you very much.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Milka Ngare please 
reply. 
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker and fellow Members . Thank you so much for 
supporting the Motion and also for contributing effectively with in depth understanding so . 
April 4, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses on ly. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from the H ansard Editor   Page 7 So, i want to thank you once again  for agreeing that overall database collection is 
impo rtant in our County for business management ; in education sector , in the health sector, in 
decision making and improved service delivery in various sectors that we have named. I also 
want to finally thank the Hon ourable  Speaker for noting that we move with sp eed to pass this 
Motion as we know that our Muslim brother s and sisters are fasting  and we appreciate the fact  
that they need to go home and break the fast. Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for that and am  
grateful that we have supported a very important Motion that will be indeed important for 
business in our County. Thank you.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Milka Moraa 
Ngare for this important Motion. Honourable Mem bers, I now stand to put a question that the 
Motion by Honourable  Milka Moraa Ngare on Establishment and M aintenance of O nline 
Database for Tourism and other Sectors  be ad opted in this Honourable House . 
 
[Applause ] 
  
 Honourable Mem bers, the Motion by Hon ourable  Milka Ngare on Establishment and 
Maintenance of Online Database for Tourism and o ther Sectors  is adopted by the House. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable Members , there being  no other business the House stands adjourned until 
Wednesday, 5th April , 2023 at 10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:10p.m. 
    
 
 
 