April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
     THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 19th April, 2018  
The House met at 2:50p.m. 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker : May you be seated Hon.  Members , once again welcome 
back to our today’s plenary, yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
The Chairperson on Committee on Labor and S ocial welfare.  
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I want to take this opportunity to say that we 
have just received the response from the Public Service B oard at  1:00p.m and I beg this 
House to give us at least  one more week so that we can sit with the C ommittee to discuss 
because I think it’s not going to be fair that we are going to t able this document before this 
House without involving the C ommittee on Labour .  
So we need to sit down as a C ommittee and deliberate to g ive our recommendation to 
this P aper, so if you allow us at least one week we have an opportunity to look at the report 
from the Public Service B oard we will be very happy thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker : Hon.  Chairman  when was the issue raised?  
Hon. Thoya:  I think Hon. Speaker you ca n get the information from the C lerical desk 
I don’t have that information ours was just to bring so I cannot remember the date and I 
should say there is a desk for th e same.  
The Temporary Speaker : You are lucky Hon . Member that the issue was raised on 
12th of this month and you still have some f ew days to report back to this H ouse.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
Next order ? 
 
STATEMENT  
MOMBASA CITY POLYTECH NIC PROGRAMME : TUKUZA VIPAWA INITIATIVE REPORT  
 
The Chairperson on Education Information and Technology.  

April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare:  Mr. Speaker on behalf of the Chairman of Education and as a 
Member of Education C ommittee I wish to take Members  through the report on Tukuza 
vipawa .  
I beg to go  through the introduction and because  it’s my assumption that every 
Member has the report with them so that when I do the summa ry if you allow me Mr. 
Speaker the Members  can read the rest of the report on their own .  
Thank you Mr. Speaker for allowing that  so the department on Education ICT and 
MV 2035.  
 
(Hon. (Ms.) Ngare moved the Report)  
 
MOMBASA CITY POLYTECHNIC PROGRAMME: TUKUZA VIPAWA 
INITIATIVE REPORT  
 
Tukuza vipawa campaign is an initiative by the County g overnment of Mombasa 
through the Department of Education, ICT and MV  2035. The aim of Tukuza vipawa 
campaign is to ensure  that every child in the County g overnment of Mombasa is equipped 
with effective life skills and  pursues their talents through Technical and Vocational E ducation 
and Training (TVET).  
The programme annually registers potential trainees in the six Sub -Counties and 
provides career guidance through the vocational training officers and does placement of the 
trainees in:  
1) County owned Polytechnics: Mtongwe Count y Polytechnic and Maunguja County 
Polytechnic.   
2) Polytechnics that the County has partnered with through Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) . 
The County g overnment of Mombasa through the Department of Education, ICT and 
MV 2035 caters for 70  per cent  of the tuition fees and the trainee pays 30  per cent  of the 
remaining tuition fees and I think that’s a really good boost.  The department has allocated 
funds through the scholarships and subsides . 
 
REBRANDING THE POLYTECHNICS  
The Department of Education, ICT and MV 2035 has taken up the youth polytechnics 
that were devolved to the County which necessitates the need to improve service delivery. 
The Department is working closely with the institutions t o have a new face for the City 
Polytechnic through rebranding of these institutions. Through the guidance of the Department 
of Education, ICT and MV  2035, the trainees are expected to experience quality learning and 
acquisition of talent and skills as they undertake their training in the Mombasa County 
Polytechnics in s hort known as (MCPs).  
The Department proposes to have state of the art classrooms and workshops with the 
objective of offering life skills and entrepreneurship tra ining on the curriculum in the C ounty 
Polytechnics. The County Polytechnics will be expected to produce well -trained graduates 
ready to navigate their future through employment or entrepreneurship .  
Now on page two , Mr. Speaker we have the summa ry of beneficiaries under the 
Tukuza Vipawa  Campaign Mombasa City Polytechnic Programme ; you will be able to see 
the institutions , the year , the number of beneficiaries through the year 2014 -2018 . You can 
see 2014 who gained 2015, 2016, 2017 up to the current note that in 2015 , short courses the 
students received also full scholarships for th e short courses  which were like maybe three 
months or six months then on the next page three we have again on the same department 
Curriculum, Training and experience.  
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 The Mombasa City P olytechnic programme initially intended to have various courses 
derived  from the following six thematic areas that is Maritime up to Sports , so you can also 
see the achievement of 2013/2014 then September to December , 2015 and on page four we 
have again on the same department In January , 2016 we had  placement of 800 trainees to the 
MCPs; Mombasa City Polytechnic Mtongwe, Mombasa City Polytechnic Maunguja an d 
Mombasa City Polytechnic at MTTI (Mombasa Technical Training Institute) so  you we will  
also be able to see what happened in 2017 up to current 2018 the impact . I would like to read 
that one; job creation through self -employment after skill acquisition and which is very good 
for our youth s, decrease i n the number of idle youths and crime rate in Mombasa County , 
reduce drug abuse cases reduce cases of terroris m and radical isation among the y outh.  
Others are r ealization of youth talent in Mombasa County , improving the quality of 
technical skills in the County , increasing number of active labour workforce in the County 
and finally on the last page Mr. Speaker you can also se e through the demonstrations of 
pictures there how the departments went about nurturing talents through sport , that is the 
evidence that something was happening on the ground.  
Then launch of Mombasa City Polytechnic and improve training , there you can be 
able to view and carpentry and joinery class at Maunguja City Polytechnic, true evidence that 
things were happening on the ground and it is good also to the Mombasa County Assembly , 
the Education Department. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker : Thank you Hon. Milka for the response I think it is well 
taken and for the rest Hon . Members  will go through during your free time the report is so 
wide. Yes Clerk . 
 
STATEMENT  
 
Hon. Priscilla Mumba . 
Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama hapa kujibu Hoja hii 
ilioulizwa kuhusu septic tanks  lakini kwa masikitiko ni kuwa W aziri ambaye ni  muhusika 
mkuu wa jambo hili kama W izara yake hayuko yuko nje ya nchi na alinishauri kuwa nisubiri 
kidogo atakaporudi tuw eze kukaa chini aweze kunipa majibu muafaka . Kwa hivyo na ona 
msubiri akija  kwa sababu ye ye ndiye mkubwa wa…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Temporary Speaker : Before I give a chance to Hon . Amur , Hon. Member you 
don’t have a report as we speak?  
Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba:  Ndio Mheshimiwa Spika kwa saba bu nimekuambia 
nilizungumza na W aziri mwenyewe.  
The Temporary Speaker : Okay . 
Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba:  Kwa sababu nilitaka kwanza ni tush auriane naye kama mkuu 
wa hiyo W izara. Kwa sababu kila kitu pia W izara ni mpa ka uzungumze na W aziri wako ili  
mjue kwa sababu jambo kama hili la septic  si kitu ya shule moja au eneo moja bali ni Kaunti 
nzima. Kwa hivyo ni kitu kikubwa kitahitaji umakinifu  mkubwa ukiwa umeshauriana na 
Waziri ndio uweze  kutoa ripoti nzuri. Kwa hivyo sina hiyo ripoti ninamsubiri W aziri wangu 
ndio niweze kuwa na ripoti kamili.  
The Temporary Speaker : What is your point of concern Honorable?  
Hon. Amur:  Bwana Spika nasimama kwa mshangao kwa sababu Bunge hili tutakuwa 
tukichezana shere sasa ikiwa Hoja itakuwa inaletwa mt u alete majibu atuambie kwamba 
Waziri hayuko! Waziri haendi na ofisi ; kuna ma  Chief Officers  wameandikwa wafanye kazi, 
kuna watu ambao wameaji riwa katika maofisi hayo  na ikiwa kila siku tutakuwa twaletewa 
Hoja hapa tuambiwe kwamba Waziri hayuko basi hili Bunge tutalifunga tukingoja mawaziri.  
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Mheshimiwa Spika lazima Mawazir i wawajibike hawaendi na maofisi wao wanaenda 
safari wao, l akini maofisi hayaendi safari watenda  kazi wal iobakia pale nyuma wanaweza 
kufanya kazi. Twaomba Mheshimi wa Spika isiwe ni mtindo wa kwamba kila anayeletewa 
Hoja ajib u anatuambia kuwa Waziri hayuko, ha imaanishi Waziri akisafiri ile ofisi pia 
inasafiri. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika lakini bar ua ambayo inawakilisha 
ripoti hii, barua zozote huandikwa kwa Waziri na ni mpaka W aziri ndiye mkuu wa hicho 
kitengo aweze  kutoa uamuzi wake. Kwa hivyo kuna masu ala mengine hata sioni mpaka 
angojee W aziri ili  atoe uamuzi muafaka.  
Kwa hivyo ningeomba Mheshimiwa mwenzangu aniw ie radhi kwa wiki ijayo Mungu  
akipenda tutaweza  kupata majibu muafaka.  
The Temporary Speaker : That is nice Hon . Member. Hon . Members ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
(Hon. Thoya stood)  
 
Just a minute Hon.  Thoya. The concern raised by Hon. Member Amur is also a valid 
concern. Let assume the Minister is out of this County for the last ...I mean for one month you 
can just imagine what will happen. So I think the role of the Chief Officer is to play I mean is 
to act whenever the Minister  is not within and the Minister  has to delegate the duties 
whenever he is not within. ... 
(Applause ) 
 
So allow me.. . 
 
(Consultation ) 
 
Again it ha s also come to my attention that the issue was raised many weeks back 
since 22nd of March , the 14 days are over so the Committee has to bring the report. But Hon.  
Members  allow me to allow the Committee plus the Chairperson to report back in the 
following week on  third,  I think yes because the report is not within and nothing we can d o 
but we are asking those Chairperso ns that make sure whenever the M inister is not within you 
work closely with the Chief Officers so that you bring the report within the time frame that is 
allocated , that is per the law. So again kindly allow me to give t he Committee another chance 
to report back next week Thursday. Thank you . 
 
(Applause ) 
Yes Mr. Clerk . 
 
STATEMENT  
REPORT ON PRO MOTION AND EXHIBITION  OF WOMEN ENTERPRISES  
 
The Temporary Speaker : Hon. Moses . 
Hon. Oindo : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have the report like I promise d last week that 
I will report back t his week and this is the report.  
 
(Hon. Oindo moved the Report ) 
 
 The Department of Youth , Gender Sports and Cultural affairs has commenced the 
process of engaging consulta nts to develop a Gender mainstreaming policy , this process is at 
an advanced stage . 
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 We are also engaging a consultant to develop our Strategic P lan for the year 2018 to 
2022.  We have formed a C ommittee on women engaged in local production t o set up a team 
that will spear head empowering women in that industry. We will soon launch the 
empowerment and skills development program and also just to support that I have here also a 
report on the disbursement of revolving fund to women groups. The department of Youth 
Gender Sports and Cultural Affairs disburse d shs  26,350,300 to 214 within the Mombasa 
County and if I can go through the money disbursed Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon. A mur:  Point of Order!  
The Temporary Speaker : Yes. 
Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker my learned friend Hon. Aran is telling us about the report 
but this report does  not seem like it is signed, it is just a photocopy there is nothing showing 
that it is signed from either department . So Mr. Speaker we need to see something that has 
been signed whether from the department or from the Committee. This is just a photocopy 
Mr. Speaker it is not a report . 
The Temporary Speaker : Hon. Member is it an official report?  
Hon. Oindo : Yes Mr. Speaker it is an official report as you can  see in the letter head 
County g overnment of Mombasa , Department of Youth Gender and Sport s and also you have 
the logo. 
Hon. Amur:  With all due respect, if it is an official report Mr. Speaker Sir then it 
should be signed. This is not an official report , It has been addressed from who to who M r. 
Speaker? It does not tell us b ecause if it was a report then it should either be directed  to the 
County Assembly Clerk or the Committee Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker : Order! Order Hon . Members . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker : Order Can I have the initial report that was tabled; the first 
one that was tabled before this House.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker : Order Hon . Member, just a minute.  
Hon. Oindo : Kindly I have to clarify something Mr. Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker : I will let you clarify it just a minute . Hon. Amur do you 
have a copy of the education report?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker if I can only give you an example of a report that I received 
like the one from the Minister of T ransport i t was officially signed , I beg to table so that it 
can be receiv ed.   
The Temporary Speaker : Thank you . 
  
(Consultations ) 
 
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Hon. Members  can I have a copy of the educational report that was tabled by Hon . 
Milka ... 
 
(Silence)  
 
 Yes? Kindly let me have it. Order Hon . Members ! It is a concern th at has been raised 
by the Hon. M ember and of course anything to sound unofficial must be signed and stamped, 
this is a House of procedures Hon . Members  and unfortunately the first report we got is also 
an unsigned document . So i think i t won't sound good if we allow M ember s with un signed 
document s to table it before this House and again deny a chance to another M ember to table a 
report that is not signed .  
So i think it is a concern, and maybe some of us we are not aware and we learn 
because learning is a process , now allow me to in form al l the Chairpersons and the 
Committees that they are not to table a report in this House  which is not a official report. B ut 
as for today because it has already happened I think I will just allow the Hon . Member who is 
the C hairman to  table the same report because Hon . Members  this report is not signed and 
you never raised a question, but you are so quiet and it has been tabled already . The same 
Hon. Member  is also coming up with another, so I think we do it for today and we call it a 
day and never will we allow any unsigned document to be signed in this House, with due 
respect please ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
Yes Hon . Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika sheria inasema hakuna uamuzi  bila 
maombi, ukisema hivyo ikiwa Mheshimiwa Milka ameweza kusoma ripoti yake na hakuna 
mtu yoyote alielalamika kwa hivyo hiyo inatakikana kuwa imesomwa maneno yale 
yamemalizika yule alieshikwa sasa ndio yeye aj itengeneze ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Temporary Speaker : I understand Hon . Members  but still it's the same session 
that the same issues are being raised, it’s not a different one.  I mean it's my humble request 
because this report was raised here on 8th March its  over 14 days now so kindly please. Hon 
Members  allow me to make ruling on the same, I won't subject it into discussion,  it is my 
humble request ...yes kindly please allow me to allow the Hon . Member to table the report but 
we are giving the final judgment on the same that never ever will you or will we allow any 
Hon. Member to table unsigned document s in this Hon orable  House ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
  Yes Chairperson . 
Hon. Oindo :  Thank you Mr. Speaker and just to assure you that my department led 
by me we honour and treasure this Hon orable  House , next week we shall also present the 
same report signed like its suppose d to be , so allow me to read it .  
 
(Hon. Oindo resumed moving the Report)  
 
Disbursement of revolving fund to women groups  
The department of Youth Gender and Sports and C ultural affairs dispersed shs 
26,350,300 to 214 women groups in Mombasa County . 
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 The groups are as follows;  
 
PWDS 19 Total of 1,410,000 ;  
Mwakirunge 9,          640,000; 
We have Likoni 9,     660,000 ; 
Changamwe women 32, total of 3,200,000 ; 
Jomvu 18, total of 1 ,800,000; 
BMU 13, 1,300,000 ; 
Changamwe 30 groups a total of 3,000,000 ; 
PWD s 146,600 
Mwakirunge 146 ,600 
Likoni 30, 1,080000  
Changamwe 30, 2,330,000  
Jomvu 30, 1380000  
Changamwe 15, 1,500000  
 
A total of 214 groups received a tot al sum of shs 26, 350,300 . 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
The Temporary Speaker : Thank you  Chairman . Yes Clerk . 
 
STATEMENT  
STATUS OF THE BURSAR IES REPORT  
 
Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . 
Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare:  Mr. Speaker again i would like to state on behalf of the Chairman 
that we have not yet received the status of  the bursaries report from the M inister. thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker : Hon. Amur . 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker again we cannot be taken for granted, this issue has been in 
this House for the last four weeks and every time this issue is given a time the reply is we 
have not received, last week the C hair directed that by this Thursday the report be table d and 
we had also requested if the Committee cannot work then an Ad hoc Committee be  formed to 
perform their duties.  
Again we cannot be told they don't have a report yet some bursaries are being issue d 
at Tononoka and the C ommittee is telling us they don't have any report , how did they manage 
to go disburse the bur saries without informing their Committee.  Mr. Speaker last week the 
direction was that by Thursday a comprehensive report b e brought in this House by the 
Committee on E ducati on and I remember very well asking the C hair by the n that the 
Committee there was no M ember in this House that time and yet time was given by this 
Thursday if no report then that Committee we should rethink about it. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker : Thank  you I think Hon. Members  I once gave the 
direction over the same issue and I don't recall wh en but it has over stayed, the C ommittee I 
think somebody, somewhere is sleeping on  the job... 
 
(Applause)  
...Because I think it was raised early February , sometimes back the moment we 
resumed after the recess and again as we speak we have no ne and in fact it seems you don't 
know when you will table it. The Member what do you have to say before  we make the ruling 
on the same.  
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker for those observations , although I think 
they are very drastic am sure if the Chairman was here he would have given a more 
comprehensive report . You are aware that he has been away at Kinondo for the last two days 
he has not even hav e time to sleep and he did a good job he delivered we now have an extra 
Member...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire):  Order Hon. Amur . 
Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare : The Committee of  Education is a very committed C ommittee we 
went to visit the Dep uty Governor who is the head of Education two days back, we had a 
lengthy discussion on the same and he promised that he was going to look in to this and give 
us a comprehensive report...  
(Interruption)  
The Temporary Speaker : But you could have informed the Hon. Member that you 
have over stayed with the report that this Thursday you were to table the report , I think you 
would have work within those...  
 
(Interruption)  
Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare : We beg to be given one more chance so that in our next sitting 
which will be after we have come from devolution conference we shall have the report ready, 
we beg to be given one more chance.  
The Temporary Speaker : Hon. Ogutu . 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker.  Mr. Speaker there are rumours  on the ground 
that next week there will be disbursement of new bursar y forms , and  if we cannot get that 
report before the disbursement then I think this is being taken for a ride.  
The Temporary Speaker : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity am also 
under pr ivilege because am part of the Committee M ember, only at this point am under 
privilege but I have this to say that it's only the report that was to be tabled before this House 
that is not ready but we have had a c ouple of meetings as my fellow M ember ha s spoken , 
before we have had a couple of meetings with the Chief Officer .  
During the meetings  we h ave raised the concern s that Members  are raising through 
the Chair and at last the status I know I have no mandate to speak the Chairperson has not 
given me this authority to speak on his behalf but I can share some information that in my 
know how that all these  concerns were raised in the last meeting we had with the Chief 
Officer Ms. Tuni and she said that she is going to hav e a meeting with the C ommittee just 
immediately after the devolution conference so that we deliberate deeply into these  issues so 
that we bring a comprehensive report after consultative meeting.  
However on the bursary status the Chief Officer ..., I don't think that's the position that 
the week after devolution they will be issuing forms because as it were they had requested for 
funding from the finance and they were told that there is no enough funds, they c an't issue 
forms before they know exactly how much disbursement is there for bursaries . So I don't 
think it is the position as it is but am not an authority that's the las t communication I had with 
the Chief O fficer.   
However having said that I wish to ask  for patience from Members  that we are really 
workin g on the se issues on bursaries , I know they are very dear to our hearts and we are 
really working on them so we just beg for a little more time and we will deliver the report in 
due cause. Thank you.  
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 The Temporary Speaker : After how long Hon. Member?  
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya Juma : Thank you Hon. Speaker . Again I enlighten that next 
week we would be involve in official matters , I prefer that we extend with two weeks and 
when we resume back we can have the meeting  and then we compile the report so that we can 
have it before the House on the consecutive meeting . Maybe the Clerk can assist us two 
weeks from now will be on which date? Am du ly informed that on 3rd of  May so I can take 
an undertaking as a Member of Edu cation Committee that by 3rd May, 2018 we will have a 
comprehensive report. Thank you so much.  
 
(Applause)  
The Temporary Speaker : Hon. Members  I think we have g ot enough clarification 
on this same issue and allo w me to make ruling on the same.  
So we are giving you but again Hon. Members  before I make a ruli ng the Chairperson 
of the said C ommittee was out , yes but not on official duty ... 
  
(Applause)  
...We will not allow it for next time again so it is my humble request that you work on 
the same n ext week and the other week on third  you report back here so I won't entertain 
discussion s on what we want on third  of May is the report . With those few remarks Hon. 
Members  allow me to make a ruling on the same.  
Hon. (Mrs.)  Amriya Juma : Obliged . 
The Temporary Speaker : Thank you, Hon. Member I have already ruled, the ruling 
is out already.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Sir the Chair was on an official duty . 
The Temporary Speaker : But he could have communicated to the Clerk of the 
County Assembly, I  respect you because you are the Chairman of the said Party...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
...Order Hon. Members ! Order Hon.  Amur! A re you saying the same issue that h ave 
already made a ruling on?  
Hon. Amur:  (Off Mic). 
The Temporary Speaker : I would want to see the letter Hon. Chairman, an official 
letter that you requested on behalf of the Party to allow the Chairman to go and conduct the 
Party activity after yes...  
 
(Applause)  
 
...Next order ? 
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE ON THE COUNTY DISASTER PREPA REDNESS DURING RAINY  SEASON  
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir I wish not to give 
the following statement response on the County disaster preparedness during rainy season as 
it is neither within the mandate of Department nor Committee on Environment, Solid Waste 
Management and Energy.   
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 The Mombasa County Disaster Management which is under County Inspectorate is 
solely responsible of the above raised concerns and that they would be in a better position to 
answer the following queries.   
 
(Interruption)  
The Temporary Speaker : Order Hon. Members ! Was it a report?  Can I have a copy 
please?  
Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, this is a statement please . 
 
(Loud  consultation s) 
 
The Temporary Speaker : Order! Order! Order Hon.  Members ! So Hon.  Member  
this simply means that it is not under your docket then we will have to find out who is 
responsible later on. Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker ... (Off Mic) . 
The Temporary Speaker :  Do the Transport Committee has anything to do wit h the 
disaster?  
Hon. Amur:  (Off Mic) 
The Temporary Speaker : Ok, so I think  whoever raised the issue should direct the 
issue to the concerned Department. Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSES ON THE CLE ARANCE OF GARBAGE CO LLECTION POINTS IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Hon. Feddis  Mbura . 
Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura:  Thank Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker I wish to give the following 
statement responses on the clearance of garbage collection points in Mombasa County. The 
Department of Environment, Solid Waste Management and Energy has been facing many 
challenges such as shortage of trailers, in sufficient work force in garbage collection des pite 
putting in  place various ways to improve the situation. The aforementioned Department is 
aware of Mchel eni collection point in Kipevu W ard and currently is advocating team work in 
insuring that the remaining collection points are cleared. We would like to assure that the 
County g overnment is aware of the above concerned posts by garbage and currently is taking 
necessary remedial measures to ensure that the goals of making Mombasa cleaner and 
greener City. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker : What is your concern Hon. Renson Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I think maybe we are just d eciding that we will float the 
Standing order bec ause the Chairman of Youth and Gender has opened the door I think we 
now need to open more doors and  I should just believe in the course  of next week we are 
going to repeat the same. I was trying to ask is the report being read authentic, is it signed? 
Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker : Ok I think I have made a ruling on the same and I said 
today marks the end of such like businesses in this Honorable  House and that next time we 
will not entertain it.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Bwana Spika  tumekubaliana na  uamuzi wako kwa sababu 
wewe ndio kinara lakini Mheshimiwa Spika twataka Makarani  wawape ushauri Kamati za 
Bunge. Kanuni ya Bunge nambari 180 inazungumza juu ya ripoti na kwa namna gani una leta 
ripoti kwa Bunge . Ni majukumu ya Makarani  kujulisha Kamati  Mheshimiwa kwa sababu 
Kamati  wanaw asilisha ripoti bila kumbukumbu.  
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 Lazima kuweko na kumbukumbu za mkutano kuwa wamekaa na wote 
wamekubalian a na kama kuna mtu amekataa inukuliwe amekataa na ile ripoti kusudi mtu 
anaweza kuja kujitetea lakini hasa ikiwa tutakwenda namna hii Mheshimiwa Spika itakua 
gumzo barazani. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Temporary Speaker :  Hon.  Members  the concerns are so many and of course 
they are so valid and I think we always have the responses then the repor ts, so what we are 
reading today are the responses and according to my knowledge is that even a response one 
can just respond off guard , I mean  without even the document itself but the concern s raised 
by Hon.  Members  are so valid only that we have the difference between the responses and the 
reports. So the Standing Order 180 that the Hon.  Member  is talking about these are the 
reports and like th e one tabled was a rep ort by the Education Committee M ember, it was a 
report at the same time the response.  
So allow me just like Hon. Hatimy has put it the C lerks take note of that let no 
Member bring here the report that is unsigned and it is my appeal again to make it final today 
and it marks the end of unsigned reports to see the floor of this Honorable  House. I think up 
to that juncture we have agreed, Clerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
The Temporary Speaker : Yes Hon. Kitula . 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I am standing here on behalf 
of the Majority Leader to present the following Procedural Motion  on adjournment of the 
County Assembly.  
 
(Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) moved the Procedural Motion)  
 
THAT, pursuant to Standing Order 30 (1), this Ass embly...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Point of order . 
The Temporary Speaker : What is your point of order Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I request Hon. Kitula to first apply for leave to delete Hon. 
Mwam wiri because we can see the name of Hon. Khamis Musa Mwidani Mwam wiri. So he 
should ask for leave first before he proceeds to table the Motion . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Temporary Speaker : Yes, you see it is ok. Of course these are the two names 
appearing ; the two names of two different people so you just have to seek leave Hon. Charles 
Kitula.  
Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I seek leave to 
delete the name Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani Mwam wiri and the name should appear as Hon. 
Hamisi Musa Mwidani who is the Leader of Majority of this Assembly.  
The Temporary Speaker : Yes I think the leave is granted. Come up again now . 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
April 19 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12  
(Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) resumed moving the Procedural Motion)  
 
Adjournment  of the County Assembly;   
THAT, pursuant to Standing Order 30 (1), this Assembly RESOLVES to adjourn 
today Thursday, 19th April , 2018 and resume on Wednesday, 2nd May, 2018 .  
Mr. Speaker may I ask Hon. Mohamed Hatimy to second the Motion . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa niaba ya Wanachama  wenzangu 
na mimi hapa na simama kwa sababu ya safari ili oko ya kwenda Kakamega Wanachama  wote 
watakuwa hawako kwa muda wa wiki moja kwa hivyo nasimama hapa ku unga mkono huu 
Mswada . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
(Question proposed)  
 
The Temporary Speaker : Hon.  Members  you have heard both the Motion  mover 
and the seconder.  I now propose the question that this House consider the Motion  moved by 
Hon. Charles Kitula . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
 
Hon.  Members  this Motion  will have no debate and again you will allow me to put a 
question on the same since there is no debate on Procedural Motion . Hon.  Members  allow me 
to put a question. I now put a question that this House adopt the Motion  of adjournment 
moved by Hon. Charle s Kit ula and considered by the House.  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
...Next order ?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members  the House stands adjourned until Wednesday, 2nd May, 2018 at 
9:00a.m.  
 
The House rose at 3:47p.m.  
 
 
 