December 6, 2014             MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                         27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 6th December , 201 7 
The House met at 9:2 7a.m. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have your seats . Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Yes Chairperson Committee on Environment, Waste Management and Energy or any 
other Member from this Committee? Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
Hon. Mwaega : Thank you Mr. Speaker I would like to inform this Hon. House that 
the Committee of Environment had a meeting with the Executive Member and we brought 
the issue of the pilling up of garbag e especially in Kongowea Ward . Even  though the 
Executive has not officially responded ba ck to us but as the Committee  we continue to make 
follow ups  and we are seeing some work being done on the ground so we await  for the 
official communication on them on how far  they have gone but so far th ere is some work   
going on in the ground. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you , yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Chairperson Education , Information Technology and MV  2035 or any other Member 
from that Committee? Yes Hon. Ali Omar Shariff?  
Hon. Ali Shariff:  Thank you Mr. Speaker am the Vice Chairperson on the Committee 
on Education, Information Technology and MV  2035, I would like to respond on this 
statement on behalf of my Chairperson Hon. Ibrahim Omondi. We have already requested the 
report from the Executive but we are yet to receive the report so I would like this House to 
have more patience Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  So you are asking for ? 
Hon. Ali Shariff:  More time . 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : What time do you want the House to give 
you?  
Hon. Ali Shariff:  After the long recess .  
(Silence)  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The Table Clerks will make the relevant 
information to you , they will communicate to the Committee concerning this iss ue even if the 
Members will be on the long recess but we will need the information to get t o the Members 
even if they are on the long recess , please fast -track on that response and ma ke sure you 
communicate to the Table Clerks and we will make a way of reaching the Hon. Members. 
Yes Hon. Samba?  
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker Sir I think by next year or rather when we are from the 
long recess the issue would h ave expired already, we will be talking on the school reporting 
now. I think they should give us this information by tomorrow  at least when we are breaking 
for the long recess because it has been long since the results were released and since I brag 
off that I produced the best pupil in the entire Coast  Province and in Mombasa County to be 
precise , I think they should furnish us with that detail Mr. Speaker Sir by tomorrow . 
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes thank you Hon. Samba but as I have 
said the commu nication will reach the Hon . Members even if they wil l be on the long recess 
so it doesn't mean it will come in February . I said the Table Clerks will communicate to the 
Committee when we will need the response and how the response will reach the Members so  
we will need the Committee to fast -track on the issue.  
December 6, 2014             MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                         27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon.  Members there being no other business the House stands adjourned unti l today 
6th December, 2017 at 2 :30p.m. 
The House rose at 9 :35a.m. 
 