March 1, 2017                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 1st March, 2017  
The House met at 2 :35pm.  
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Members have a sit. Members I stand under 
Standing  Order 31  and am ordering Sergeant A t Arm s to ring the  quorum bell . 
(Quorum bell rung)  
(Members entered the Chamber)  
Yes Clerk ascertain whether there is quorum...  
(Clerk  confirmed quorum)  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Notice of the Motion, Hon Mohamed Hatimy?  Any Hon Member of Delegated to take 
us through this Notice of Motion . Yes Hon Onje read it . 
Hon Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika vile unavyojua mimi ni 
Naibu Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati ya Delegated County Legislation , sasa kwa ruhusa yako 
nitaendelea kusoma Mswada  amba o ni kwa niaba ya Mheshimiwa Hatimy kama utanipa ruhusa .  
(Hon.  Onje g ave Notice of  Motion on formal delegation of duties by Chief Officers and seniors ) 
Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to give notice of the following motion;  
THAT AWARE THAT  it is the right of every employee to proceed  on annual leave or 
any other leave recognized by law;  
FURTHER AWARE THAT  the Chief officers and Senior Officers working in the 
County Government normally enjoy this right as required by law;  
CONCERNED THAT  the aforementioned officers do no t delegate  the duties in writing 
and hence the officers who are supposed to stand in for them are not clearly informed in writing 
of the duties that they are required to partake in the absence of the officer proceeding on leave;  
NOTING THAT  the lack of effective de legation stalls the work ou tput in the affected 
department (s) and the County government at large and undermines transparency and 
accountability and also results to unnecessary delays in  service delivery;  
Mr. Speaker S ir, 
I urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that; 
 The County Secretary and the County Assembly Clerk to develop a system that will 
ensure that  all the Chief Officers and Senior Officers proceeding for annual leave hand 
over their duties for those in the office in writing;  
 The County Secretary/County C lerk to ensure adherence to the requirement that staff 
proceeding on leave prepare an itemized hand over note with a copy to be issued to the 
County Secretary/ Clerk as the case may be, and other Heads of Departments.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker sir I read to m ove. 
(Hon Onje moved)  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon Onje, the Notice of Motion now 
rests to the House Business Committee  to allocate time for this Motion, yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon Zainab Mumba.  
March 1, 2017                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 Hon. Faraj : Hon Speaker I wish to stand on behalf of Hon Zainab Mumba because she’s 
my Chairlady on the side of environment and Mr. Speaker Hon Zainab has requested for more 
time to come up with the statement if you will allow.  
(Interruption)  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Mary Akinyi the Chairperson on 
Environment  and Natural resources has requested for more time but as the Assembly we will 
give the Chair and the Committee since there  is time , so make sure by next week on Tuesday  you 
have this response in the House. Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon Amir Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Mr. Speaker sir I stand before this Hon House 
to give out a reply  on the statement requested by Hon Omar Eb rahim , Deputy Chair of Spo rts 
Youth and Gender regarding Deputy Chair. 
(Interruption ) 
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : What is it Hon Saad?  
Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker ; there is a Committee leadership being  
distributed by fellow Members in this House. Mr. Speaker this is not procedural.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just proceed with the reply but make sure you 
refer well.  
Hon. Thoya.  Thank you Mr.  Speaker si r. Mr.  Speaker sir, Hon Omar Ebrahim is the 
Deputy Chair of Sports and gender ; I would like to give the following statement, in regards to 
lack of proper lighting in Kongowea Market, in response to concerns raised b y Hon. Ebrahim 
Omar during the Twenty fourth sitting on Thursday, 23rd February 2017.  
(Hon Thoya read)  
Mr. Speaker Sir, as all are aware, there had been a construction project which was 
recen tly undertaken by the National government for the purpose of upgrading the Kongowea 
market.  
Due to the above mentioned project, the Market Master earlier reported this issue to 
Electrical Department ; in addition the El ectrical Department communicated in writing to Eng. 
Albert Keno who is the Chief Officer Department of Public Works, Transport and Infrastructure 
that part of Kongowea Wholesale Market had experienced electrical shots leading  to improper 
lighting.  
However, Mr . Speaker Sir, the electrical engineers have been working around the clock 
to ensure the immediate resumption of the lighting services to Kongowea Traders Market.  
Mr. Speak er sir, I would like to assure Members of the County Assembly and the public 
at larg e that as we are speaking the problem has been solved.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon Amir Thoya.  What is it Hon 
Omar Meti?  
Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker Sir, I want to thank the Chairman for Transport and Public 
work s for the r eports ; but truly speaking there some remarks which they did not make sense to 
me because Mr. Chairman has said that the problem has been solved but I can assure you up to 
now even if you go to market during the morning hours you will see finding the problem 
existing . 
So maybe he may read this report by saying the problem will be solved but it has no t yet 
been solved Mr. Speaker , so that ’s a correction Mr. Speaker  because during the morning hours is 
March 1, 2017                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3 where the traders are finding  difficulties  when they want to distribute their goods in the market 
because it is tota l darkness and they have to use their phones, the mulika mwizi  ones as torches . 
So when the time reaches around 9 to 10 O’clock in the morning Mr. Speaker the cha rges 
are exhausted or finished so they cannot do  the transaction for M -pesa when  they need to  
communicate  with their customers about the  arrival of their goods which have been  ordered.  
So this is a very urgent issue Mr. Speaker, and I need the Chairman to clarify that the  
problem is not solved and it is  going on and it will be solved soon rather than misleading the 
House by saying the problem has been solved . 
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I hope Hon Amir Thoya you are not responding 
to what has been said by Hon Meti . 
Hon. Thoya:  I would like to make t wo clarifications Mr. Speaker.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok…  
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker Sir, the earlier reported problem was the lighting but am 
surprised Hon Member is talking of lighting in the Kongowea Market during t he day … 
(Laughter ) 
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : We have understood, Hon Meti is as if you are 
introducing the issue of mobile phones that was what a Hon Chairman have understood but all in 
all the Chairman has responded and he act ed on what you have said for hi m to make sure he 
rectifies his statement tha t problem would be solved. Yes C lerk, let’s proceed.  
MOTION  
Yes, Hon  Saad Faraj…  
Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity on behalf of Hon  Mohamed 
Hatimy who is the mover of the Motion, if you allow me Mr. Spe aker I would like to move this 
Motion on his behalf.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : You may proceed am sure he has give n you the 
mandate to move this Motion.  
Hon. Faraj:  Yes Mr. Speaker there is a  letter to move the Motion his behalf.  
(Hon Saad move d Motion on confirmation of qualified officers serving in acting capacity ) 
Mr. Speaker Si r, I beg to move the following Motion;  
 
1. That aware that the employment laws and policies require that an officer w ho has served 
in an acting capacity and has the relevant qualification(s) and /or experience should be 
confirmed to the substantive position;  
 
2. Further aware there are many officers  who are serving in the County government and 
they have the relevant qualif ications yet they still serve in acting capacity;  
 
3. Mr. Speaker Sir, concerned this may lead to high turnover and lack of motivation at the 
place of work and hence his productivity and encourage vices such as corruption;  
Mr. Speaker, I this Assembly to reso lve that;  
1. The County Secretary and the County Assembly Clerk to liaise with the  County 
Public Service Board and the County Assembly Service Board respectively to have 
the acting officers who are qualified and possess the required technical skills to be 
confirmed in substantive positions.  
2. The County Secretary to liaise with the Office of the Governor on deployment of the 
qualified staff.  
(Hon Faraj moved)  
March 1, 2017                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4 Mr. Speaker, I beg to move and call upon Hon  Jimmy Khadarli  to second this Motion.  
(Hon. Odari bow ed) 
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank  you as the Motion has got a seconder, I 
now propose a question ; as many of the opinion that the Motion that Saad Faraj on confirmation 
of qualified officers serving in acting c apacities been debated in this House…  
(Question put and agreed to)  
Yes Hon  Saad…  
Hon. Faraj:  Thank you once again Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker we as Members of the 
County Assembly have already discussed issues that are attached to our welfare and for a long 
period we have forgetting people who have been working so hard to make sure that issues in the 
Assembly, issues that matter with  regards to the welfare of the Members are being dealt with by 
this people.  
Mr. Speaker sir it is high time that th ese Members appreciate , show appreciations t o these 
staff by passing this Motion which is going to have a very positive impact from the way the staff 
are carrying themselves in this County Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker we've spoken about those staff  that are working on acting capacity and the 
law clearly st ates that for a certain of period of six months if a person serve s on an acting person 
then he or she should be confirmed but today we are having staff who have been working on 
acting capacity for more than three years since we came as Members of the County Assembly 
representing our representative  areas .  
Mr. Speaker we have people or staff who have experience in different fields but we have 
failed to promote them because they lack documents but they work and they show that they are 
very responsible in their positions and some of them have been producing results while they do 
not have those relevant documents which are needed . 
And I think we ne ed to be fair enough for those Members who we actually inher ited f rom 
Municipality ; from the defunct Municipality since  during the time they were no opportunity to 
go for training but after our coming Members of the County Assembly it is for us to come up 
with the aim s and show support to these pe ople and now that there are opportunities for training 
to provide them with the relevant training that they are needed but at the same time it is high 
time that we promote these members of staff.  
Mr. Speaker I call upon all the Members to support th is Motion so that we can improve 
the way we are working in this Assembly. Thank you.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon Amir Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama katika 
ukumbi wa Jumba hili kuweza kuunga mkono hoja ambayo imeletwa na ndugu yangu 
Mwakilishi wa Tononoka Saad Faraj.  
Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni Jumba na sheria na ni mahala tunapolizungumzia suala hili 
inakuwa si sawa mfanyikazi ama mtumishi wa umma ama mtumishi wa Kaunti hii kwamba 
anafanya kazi takriban miaka miw ili ama mitatu katika hali ya ku  act kwa nafasi  ambayo iko 
wazi  na pengine ingehitaji nafasi ile iweze kujazwa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika endapo utaweka mfanyi  kazi aweze kufanya kazi hii kwa muda mrefu 
inamaanisha kwamba tumemzuiliwa mtu mwengine pale chini ili kuweze kuingia katika ile 
nafasi ambayo pengine huyu ambae anafanya nafasi ya juu angeweza kuthi bitishwa kupitia kwa 
County  Assembl y Service Board kufanya kazi kulingana na ile kazi , kulingana na uwezo  
tunazuilia wale wa chini kupanda . 
Mheshimiwa Spika wa fanyi  kazi wengi ambao wanafanya kazi katika shirika hili 
wanafanya kazi na sisi kama watunga sheria tumeweza kukalia nafasi hizi kwa sababu ni lawama 
March 1, 2017                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 zetu kwa sababu sheria inapopita katika Bunge hili inatakikana iweze kutekelezwa muda ule  ule 
ambao umepitishwa . 
Nakumbuka ya kwamba Mheshimiwa Spika si mara ya kwanza hoja kama hii kuja katika 
Bunge letu na ikapita n a bado hali kama ile inaendelea ; kwa hivyo ningeomba utekelezaji wa 
sheria hii uweze kufanya kazi  mara moja  kwa sababu ninaamini ya kwamba hali kama hii 
imeathiri watu wengi na wale waheshimiwa wengi ambao wataweza kuchangia tuchangie kwa 
busara kwa sababu sisi ni watetezi na sisi ndio wawakilishi na bila sisi kuweza kupitisha hoja hii 
leo wafanyi  kazi wetu wataend elea kuumia na naona Nyumba hii haitakuwa sawa.  
Kwa hivyo tupitishe ili tuweze kutoa nafasi kwa wale wengine wadogo waweze kupanda 
katika ngazi mbali mbali za Bunge ama nafasi za utumishi wa Bunge la Ka unti.  
Kwa hivyo tupitishe tuweze kuhakikisha kwamba wa le wengine wanapanda wanajaza 
hizi nafasi ambazo zitawachwa wazi kwa wa le amba o wako kwa nafasi za kushikilia . Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon Mary . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi pia naunga mkono jambo hili 
nikiwa ninasisitiza ha swa vitengo vyote ambavyo viko katika Kaunti yetu hii ya Mombasa , 
departments  zote ili haya mambo yaweze kutekelezwa haraka iwezekanavyo, nikiwa naangalia 
ile department ya inspectorate  unaona kuwa hata wale watoto ama vijana ambao wao ni 
maaskari wengine pia wanasaidia katika ku kusanya  fedha za kuegeza magari  ndio wanaongeza 
ushuru katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa  lakini kufikia hadi leo hawajakuwa wameandikwa 
permanent bali ni kama contract  na contract  kama ku act tu na hiyo ndio kama vile ali yetoa hii 
mjadala ali yekuja nayo akasema kuwa inachangia hata katika hali ya ufisadi . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba , tena naunga mkono jambo hili na iweze 
kufanyika haraka iwezekanavyo haswa kwa kila kitengo  amba cho tuko na cho, ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I hop e Hon Member you are not opposing  this 
Motion, unless you are opposing i will give you an opportunity if you are opposing i will proceed 
to put a question … 
(Laughter ) 
Hon Members will as ma ny as of the opinion that this Motion on confirmation of 
qualified off icers serving as acting capacities be confirmed . 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Applause ) 
Yes Clerk  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
Yes Hon Mwidani, Leader of Majority . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker , let me t able a Procedural 
Motion . 
ADOPTION OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY CALENDAR 2017  
(Leader of Majority Hon Mwidani read)  
Pursuant to Standing order 24 and 25 , the Assembly resolves th at the calendar 2017 be 
adopted . 
Mr. Speaker from 17th January to 20th April we are going to have Tuesday, Wednesday 
and Thu rsday , from there we are going to have a recess from 6th April 2017 to 28th April 2017, 
then we move to the period of 2nd May 2017 to 8th June 2017 Tuesday afternoon, Wednesday 
morning and afternoon, Thursday afternoon, then we have a recess till Sine die on 15th June 
2017 . 
March 1, 2017                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         27 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6 I am proud to produce this Motion and Members i hope they will accept it and so that we 
move it , we wait until maybe when G od wishes and actually pray to Members so that after this 
recess Sine die on 15th June I might see them September her e. I wish to have all those present as 
Members on September, thank you Mr.  Speaker, I would like to call Hon Wangudi Stephen  to 
second this … 
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Wangudi:  Mr. Speaker I second.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Members I propose a question that as many 
as of the opinion that the Procedural Motion on the adoption of the County Assembly cale ndar 
2017 be discussed in this House…  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker pursuant to Standing Order 25 the 
Assembly resolves that the calendar 2017  be adopted for the period 17th January to 20th April 
2017on Tuesday afternoon , Wednesday  morning and afternoon and Thursday afternoon and then 
we should have a recess on 6th April  2017 to 28th April  2017 and then we come on a period  of 2nd 
May to 8th June 2017 from there we proceed to Sine die recess from 15th June 2017 . Thank you , 
Mr. Speaker.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon Wangudi?  
Hon.  Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa fursa hii  hata mimi niweze kuchangia 
katika  hoja iliyowasilishwa katika Nyumba hii na Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni. M imi 
ninaunga ratiba hii mkono nikizingatia kwamba tutakuwa na muda mzuri wa kuchanganua 
maswala ambayo hii Kaunti kabla hatujafika tamati ya msimu huu .  
Namna ratiba hii ilivyoorodheshwa hapo katika ti kuna muda wa mapumziko ukizinga tia 
ya kwamba huu muda wa mapumziko kuanzia tarehe sita mwezi wa nne hadi tarehe 28 mwezi 
wa nne ni muda mwafaka zaidi kwa sababu ukizingatia kwamba ile tume ya uchaguzi  imeweza 
kusema ya kwamba kuan zia tarehe 14 mwezi wa nne hadi 26 utakuwa ni msimu wa uchaguzi 
mdogo basi utakuwa ni muda mzuri Waheshimiwa hawa kuwa mashinani . 
Hii nafasi wataweza kuitumia ili nafasi ya kurejea ndani ya Nyumba tuko na mda mfupi 
wa kumaliza yale makombo yatakuwa yamebaki iliyosalia tuwe  tunaangalia maswala ambayo 
yanaambatana na  utungaji wa sheria katika Jumba  hili kisha baada ya hapo kila mtu atakuwa 
amepata mkono wa buriani apumzike salama.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Members as the Speaker I will not put a 
question to this Motion I  would like the Leader of Majority to rectify the dates because I am sure 
if you look properly the dates period 17th January to 20th April 2017 and after that we see recess 
from 6th April to 28th April . 
The Leader should come clear because under Standing Order 2 5 (2) this  thing is supposed 
to be gazett ed and this is a respected House of law and we would not like people to come after  
not to question our calendar ; the issu e will stand pending until the Leader rectifies this and 
tomorrow we will put a question . Thank you. Yes  Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon Members this House st ands adjourned until tomorrow 2 :30pm. 
 
The House rose at 3:10pm.  