April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 3rd April, 2019  
The House met at 2:48p.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Members you may have your seat . 
(Silence ) 
 Yes, Clerk?  
PAPERS  
ANNUAL REPORT OF FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018  FOR MOMBASA COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD  
 
 Yes, the L eader of Majority or any other M ember? Yes, Hon . Raphael Bwire.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I am mandated by the Hon . Majority 
Leader, to tabl e this report before the House i n his absence . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : To lay?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  To lay the report i n his absence Mr. Speaker . I have the annual report of 
financial year 2017/2018 and I would wish to lay it before this House . Thank y ou.  
 
(Paper laid ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : From which Department?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  From the Mombasa County Service Board . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Okay , thank you.  

April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker Sir… 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Bwire you are out of order;  we are in order 
number five. I think you have laid the report on order number five.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:   Yes, Sir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you , then just wait for the next order so 
that you present to this Hou se whatever that you have.  
 
 Hon. Bwire: Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk?  
PAPER  
MOMBASA COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD EVALUATION REPORT FO R THE YEAR 2017  ON 
COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE COMPLIANCE WITH THE V ALUES AND PRINCIPLES  IN ARTICLE 10 AND 232  
OF THE CONSTITUTION  
 
 Yes, Hon . Raphael Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker, with me ... 
 
(Consultations)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : …Okay proceed Hon. Bwire . 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker Sir , this is a Mombasa County Public Service Board , the 
evaluation report for the year 2017 on County Public Service Compliance wit h the values and 
principles in Article 10 and 232 of the Constitution . I wish to lay Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Paper l aid) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you . 
 
MOMBASA COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD EVALUATION REPORT OF 2018  ON COUNTY PUBLIC 
SERVICE COMPLIANCE WITH THE V ALUES AND PRINCIPLES  IN ARTICLE  10 AND 232  OF THE 
CONSTITUTION  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  And again Mr. Speaker on the same note I have the Mombasa County 
Public Service Board Evaluation report of  2018 on County Public Service compliance wit h the 
values and principles in Article  10 and 232 of the Constitution . I would wish to lay. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 (Paper laid ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Members the three laid reports will be 
Committed to the Committee on Labour , so Members from that Committee please tak e note  and 
start working on the said Committees because as from today the reports are committed to that 
sectoral Committee. Yes Clerk?  
PAPER  
 
 Chairperson Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs or the Chairperson on Labour and 
Social Affairs? Yes Hon. Shom ari? 
 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . Ningependa 
kufahamisha Nyumba hii kama ikiwezekana watupatie kama muda wa wiki moja kwa sababu 
kuna ripoti ambayo tunaisubiri kupatia kwa hilo suala la Fagia Bunge, hivyo basi  tungeom ba 
Nyumba hii itupatie wiki moja tuweze kukamilisha hiyo ripoti Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : So Hon. Shomari you are talking on behalf of 
which Committee?  
 
 Hon. Ali Shomari:  …of Justice . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Legal and Justice.  
 
 Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Yes. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Yes what is it Hon. M usumba Raphael?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker Sir , I hereby represent the Chairperson on Committee of 
Labour and Social Welfare . Mr. Speaker we wer e to have a joint meeting which we had and as 
indicated by the Hon. Member from the Legal and Justice we also join him in asking for one 
more week so that we bring a very comprehensive report on the same. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you noted. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 I understand the Leader of Majority has just left because it was his responsibility to come 
and respond on th is urgent issue from Jomvu Kuu Ward, so we will give him until tomorrow 
afternoon so that he respond on this issue.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Yes Hon. Athuman  Shebe? Okay proceed ? 
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Yes thank you Hon. Speaker , am just standing to appreciate the 
effort which have been put in place by the Leader of Majority and also the Water Committee I 
just want to confirm that I just received water in my area and as we speak right now …  
 
(Applause)  
 
 My people Hon. Speaker are just enjoying themselves drinking and showering it has been 
a long time ! Yes Hon. Speaker I think I have decided just to appreciate t he effort which have 
been made by the Leade r of Majority and the Chair of Water. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Athuman  Shebe.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 What is it Hon. Junior Wambua?  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Bwana Spika naf ikiri ma lalamiko ilikuwa Changamwe na Jomvu, 
Jomvu walipata … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : There is a P oint of Order ! 
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Changamwe tuna shida sana hakuna maji hata kidogo, tungetaka na sisi 
tupate maji.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes what is it? There  is a point of information.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker before the Member Hon . Athuman..., I appreciate  that you 
directed the Majority Leader who was mandated to do a follow up to report, he has not report ed, 
so I d o not think it is viable for the Members to start aga in arguing the case and yet he has not 
been reported back by the Majority Leader. ..  
 
(Applause)  
 
Hon. Speaker I would wish to  urge the fellow M embers to wait till the response to come 
from the Majority Leader,  then we start reacting, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you for the Information  Hon. Junio r 
Wambua.  
 
April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Hon. Wambua:  Spika niliona kama huyu alikuwa anam wakilisha kwa mambo yote, 
naona angeendelea kumwakilisha pia.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Junior Wambua . I think I had 
said ea rlier that  it was the responsibility of the Majority Leader to respond to this issue, so I had 
directed that he respond s to this Hon ourable House  due to it s urgency by tomorrow afternoon  
even though the Member from Jomvu Kuu Ward responded that in  his Ward people have now 
started receiving water, but the Statement was on Mombasa W est. Yes, Clerk ? 
STAT EMENT  
STATUS OF LAPFUND DEDUCTION S 
 
 Yes, the Leader of Majority ? This wil l return to the House Business Committee  they will 
allocate time and  date for it to come back . Yes, C lerk?  
 
(Statement on s tatus of L apfund deductio ns deferred ) 
 Yes, Hon . Leader of Majority . 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker through the office of the Majority 
Leader as requested that you kindly allow him to report back next week, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Musumba Raphael . Hon. 
Members there was a Statement in order number six, I have seen the Chair Labo ur and Social 
Welfare and th e Chair Justice and Legal affairs, they have requested that they be ready with their 
response and it is just a response so  I will let the Hon . Chair Labo ur to respond so that we 
proceed . Yes Chairman Labo ur. 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, apology for arriving late here  but I want to 
bring to your attention that we have had a very fruitful meeting with the said officers . I want to 
allay fears  that Fagia Bunge is existing  no more, I want this to be captured by that Hansard that 
Fagia Bunge has com e to an end officially and related to the involvement that due to t he natural 
death of Fagia Bunge  then the administrators that were involved are going to be called to order 
and discipline  will be followed hence forth . Thank y ou.  
 
 The Deputy Speak er (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you the Chair of Labo ur, what is your 
concern Hon Tob ias? 
 Hon.  Samba: Mr. Speaker I have a concern just 3 minutes ago we have been informed 
by both Chairmen for Legal and the other one stood in for Labour now they requested for 1 
week. Now both Chairmen…  
April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 (Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): They requested Hon. Tobias , they requested for 
one week because the Chairmen were not around but they had said that they have already sat on 
a joint Committee, so it is in order becaus e I ordered the Hon . Member to respond because it is 
just a response…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker you were being misled . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : No we were not being misled they were just 
requesting to let the Honourab le Chairs to present the respon se… 
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker it is just very sad for the Committee that has sat and 
deliberated on this issue and is reporting someth ing very positive and the said Member himself 
was present, so please you were in and you have attested to that and I have said it is very clear 
that Fagia Bunge  has come to an end so let us stick to that and if there is anything that will raise I 
will be there for you. Thank you.  
(Applause)  
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker?  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire . 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I happen to be a Member of the said 
two Committees, I am a Member of Legal and Jus tice Committee and I am also a Member of 
Labour and I stood here on behalf of the Chair person and the entire Committee asking for 1 
week same applies to the Vice Chairperson of the Legal and Justice Mr. Speaker. I also stood 
here to ask for more time. Mr. Speaker I think you had already ruled upon the item and it was…  
(Interruption)  
 The De puty Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Raphael I had not ruled but the Hon . 
Members it is you who stood and said you  are requesting for one week that the Chairs…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Bwire : I agree with you Mr. Speaker . 
 The Deputy Spea ker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : We are not around , so when the Chairs came in I 
just used Standing Oder No.1 to let the Hono urable Chairs to respond on the ir Stateme nts. It is 
just a response to a Statement and it is not a report.  
April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  Hon. Bwire:  But Mr. Speaker with your permission allow me to say that despite being a 
Member of the two Committees whether it is a response or a report it has been an issue that has 
affected the Hon . Members and I would wish this report, be it a report or a response to come in 
written form and that is why  as Members of the said Committees we had requested one week at 
least we table this w ritten report next week Tuesday . Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwam wiri? 
 Hon. Ath uman Mwam wiri: Naomba kutaarifu Jumba hili ya kwamba Wawakilishi 
sahihi wa kuripotia masuala ya Kamati ni Wenyekiti wa Kamati kama wapo wanajukumika  
kuripotia na kama hawapo ndio Mwanachama wa Kamati anaruhusika kuzungumzia na kwa 
kuwa Mwenyekiti amezungumza ni yakini ya kwamba Mwenyekiti inatosha na kama 
wanachama wa Kamati hio wana  shida na Mwenyekiti…  
(Applause)  
 
 Na kama wana  tofauti katika Kamati zao  sisi kama Jumba  ni mwafak a kuchuku a taarifa 
kutoka kwa M wenyekiti. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Point of information!  
 
 The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Samba?  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Hon. Speaker we are setting a very bad preceden t in this House, a 
Chairman cannot be one without Members a nd here is a situation where a Deputy Chair takes 
respons ibility in the absence of both Chairmen . Hon. Speaker ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya .  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  I am on a point of order!  Hon. Speaker once the Statement was requested 
and the  response was to be given both Chairmen were not in the House and the representatives 
took the initiative to give the response in their absence they cannot  take us back even if they are 
Chairmen they cannot be Chairmen without Members and we are going to contradict ourselv es. 
 A response was given by the Vice Chair and then here comes a situation  where Chairmen 
walk slowly and they come at their own time they are taking us back it is our right to seek for a 
response in a written form and I think that is why both the colleagues who stood did not have a 
written response that is why did not have a re port and if they have failed in their deliberation as 
Chairmen they can as well resign and quit. .. 
 
(Loud consultation)  
(Interruption)  
 
April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker!  
 
 Hon. Thoya : Mr. Speaker! Mr. Speaker!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Members!  
 
 Hon. Tho ya: Mr. Speaker!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Members this is a House of rules and we 
are guided also by our Standing Order s; which Standing Order number 161(c) clearly state that 
the Chairperson of a Committee is the spokesman of the Committee  so the Hon. Member or the 
Chairperson of that Committee as the spokesman of that Committee is in order but unless the 
Chair of Justice and Legal Affairs is not or she is n ot accepting whatever that the Chair from 
Labour Committee has responded.  
 So if the Chair from Justice Committee is supporting whatever that has been said by the 
Chair of Labour then Hon. Members we will proceed with whatever that has been responded and  
when you go back with to your Committees you can proceed in writing a report and p resent it to 
the House Business Committee for it to be debated in this House. It can come as a Motion if you 
want it to come back to this Hon ourable  House you can go back to your C ommittees and prepare 
a report , go to the House Committee and bring back as a Moti on but it is a response and it h as 
been responded well so Hon. Members let us just proceed with our proceedings.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker with due respect I indeed respect your directives but as much 
as the Chairperson is a spokesman of t he Committee that does not mean that Members cannot 
have their say. Mr. Speaker we were to have a  joint meeting between the two C ommittees.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon  Mwalimu) : Of which you had . 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker I am speaki ng what I know ; we only held a Labour Committee 
we never held a joint meeting and that is why we are asking for more time ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 We need the advisory point of view … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Now you are co ntradicting yourselves  because 
the Vice Chair stood up and sa id you had a joint Committee not unless we go back to our 
Hansard records and find out what the Hon. Vice Chair said b ecause he said you had a joint 
Committee.  
  
April 3, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           27 
DISCLAIMER: The electron ic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9  Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker! Mr. Spe aker!  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  That is the position Mr. Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Bwana Spika tunachotaka ni  hii vumbi iishe , hii vumbi iishe ! Ukweli 
tumekuwa na mkutano na tunajua vile zile hali zi ko. Mwenyekiti mwenza yuko hapa , ikiwa ni 
vyema kwao kwamba tu pewe w iki moja na mioyo yao ingekuwa myeupe kama theluji tukiileta 
in form of writing I will always do it and I am committed to do it. Please let us discern.  Thank 
you. 
   
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker!  
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Members!  
 
 Hon. S amba:  Kindly!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Members, I think I have given my 
directives and let us proceed from where we are. You will discuss  the issue at your Committee  
level and report to the House Business Committee. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members the House stands adjourn ed until 4th April, 2019 at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The H ouse rose at 3:18p .m. 
 
 
 