July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday , 1st July, 2020.  
The House met at  2:53p.m  
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M walimu) : Have your seats.  
  
(Loud consultat ions) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT  BY HON . AMRIYA JUMA TO COMMIT TEE ON EDUCATION ON 
RISING CASES OF TEEN AGE PREGNANCIES IN M OMBASA COUNTY  
 
   Yes Hon. Amri ya? 
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma : [Inaudible ].  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Use your mic rophone . 
 
 Hon. Amri ya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Pursuant to S tanding orde r number 31, I 
wish to bring a Statement and request the Chairperson on E ducation to respond on whether the 
department is aware of the rising cases of teenage pregnanc ies in Mombasa that have been out in 
the media amounting to over 2 ,500 cases and what the C ounty is doing about it. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes, any Member from Education 
Committee? Y es Hon. Charles Kitula . 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Kama Kamati ya hili B unge tukufu, hatuwezi 
kujadil i hoja kutokana na mitandao ya kijamii ; kama k una ushahidi, tuweze ku jadili  zaidi, lakini 
mambo ya mitandao ni sehemu ya propaganda  nyingi .  

July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Atuelezee ni kama imetoka katika Wizara  husika ; kama ni USAID , kuna mashirika 
ambayo ya natambulika kiserikali tutaweza  kuichambua kupitia sehemu hizo  lakini mitandao 
Mheshimiwa S pika kuna propaganda  nyingi katika mitandao. A hsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M walimu) :  Yes Hon . Raphael B wire? 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Shukran Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa S pika Waswahili husema 
lisemwalo lipo, na haya maneno yamezungumziwa sana katika vyombo vya habari vinavyo  
heshimika na inakuwa ni ju kumu la sisi kama wawakilishi n a mwakilishi tayari ameleta swala 
hilo katika hili Bunge . Inakuwa ni jukumu la idara  husika Mheshimiwa S pika kuchukua jukumu 
hilo ku hakikisha  kama maneno haya yanayozungumzwa ni ya ukweli na  ni jukumu letu k ama 
wawakilishi. H uwezi kusema kwamba yale ni maswala ya vyombo vya habari  sasa 
tusiyazungumze. Shukran.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M walimu) : Yes Hon. Kitula , you want to respond?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika nataka nieleweke vizuri.  Mimi ni M wanachama wa 
Elimu na pia niko na d ada zangu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  lakini kuhusiana na  swala hilo hilo 
nataka Wanachama  wachukulie jam bo hili kwa sawa kabisa kwamba W aziri mwenyewe wa 
Elimu alisema ya kwamba hayo madai sio ya ukweli , hiyo ilikua ni njia ya mashirika ya siyo ya 
kiserikali ( NGOs ) kujitafutia biashara kupata kuelimisha kina dad a katika mashule . Alisema 
hakuna hata mwanafunzi mmoja alieleta ushahi di katika Idara ya Elimu ndio tufahamu kuwa 
Waziri M agoha mwenyewe alisema kuwa ni tetesi . Kwa hivyo ikiwa kuna stakabadhi  ambayo 
imetoa taarifa hi yo mimi pia niko na dada na  ni uchungu nitaishughulikia  lakini mambo ya 
mitandao  hatuwezi fanya mambo kulingana na tetesi za mitandao. Ahsante.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, you are on a P oint of order or what?  
Use your mic rophone . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mhesh imiwa Spika. N afikiri swala ambalo limetolewa na 
Mheshimiwa Amriya ni swala ambalo hata wale wenye ulemavu wa kuona washaanza kulipata 
ukweli wake . Hili sio swa la la mitandao,  tuko na macho na tunaona ya le yanaendelea , kwa hivyo 
nafiki ri ni s wala ambalo  linahitaji kujadiliwa katika Bunge hili. Wa sichana wetu wako katika 
hali ngumu ; kila utak ae muona anakwambia bwana kijana sisi tuko maskani yale tuna yaona wao 
wanabebana . Hii sio ya mitandao M heshimiwa ni kitu tunaona na  macho , kwa hivyo mimi 
nafikiri hili n i swala ambalo latakiwa lizungumzwe kwa mapana na marefu . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Mheshimiwa Milka ? 
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker and the C hair of today for giving me this 
opportunity to  also give my voice on the same.  I want  to thank Hon. Amriya for brin ging that 
issue to this House, it is something that we cannot push away and we cannot say it is only 
appearing in social media and therefore we have no evidence . 
July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  In fact the WHO has already acknowledge d that there is an  upsur ge of teenage 
pregnancies in the world and Kenya is greatly affected . What this means is that our girls ’ 
education future is at stake and we are going to have so many dropouts of the young teenage girls 
who are getting pregnant and that is going to affect the education and to another extent the 
education of  women in Kenya and when women lag behind in education everything lags behind 
because women are pillars of economic developme nt and also other social spheres of life . 
 So it is a topic that must be discus sed; it is an issue that must be addressed so that we 
save the lives of very many girls who are lagging behi nd and getting so many problems;  
probably because of this COVID  19 we also must ask ourselves, as parents ask ourselves very 
many questions , have we  delegated our responsibilities to teachers because within a very short 
time the girls have been home and the parents are overwhelmed they are unable to control these 
girls at home .  So does it mean we have delegated our responsibilities to teachers ? That teachers  
are the ones who are supposed to take care of our children ? These are hard questions that we 
must address as a House and as Momba sa County especially the women L egislators please let  us 
stand up and rise against this vice and e nsure that our girls  are safe and we put a stop to this 
upsurge.  Thank you so much Hon. Members.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Hamida ? 
 
 Hon. Noor: Thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank Hon . Amriya for bringing up this 
Statement . I do emphasize  on this thi ng so much because we have seen teenage pregnancies , we 
have seen it has gone high it seems it is the teachers who are looking after our children because 
they are at home for only three months  and this thing has  really escalated . 
 As women  representatives in Mombasa C ounty we should all stand up like one of my 
colleagues has  just emphasiz ed on it and we have to do it and come out and talk about it and 
educate our girls because the education of girls especially in Mombasa is going down . Women 
and men in this  House I think  this Statement is very important for us and we have to talk about it 
and every one of us must be part of this thing . Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Indeed I wish t o reiterate  the voice of Hon. Amriya 
concerning the pregnanc ies that are really on the rise, evidently Mr. Speaker.  I have a friend who 
has a relative, who has fallen the worst victim of this Covid19 maybe, a brother 17 years old, 
Members may I have your a ttention, am giving you a very good evidenc e that these things are 
really o n the rise.  A brother at the age of 17 years in these three months of quarantine has 
impregnated his two sisters; I  do not think whether most M embers  have that report, that a brothe r 
17 years old has impregnated his two younger sisters j ust because of them  living close in the 
same house. S o these things are r eally happening in our villages  but again I want to  ask Hon. 
Amriya do we also engage the department of Gender, Youth and S ocial pro tection  because such 
things cannot o nly be under the department of E ducation. We  need also to put together the 
Health  department, the department of Youth, G ender  and S ocial protection so that we come up 
with a very good team. And also I and Hon. Milka  and I think the Honourable  from Mwakirunge 
we had a conversatio n with the County Youth Officer … 
 
[Interruption ] 
July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Hon. Nzai:  Point of information Mr. Speaker ! 
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Yes, inform me, let the Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes H on. Nzai?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker to have given me this opportunity on a 
Point of information. Mr. Speaker maybe I seek your clarification,  we are at a S tatement hour ; I 
do not think it  is debated and I beli eve the Hon . Member who has given that  Statement has 
clearly indicated that  she requested the Chairperson of E ducation to bring that information. So I 
do not know whether it  is a M otion to debate or? I seek your clarification Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Nzai . Hon. Nyiro you 
can proceed ; Hon. Nzai as the Speaker I allowe d the Members to react on that S tatement and it is 
a precedence even in Senate it occurs as well . Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Hon. Nzai unless you want to  tell us that you are among the people who are 
impregnating our girls  in the villages to contribute...  
 
[Laughter and applause ] 
 
 But I know you cannot do that because you a re a good father and a Hon. Member. So I 
also speak as a teacher, as a parent  and a lso a Hon. Member of the Education C ommittee, so I did 
have all the rights t o be able to contribute because even if this goes to the C ommittee level, we 
are the same who are going to be engaged there and the Speaker is here if you want also to take 
his job  you can also apply  because the Speaker is there and is definitely able.   
 Mr. Speaker I want to conclude by saying that we had a conversation with the Kisauni 
Sub-County Director of Education on something like that and he was really concern ed about the 
issues that are coming up, so these things are really on the ground and some of the offices are 
aware that these things are happening. S o as an Assembly I think it’s  good for us to constitute the 
Committees that are concern ed and call the offices concern ed so that we can also have a sitting 
we have a discussion as soon as possible so that things don’t go to the worst side of it.  
 So Mr. Speaker, Hon. Amriya this is a very good idea that you have seen as a Lawyer 
you are advocating for our girls and boys. Rem ember we are not only talking about girls getting 
pregnant, we are also talking about the issues of the boys who are getting the girl s pregnant 
because all of them are being affected in a way or the other. So they are our children we should 
be able to have  a conversation and this thing is very helpful. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika wanene 
waliamba , heri maumivu yaniuwe au yanikomaze kuli koni upumbavu uniliwaze . Mheshimiwa 
Spika nasadiki taarifa ama suali limeletwa na Mheshimi wa. 
July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 Mheshimiwa Spika  nikiwa M wanachama wa Kamati husika kwa niaba ya wanachama 
wengine ningekuomba uturuhusu suala hili lirudi katika Kamati kuweza kutathmini na 
kuch unguza inavyostahiki na kuleta jawabu sahihi kwa sababu singizio la suala hili limekuwa 
limetendeka katika kipindi hiki ambapo shule zimefungwa kwa sababu ya swala la msambao wa 
virusi vya Corona . Lakini Mheshimiwa Spika kwa wata alamu wa ki afya na h umu nda ni nina 
imani wapo madak tari tutakubaliana kwamba tangu mwisho wa mwezi wa tatu hadi sasa hivi ni 
takriban miezi mitatu katika majira ya uja uzito hio inakuwa ni 1st trimester  wenyew e wanasema 
hivyo a mbapo hata k liniki  hazijaanza i li tupate yakini ya kwamb a mimba hizi ni za kipindi hiki 
ama walizipata wakiwa shule muhula wa kwanza ndio tuwe na taarifa na takrimu sahihi.  
Ni muafaka na ni wajibu wetu Mheshimiwa Spika kama Kamati kulizamia swala hili na 
tunakuahidi na ku kuhakikishia nikiwa mwanachama wa Kamat i ya Elimu tutaregesha jibu sahihi 
kwa Jumba hili ndani ya juma moja linatutosha kutekeleza hilo kwa ruhusa yako na hekima na 
busara ya Kiti chako . Na nikimalizia Mheshimiwa  Spika nam kumbusha Mh eshimiwa mwenza 
wa Kamati ya Elimu pia ametupa taarifa kuna ki jana alitunga mimba dada zake wawili ajue 
kwamba katika Sehemu ya 87 ya Kanuni za Bunge hili inapaswa awe na ushahidi wa kutosha au 
toshelezi unapotaka kutoa taarifa sawia na hiyo. Kwa sababu mengineo Mheshimiwa Spika ni 
propaganda  za mitandao na Wakenya t unaju a, tunafahamia na tulivyo wabunifu katika kuzua na 
kusambaza yasiyo stahiki . Ni juzi tu Mheshimiwa Spika tumeshuhudia mambo mengi mengi 
kuhusu miongon i wa viongozi wetu wakiwekelewa; k wa hivyo tuweke heshima yetu ya 
kiuheshimiwa na tusiendeshe Bunge na  hoja na misingi ya propaganda  na taarifa za mitandaoni , 
sisi n i watu wazima, wakomavu ndiposa  nikasema , wanene walisema. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you. Yes Hon. Aran?  
Hon. Oindo : Thank you Mr. Speaker for g iving me this opportunity . I just need to 
inform the House and also know from you and to seek advice from you Hon. Chair. Are we 
really following the guidelines and measures that are put place by the Government or by the 
World Health Organization  (WHO) ? Because Mr. Speaker we know the pandemic is real and the 
way we are sharing a...  
[Interruption]  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Are you introducing another S tatement?  
Hon. Oindo :  No, I seek guidance, I n eed to be informed Hon. Chair.  
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Then  you are out of order Hon. Aran! 
People are reacting on the S tatement that has been allowed on the floor of the House. Yes Hon. 
Leyla?  
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii na mimi kuweza 
kutia m istari yangu hapa. Na nimesimama kuunga mkono hio taarifa iliyokuja na Mheshimiwa 
Amriya na Mhesh imiwa Spika mimi nasikitika Waheshimiwa wenzangu kusimama kupinga 
jambo kama hilo ambapo ni jambo limetokea ulimwengu mzima...  
July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 [Interruption ] 
 Hon. Kitula:  Point of information Mr. Speaker ! 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Charles? There  is an 
information . 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna mtu aliyepinga watu wan aleta maoni yao , kwa 
hivyo tukubaliane na viongozi stahiki wa Bunge hili . 
 Hon. Nyache:  Niruhusu Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Proceed.  
             Hon. Nyache:  Sawa nimekuelewa lakini ilikuwa ni sawa nakupinga vile usemavyo...  
 
     [Consultation s] 
 
 Haya nisha  withdraw . Mheshimiwa Spika ni kweli wasichana kipindi hichi cha miezi 
mitatu wasichana wetu wadogo wameweza kushika mimba kwa wingi na mimi nimesimama 
hapa kama mama sitoficha hilo inaonekana walimu walikuwa wakifanya ka zi nzuri sana 
kutulindia watoto. S isi wamama ndio tumekuwa na utepetevu wa kuweza kufanya nini ... 
kulegeza kamba kwa wasichana wetu mpaka ndipo hii miezi mitatu ikatangazwa kuwa watoto 
wengi wameshika mimba na watoto tulikuwa tumebaki nao majumbani ni sisi wazazi 
tujirekebishe hata huko mashinani pia sisi viongozi hapa inataki kana twende tukazungumze na 
wazazi waweze kujirekebisha na wawe karibu na watoto wao hizi shida zote hazingepatikana.  
Sasa kama sababu inakuwa ni Corona  sio Corona wazazi wenyewe ndio wamelegeza kamba 
kwa wasichana wao. Ahsante.   
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Naliaka because 
Hon. Milka you have already reacted on this issue ... 
      [Consultation s] 
 Yes Hon. Naliaka?  
 
 Hon. Naliaka:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Mr. Speaker Sir I 
would like to congra tulate my fellow Hon. Amriya Juma Boy for brin ging this Statement in this 
Honourable  House . I would like to share this with the Honourable  House that during our days I 
remember very well we used to have motivators coming to school sharing with the girls, 
mentoring them especially the ladies who had excel led in life . Unfortunately nowadays we do 
not see such things in our schools and I also think this is one of the reasons that some of the 
ladies it  is like they do  not have the urge to motivate the students.  This is because the moment 
they indulge in pre-marital sex that means they are following two birds at a  go, so of course one 
bird has to go but still during our days we used to have soci al workers who used to go about  also 
trying to give sex education in schools .  
July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Even at home in barazas the parents will be urge d to take their girls in schools and take 
care of them but nowadays  it is like man for himself and God for us all , so the government is to 
be blamed here , also because as a government it is like we are not caring more about our girls 
and it is for the parents because all of us i believe are parents in one way or the other , we are 
parents and therefore I urge the Honourable  House whenever we are outside t here as Hon. 
Members please let u s urge ou r girls and sons and let us be  role model s to them and let us always 
tell them to live a life with a meaning . This is  because  it is like people are just liv ing for the sake 
of it and that  is why you see some of them  abuse these drugs because they do  not have an  
intention to l ive. S o it is our responsibility as leaders, as parents, as brothers and sisters to take 
care of our boys and girls for the future generations. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Milka you have already re acted.  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  I am not reacting on the same, the form that came up I just want to [??] to 
supporting may be it is very important to our health. I am even scare d of that , just give me a 
chance . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay f or the purpose of Hansard react  in 
half a minute.  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Yes now I remember very well that this one  is not working ...[Technical 
hitch] . 
 
[Laughter ] 
 
 Now Mr. Speaker …[Off Microphone ]. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwali mu): Use your microphone . 
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you for re -allowing me again to do some contribution . As much as I 
really support 100  per cent  what we are debating about the teen pregnancies , a health concern 
come in between that as we are debating and we are sharing this microphone round, touching it 
and you know there are some particles that might be imported from one person to another.  Are 
we following? Are we adher ing to the Ministry of Health and World Health  Organization  
protocols? 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  I do not want to be informed . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Milka . 
 
[Loud consultations ] 
 
July 1, 2020                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             27 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard R eport is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Hon. Milka  have a seat , it has seen as yo u are introducing another issue . 
 
 Hon. Ngare:  As a Member I have refused to be informed.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  And I do  not want to inform you. I have not said anything about...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Milka I had already ruled on the 
same issue . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Yes. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hono urable?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker, thank you. I was just reminding this House that you have 
already ruled on that issue that we do away with the first statement then Hon. Aran was to 
introduce what the Hono urable Member is discussing. That is all and no  hard feeling Mr. 
Speaker . Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Bwire. Hon. Member s I 
now instruct the Education Committee as  mentioned by Hon. Amriya plus Committee  on Youth, 
Gender & Sports and Health Committee to sit together and come with  a comprehensive report 
for it to be debated in this Hon ourable  House.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Mr. Speaker what is the timeline?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members the Committees 
concern ed are supposed to brin g back the response to this Hon ourable  House in the two weeks’ 
time.  
 
[Applause ] 
[Consultations ] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no other busin ess the House stands adjourn ed.   
 
The House rose at 3:23p.m.  