April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 4th April, 2019  
The House met at 2:54p.m.  
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Hon. Members this is a verdict of the Select Committee on report on the allegations 
of incompetence and gross violation of the Constitution and other laws levelled against Hon. 
Tawfiq Balala, County Executive Committee Member for Transport,  Infrastructure and 
Public Works.  
 Hon. Members , a Select Committee  was constituted to investigate and report to this 
County Assembly the allegations levelled against Hon. Tawfiq Balala County Executive 
Committee for Transport, In frastructure and Public Works.  
 The Select Committee tabled its report on Tuesday, 2nd April , 2019 and the 
Com mittee found the allegations un substantiated Pursuant to Section 40 (5) of the County 
Government Act , no further proceeding shall be taken on this matter.  
 The County A ssembly through the Clerk shall therefore communicate the decision 
of the Select Committee to the County Executive Committee Member for Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works Hon. Tawfiq Balala . 
 Hon. Members , pursuant to Art icle 195 of the Constitutio n these  findings do not 
however stop the Coun ty Assembly from inviting or sum moning the County Executive 
Committee Member for Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works to answer any questions 
that the Committee or the County Assembly may require him to re spond to .  
 In accordance with Article 185 (3) t he County is vested with the oversight authority 
over the County Executive Committee and any other County Executive organs and whenever 
it finds fit, may require the County Executive Member to appear before it for the purpose of 
accountability. Thank you Hon . Members. Yes Clerk?    
STATEMENTS  

April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON EDUCATION , INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY AND MV 2035  HON. OMONDI ON THE STATUS OF SCHOOL MILK IN THE 
COUNTY  
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omo ndi, the Chairperson Committee on Education, Information 
Technology and MV 2035 please respond.  
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity granted. I want to 
respond on the statement on the Status of milk in Mombasa County . We did receive the 
Statement from Department of Education but we had a meeting with the Committee of 
Education and deliberated on all the issues that had been raised but we found most of those 
issues that were raised in that particular responses were irrelevant and therefore  the 
Committee…  
(Silence)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes continue Hon. Ibrahim . 
 Hon. Omondi:  And therefore the Committee rejected to adopt the response Mr. 
Speaker and therefore we do request, we  did not want to bring a S tatement into this House 
which wo uld not satisfy the Members then we rejected that.   
 Therefore, the Committee of Education want Members to give us one week so that 
we may bring our recommendation, full report and recommendation s concerning the School 
milk. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Kha tri): So what is your conclusion Hon. Ibrahim? You are 
asking for more time or?  
 Hon. Omondi:  We are asking for one week to come with the report and the 
recommendation after rejecting the Executive response Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, than k you that is fine we are giving you one week. 
Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON EDUCATION , 
INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY AND MV 2035  HON. OMONDI ON THE SUPPLY  OF 
LEARNING EQUIPMENT A ND TOOLS IN THE EARL Y CHILDHOOD DEVELOPM ENT 
CENTRES (ECDES ) 
 Yes again Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir once again. It is a House which want to 
perfom its duties up -to-date b ut the response that w e received from the Executive  was a sham 
and as a Committee of Education we did not a ccept that report to come in this House. And 
therefore we also rejected that particular response and again we would like to request my 
fellow Hon . Members to give the Committee of Education time to come with a full report and 
also the recommendations on wh at should be done on supply of learning equipment and tools 
in the ECD’s Centre. Thank you.  
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 (The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMIT TEE ON EDUCATION , 
INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY AND MV 2035  HON. OMONDI ON THE STATUS OF 
BURSARY  DISBURSEMENT  IN THE COUNTY  
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim . 
 Hon. Omondi:  Once again thank you very much for this particular opportunity once 
more.  Mr. Speaker  I want to respond on the b ursary status as it was re quested and the 
response is in two  categories ; it touches on the bursary , the Kshs.50M illion  that was awarded 
for those pupils who got 300 marks and above and it also touches on the bursary which is yet 
to be given but the process is going on.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I would to give a Statement response to status of b ursary 
disbursement in the County as requested by Hon. Murfad Abdallah Amur, Member of County 
Assembly from Old Town Ward, during the 15th Sitting  on 13th March , 2019 of this House.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, on Monday 8th March , 2019 Form one b ursary cheques were 
released to the public. The Deputy Governor, H.E. Dr. Wil liam K. Kingi who is also the CEC 
for Education officially launched the exercise at Tonon oka Social Hall and 3,286 
beneficiaries attending close to 800 schools around the County.  
 Below is the breakdown per category and Sub -County.  I hope that Members have 
these  copies so Mr. Speaker I think it will be unnecessary  and waste of time for me to  go 
through this schedule  and if you may allow because Members have got the copies they can 
just go through that schedule if there is any objection then it will be ok ay. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just a minut e, you can highlight from the 
schedule what has been disbursed, the total amount that has been disbursed for Hansard 
records.  
 Hon. Omond i: The total amount that has been disbursed?  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes. 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speak er Sir for the direction given. The total amount 
that was disbursed is Kshs.45,976,000 , that was for Form one  beneficiaries.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you and the number of 
beneficiaries?  
 Hon. Omondi:  Total beneficiaries 3,286 in tha t particular exercise . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay have your seat . 
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir and therefore again on the process that 
is going on because I said I am going to touch on two; the one that was disbursed to the 
pupils who got 300 and above and also the on -going.   
 Mr. Speaker S ir there is a bursary that we are supposed to give to form two, form 
three and form four and I want also to respond to it;  the County Treasury ...sorry Mr. Speaker 
Sir follow ing subsequent meetings  of the Committee and D epartments held on 1st April, 2019 
in the office of the Deputy Governor , that is the CEC for Education it was resolved that going 
forward the collection and issuing of the bursary, application forms; issue of the bursary, 
application  forms and c heques to beneficiaries will be conducted in the offices of the Member 
of County Assembly that is MCA in conjunction with County Administration.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay, thank  you Hon. Bomoa  for the 
response unless there is  an Hon. Member with any concern. Yes Cl erk? Y es Hon. Ogutu?  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker he just said that…  
(Silence)  
(Loud consultation)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Benard?  
 Hon. Ogutu:  He said that moving forward the bursary will be issue d at the offices 
of the MCAs but he did not indicate the time because currently as we are speaking the 
process is going on. So when shall it be issued from the offices of MCAs?  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you M r. Speaker S ir. As I said moving forward that means 
the process is on and I am going a gain to report back to this Honourable  House on all the 
programs, the timelines of all this exercise , how it will take place and I will give a very 
comprehensive S tatemen t on this. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes C lerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON JUSTICE AND LEGAL AFFAIRS HON . 
AMRIYA JUMA BOY ON UN LAWFUL ARREST BY INSPECTORATE OF PEDESTRIANS PASSI NG 
BENEATH THE FLY OVER  
 Chairperson Committee on Justice and legal affairs Hon. Amriya Juma?  
 Hon. Amriya Juma Boy:  I might please you Mr. Speaker , thank you very much for 
according us the opportunity. Mr. Speake r the Committee on Justice and Legal A ffairs is 
ready with their re sponse  to what  was brought by Hon. Kitula the C ommittee is happy to 
inform the House that a letter was written to the Department of Devolution to provide 
information on the issue of unlawful arrest  by Inspectorate arresting of pedestrian passing 
beneath th e fly over. Mr. Speaker,  the Department  has confirmed that indeed the Inspectorate 
is within the D epartment 's mandate and the status with regards to legislation is that there was 
a Mombasa County Inspectorate Bill , 2016. 
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  This was introduced in the F irst A ssembly but unfortunately that Bill did not see the 
light of the day it lapse d during the first reading on the Tuesday 27th September , 2016. So Mr. 
Speaker the C ommittee has consulted with the Legal D epartment on the status of the said Bill 
and we have com mitted the Legal Department to have draft on the I nspectorate Bill and the 
Committee will par take pursuant to Standing O rder 121 to re -introduce the Bill in the County 
Assembly.  
 Mr. Speaker...  
(Silence)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes proceed . 
 Hon. Amriya Juma  Boy: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker in accordance to 
Article 191  where there is absence of the C ounty legislation the national legislation take 
precedence . So currently the Department is using the T raffic Act pur suant to our C onstitution 
and I saw their effort that they are in line to reintroduce and pass to t his House the 
Inspectorate Bill w hen M r. Speaker it is our hope as a Committee that once the L egal 
Department has finalized the drafting the Committee on Justice will re -introduce the  Bill. 
 Thank you very much , that is the submission.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kitula a re you are the one who 
brought that S tatement?  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi rai yangu ningependa utoe  muongozo katika taarifa h ii iliyoletwa na Mwenyekiti wa 
Maswala ya Haki. Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti mimi sina shida kwamba ufahamu huu tuna 
ufahamu sisi W aheshimiwa, je wananchi wana  fahamu vipi sheria hizi za trafiki 
Mheshimiwa?   
 Kwa hivyo ningependa sana utoe  uamuzi kwamba kuweze kuwekwa alama za 
barabarani  pale kwamba endapo mtu y eyote atavuka itamgharimu kiasi fulani cha f edha kama 
faini. Katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hakuna alama hizo  mpaka 
leo, kwa hiv yo ningependa sana serikali ya K aunti ya Mombasa iweze ku weka pale alama za 
barabarani  ili wananchi wetu waweze kuona pale kwamba endapo  atavuka basi itagharimu 
kiasi fulani katika K aunti yetu ya Mombasa. Ahsante sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 Hon. Amriya Juma  Boy: Mr. Speaker with yo ur indulgence because once the B ill 
has been finalized by the Legal D epartment it will involv e the research team, the House 
Business and the House will also have an input.  
 So I request the Hon. Member to save his horses we will hav e to consider all the 
input from all the Hon. Members on the said Bill and we hope that Bill will come as soon as 
possible.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Renson?  
 Hon. Thoya:  I want to echo the same observation that have been reiterated by t he 
Chair Justice ; that in absence of that Bill the Inspectorate are conducting that or the business 
illegally s o there is every reason that the Department should harness that Bill .   
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  I also have been in touch with Chief Officer M adam Mwikya  that if that B ill is not 
brought before this House then when they arrest somebody who is clever enough in terms of 
the law will be challenged.  
 So the Hon. Member Chairperson Legal should push th e said D epartment to bring 
that Bill, contrary to that they are doing the busi ness out of law. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . As from what the Chair has 
just stated on legal that currently we do  not have legislation to the I nspect orate to enforce  the 
use of fly overs but they are relying t o the legislation which is the T raffic Act and it is in that 
Act each and every sign, road users and signs are supposed to be portrayed on our ... we call 
them road infrastructure.  
 So according to this Act the si gns and signage which  the Honourable  is referring to 
are supposed to be on the site so that the users can know that this refers to this and this refers 
to this , so if they are referring to this Act they do  not have any excuse to say that they are 
waiting f or their Bill for them to put those signs and they are already using an Act which is 
clear and more superior than the Act which will be passed by this Assembly.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Hon. Amriya  
I think you heard the concern from the Ho n. Members so it is up to your C ommi ttee and your 
Department to atleast make sure the signs are kept in good positions so that Kenyans  will see 
what fines are there if they cross or they do  not pass through the fly over, so make sure you 
fast track from the D epartment of Devolution and Transport.  
(Interruption)  
 What is it Hon. Bernard? If it is this issue we have already rule d on it. 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Please!  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay . 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mimi na fikiria Mheshimiwa Spika hata watu wa Uchukuzi  yafaa 
waingizwe ndani hapo manake kukiwa na barrier  hapo chini ya hiyo flyover hakuna vile mtu 
ataruka hiyo barrier  aache kupita kwa flyover. Sasa watu wa Uchukuzi  watu wekee barrier  na 
hizo alama za barabarani  ambazo zinahitajika ili watu wetu waache kushikwa. Ahsante . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . I think the Hon . Member has 
noted so it is a matter of t wo D epartments but it is led by the Chair of Legal and Justice they 
will sit with the Commit tee on Transport and try to work on whatever that you have raised 
Hon. Members. Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON INFRASTRUCTU RAL CONCERNS  
 Yes Chairperson Committee on  Transport, Infrastructure and Public W orks, Hon. 
Prischillah Mumba?  
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika. N imeambiwa hiyo ripoti bado haiko 
tayari, niwapatie muda kidogo ili wawe ze kunipa ripoti ya ki sawa sawa.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chief Whip.  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ningependa kumkumbusha M wenyekiti ya kwamba 
si ripoti, ni majibu tu . Ahsante.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you, and she has responded.  Hon. 
Prischilla it is a response, not unless you want to bring a report  for it to be debated.  
 Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, pengine ni kuteleza kwa mdomo lakini 
hiyo Taarifa  haiko tayari , itakuja . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Okay, so when actually are you thinking that 
you will have the respon se. 
 Hon. Mumba : Nitaifuatilizia kwa wiki inayofuatia niweze kupata hiy o ripoti, 
nitahakikisha nimeif uatilizia niweze kuleta ripoti inayofaa katika Jumba hili Tukufu.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ni vizuri kwamba tumeweza kusikia 
kwamba italetwa lak ini rai zangu ama za Nyumba hii  ni kumpatia changamoto Mwenyekiti 
mwenzangu, ni juzi tu  kumekuwa na hizo tetesi kwa hivyo huu ujumbe aupeleke kule 
kwamba idara hiyo ijifunge kibwebwe, hizi habari za  kuwa hab ari tukitaka ni kesho, ni kesho  
kutwa haziji tunataka zifike tamati.  
 Kwa hivyo ningependa ujumbe huu aup eleke kwa niaba ya Jumba hili kwamba, wale 
maafisa wa I dara ile waweze kutokana na hii damu chafu, ambayo imeingia ilikuja mpaka 
ikafika hapa, tujarib u sana wafunge vibwebwe wajikaze watuletee hizo  ripoti husika na kazi 
zifanyike  wawajibike. Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you.  I think Hon. Prischillah 
Mumba you have heard the concerns from Hon. Thoya so H on. Prischillah make su re your 
Department respond s to whatever that has been raised in this House and Assembly or the 
House w ill not tolerate delays in responding to whatever that  has been asked from this House. 
Yes Clerk.  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSP ORT, INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON INFRASTRUCTU RAL CONCERNS  FROM  HOLY CROSS 
CATHEDRAL CHURCH TO MATERNITY  IN KIPEVU WARD  
 Yes Hon. Prischillah Committee on T ransport ? 
 Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kauli  ni ile ile, hizo Taarifa zote mbili 
zilikuwa zije kwa pamoja na hazikuja , sasa nazisubiri mpaka wiki ijayo ndio nizilete mana ke 
zilikuwa zije kwa pamoja ni  vile tu zimewekwa ya kwanza na ya pili lakini zilikuwa zote zije 
kwa kuf uatana ambapo wiki nafikiri juzi nilileta ripoti karib u nane, zilikuwa majibu yake 
nikawa niko nayo wakaniambia niwape m uda kidogo ili  watengeneze na majibu haya…  
(Applause)  
 Kwa hivyo hata  nyinyi pia niwie ni radhi mana ke wakati mwengine naja na ripoti 
karibu kumi ama Taarifa  kumi najibu, hivyo basi  ikiwa nim ewaambia subirini, subirini 
kidogo niweze  kuwapatia jambo la kisawasawa . 
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  Sio nikiwa najitetea hapa nionekane kama nafinyilia ; Wizara yangu ni ya kueleweka  
na itaweza kuleta mambo kisawa sawa na itaweza kuleta mambo ya kisheria , kaa chini 
Mheshimiwa sitaki…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  
 Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika ni ieleweke 
wakati Mheshimiwa analeta Taarifa  huwa anatarajia majibu haraka iwezekanavyo kwa vile si 
yeye anajiwakilish a anawakilisha wana nchi.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika na maswala ya kusema Idara  labda K amati ilileta  majibu mengi  si 
lugha ya kuongea mbele ya Bunge hili. Taarifa  ikiletwa Bungeni majibu yaletwe kwa vile 
wananchi wanangojea hayo majibu , hii Taarifa  mimi ndio nilioile ta na nikasema dharura 
ambazo ziko, ile barabara ni ya matatu na inakaa kama shamba na sasa hivi vile tunaongea 
manamba au wananchi wa hiyo sehemu wanataka kupanda migomba ya ndizi .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ita kuwa ni aibu sana K aunti yetu k uona vitu k ama hivyo 
vinaendelea mashinani;  naomba hii Wizara  yetu ya  Uchukuzi ifanye kazi kwa u adilifu kwa 
vile wanatumia raslimali za Kaunti ya Mombasa na wanalipa ushuru…  
 
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Fahad ? 
 Hon. Fahad  Kassim:  Mheshimiwa Spi ka, Point of clarification and information , 
Mheshi miwa Faith alikuwa katika ad-hoc Committee  na leo tumetoa clean sheet  kwa W izara 
hiyo kwa hi o... 
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Fahad you are out of order! S o Hon. 
Prischillah Mumba  please take charge and make sure you respond to this House in a week 's 
time because as I said earlier we w ill not tolerate the delays and Hon. M ember is complaining 
of situation of Holy Cross Cathed ral Church to Maternity in her W ard so please make sure 
you fast  track the response to this Honourable House. Y es Clerk.  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY THE LEADER OF MAJ ORITY HON . MWIDANI ON REORGANIZA TION 
OF MEMBERS TO COMMIT TEES  
 Yes the Leader of Majority ? 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speak er. I think I have a 
Statement to respond o n reorganization of Members to C ommittees.  
 Mr. Speaker you know if it could be on e Committee I think it could  be a very easy job 
but now  it seems it is all C ommittee s. 
 So my request you know it i s a matter of time  because yo u know we have almost 18 
to 16 C ommittee s so it is something which can not be done in a very short ti me.  
 Therefore  Mr. Speaker mine is to request this House to give me time  we sit with my 
Committee or S elect ion Committee so that we can bring a very co mprehensive report on all 
Committees concerned. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Milka Moraa ? 
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  Hon. Ngare : Thank Mr. Speaker . The M ajority Leader we appreciate your response 
and we appreciate your leadership too however you have not given us timeline on when, how 
soon or how long  it is going to take for us to deal with the  Committee reshuffle. I think it will 
be good for us to know the time limit.  
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Well Mr. Speaker this is the House of law, 
even if I said three weeks you know the only person who can determine on issues is the 
Speaker so I hope I have raised it, it is not an easy job, so if you want me to mention time 
limit the n it is like almost three weeks then I think I  will be done . Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Leader of Majority.  Leader of 
Majority please we are guided by our Standing O rders so go through our Standing O rders and 
bring back a co mprehensive response using our Standing O rders because I unde rstand that 
there are Committees that have got timeline s and others do  not have, so usi ng the Standing 
Orders you can respond to these issues.  Yes Clerk?  
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Thank you. Y es Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY REPRESENTATIVE OF  CHAIRPERSON COMMITTE E ON 
ENVIRONMENT , WASTE MANAGEMENT AND  ENERGY HON . NYIRO ON ENVIRONMENT AL 
CONCERNS IN KAA CHON JO AREA OF TUDOR WAR D 
 Yes Chairperson Committee on Environment , Waste Manageme nt and Energy. Y es 
Hon. Nyiro.  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I stand in for my able Chair who has some 
issue s outside this House, and as a M ember o f Environmental C ommittee, I also feel 
hono ured to give…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwali mu): Yes Hon. Fahad ? 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Mheshimiwa Spika am on a Point of O rder, tafadhali Mama 
Kushe ato e miwani  sababu sijui ni madharau ama ni nini ndani ya Bunge ? Tafadhali.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Okay proceed Hon. Nyiro.  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you Hon. Fahad . 
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Proceed.  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Let me give a response to the statement you requested from Kaa C honjo , 
that is in Tudor Ward by Hon. Samba and in this response it  is an all inclusive response 
because whatever is happening now it is like we are in a state of danger becaus e the rains 
have started .  
 So we  have a communication from the Department, that the D epartment on 
Environ ment is embarking on employment ; it is not e mployment or rather recruiting groups 
in the W ards who are going to be reimbursed from the D epartment so that they can help the 
Hon. Memb ers in unclogging of  their sewage system s and any other urgent need that will rise 
from the state of the rain . 
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  So I ur ge the Hon . Members in ca se you have an emergence please  liaise with the 
Department of E nvironment so that we can constitute your team of youth s so that the 
Department can reimburse  them with some cash so they can help you do some unclogging of 
your the tr enches in your Wards . Thank you Mr . Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Nyiro . Yes C lerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY VICE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTE E ON HEALTH SERVICES HON. 
FATMA SWALEH  ON STORM WATER DRAINAGE  SYSTEM AT MAGONGO HEALTH CEN TRE 
     The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes, Chairperson Committee on Health.  
 Hon. Fat ma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika mambo ya storm water  hayako katika 
Wizara ya Afya , kwa hivyo naomba aliyeleta Taarifa  hii, apate jibu kutoka Wizara ya 
Uchukuzi  ama ya Maji . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank  you Hon. Fatuma Kushe.  
(Interruption)  
 What is Hon . Bernard Ogutu?  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ndio niliitisha hi yo Taarifa  na bajeti iliwekwa 
kwa Wizara ya Afya  millioni naf ikiri tatu kushughu likia mambo h ayo. Sasa ikiwa N aibu 
Mwenyekiti anakana basi watoe hio million i tatu wa iweke kwa Wizara ya Uchukuzi  na hi yo 
idara nyengine amesema  ili watufanyie hio kazi, yale  ni mambo ambayo yanahusiana  na 
mambo ya afya, kwa hivyo wafanye ile kazi ambayo inatakikana . Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.    
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon . Fatuma Mote.  
 Hon. Fat ma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa 
mwenzangu kwamba  naomba  aelewe kwamba mambo ya storm water  hayako kwetu, naomba 
aweze kwenda ku uliza katika Wizara ya Maji  ama Uchukuzi  hayako kwetu.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Fatuma Kushe, the concern from Hon . 
Ogutu was the storm water dra inage system at Magongo Health C entre, so that is why the 
Hon. Member says  that it is a concern that the Health D epartment can tackle.  
 Hon. Ogutu:  And Mr . Speaker there is allocation for that in the Department of Health  
so if the Vice Chair is not aware of that  she should visit the budget office so that she can be 
aware of that.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Fatuma Mote?  
 Hon. Fatuma Swaleh : Sawa Mheshimiwa Spika. S ijakubali kikamilifu mpaka nipate 
fursa ya kwenda site visit  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Fatuma.  Hon. Members we 
shall now stick to our S tanding O rder 161 , and let the spokesman of the C ommittee to come 
and respond to that issue that has bee n raised, so the Chair of that C ommittee will come and 
raise in this Hon ourable House in a week's  time. Yes C lerk?  
STATEMENT  SOUGHT FROM CHAIRPER SON ON FINANCE BY HON . FAHAD KASSIM ON ACCE SS TO 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREME NT OPPORTUNITIES (AGPO)  
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11  Yes, Hon . Fahad Kassim ? 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Mr. Speaker S ir, pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 
No. 45(2) c I wish to seek a Statement from Chairperson on Finan ce and County Planning 
Committee regarding the above mentioned subject.  
 Mr. Speaker, Article 227(1) of the C onstitution of Kenya , 2010 provides that when a 
state organ or any other public entity contracts for goods or services, it shall do so in 
accordanc e with a system that is fair, equitable, transparent and cost effective .  
 Mr. Speaker, the aim of the Access to Government P rocurement Opportunities 
(AGPO) program is to facilitate the enterprise owned by women, youth s and p ersons with 
disabilities to be able to participate in government opportunities.  
 This will be made possible through the implementation of the legal requirements that 
30 per cent  of government procurement opportunities be set aside specifically for enterprise s 
owned by these groups. A s a result, the program  is aimed at empowering them by giving 
them more opportunities to perform business with the government.  
 Mr. Speaker, I urge the Chairperson C ommittee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations to inform this House on:  
1. The name of the comp anies, the D irectors and their respective ages and other 
description of the works, services or supply of goods awarded to youths in the financial 
year 2017/2018 and their correct values ; 
  
2. The name of the companies, the D irectors and the description of the  works, services or 
supply of goods awarded to women in the financial year 2017/2018 and their correct 
values ; 
 
3. The name of the companies, the D irectors and the description of the works, services or 
supply of goods awarded to persons with disabilities in t he financial year 201 7/2018 
and their contract value, t heir NCPWD certificates ; 
  
4. The total contract value of works, services and supply of goods in the financial year 
2017/2018 ; 
 
5. Whether the County government complied with legal requirement that 30  per ce nt of 
government procurement opportunities are set aside for women, youths and persons 
with disabilities.  
 
Thank y ou. 
         The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Fahad. The acting C hair 
Finance , any response? The Vice Chair?  
         The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : I think Mr . Speaker I have just heard it now, 
in fact I need all the (??) which the M embers has mention ed to have it in papers so that I can 
follow up.  
 So Mr . Speaker it  is not a bad issue as a M ember, he  has all the rights to get the 
information, but I wish to have time so that I get the paper which he has men tioned so that I 
make some follow up . Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
 
        The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Fahad Kassim.  
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12         Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Thank you Mr . Speaker I will hand over t he official written 
communication to the Vice Chair of Finance and kindly ask him to give us the exact time 
frame, we will appreciate.  
         The Leader of Majority  (Hon . Mwidani) : Thank you Mr . Speaker. T hank you Hon . 
Fahad for giving me the access to governmen t procurement opportunity by youth , women and  
person with disability and I think it  is an issue of time now.  
 Mr. Speaker I would request to be given two weeks’ so that I can respo nd. T hank you.  
 
         The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Okay thank you . Yes C lerk?  
METHADONE CENTRE AT S HIKA ADABU DISPENSAR Y IN LIKONI SUB COUN TY NOT OPERATIONAL  
          The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwaka Bakari.  
           Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr . Speaker . I have just received 
communication from the said Hon . Member, to stand on his behalf for her Statement.   
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand Pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2) (c), seeking to know from 
the Chairperson Committee on Health if he is aware that the Methadone centre  at Shika  
Adabu Dispensary in Likoni Sub County has not been i n operation for quiet s ometime and 
whether the County government of Mombasa has any plans to put up another Methadone 
prescription Centre in Likoni Sub County as a matter of urgency  considering that it has high 
number of drug addicts in the County. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon . Fatuma?  
(Consultations)  
(Laughter)  
 Hon. Fat ma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningeomba Mheshimiwa 
anipe kiasi ya siku nne hivi  ili tuweze kuja na jibu mwafaka.  
 The Deputy Speak er (Hon . Mwalimu) : Okay thank you, the issue  will return back to 
the House Business and they will allot time and date of when it  is going to be responded in 
this House . Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
 The Deputy Speak er (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Kizito . Yes  Clerk?  
 (Consultations)  
 Okay, what is it Hon . Ibrahim?  
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir I stand Pursuant to 
Standing Order 41 (2c) . I wan t to give a very powerful Statement here and am calling it 
powerful because it really affects our people especially during this rainy season .  
 Mr. Speaker Sir it is just last week where Ch airperson for Roads and Public Works 
promised us a program on how they are going to drain or to o pen the drainage system in our 
Wards.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir to my surprise today in the morning I just received a phone call that 
there are people on the ground opening the drainage system but when I reached I was more 
amazed when I found out that the youth s that were being used in my Ward to open the 
drainage system were transported from the town up to that place !  
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13  It is worse because a t that particular place we also have youth s who can do the same 
work.  Mr. Speaker Sir I remember very well we promised a dawn of a new type of leadership 
and leadership based in service delivery not lordship, a leadership based on consultation not 
autocracy . 
 Mr. Speaker Sir leadership  should be  based on youth and women empo werment not 
wealth accumulation ; today our youth s on the ground nobody is concern ed about them it is a 
very big problem .  
 Mr. Speaker Sir  to add on that I just want to find out from the Department of R oads 
and Infrastructure that every Ward has only been given one day; has only been allocated 
funds for one day to open the drainage system . Mr. Speaker Sir like in Changamwe Sub 
County we have been gi ven five days that means every Ward will only get one day . 
 Mr. Speaker Sir when you go to my Ward even five days are not enough to open those 
drainage system s and when you look at manpower; the people that have been allocated are 
only 15 youth s from town . So Mr. Speaker I just want to know from the Chairperson 
Tran sport and Infrastructure surely what i s happening in that particular Department ?  
 Mr. Speaker Sir last time they told us that they were waiting for some money so that 
they can empower the youth s on the ground to do the same work, today they have transported 
youths from town  to come and do the same work; 15 youth s and they have only been given 
money for only one day and when you look at those drainage systems  they are pathetic . Mr. 
Speaker Sir you are my neighbo ur and you can confirm that. Thank you Mr. S peaker Sir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith?  
 Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nikiongezea 
katika hiyo Taarifa  ya Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi kwa kweli kuna hiyo kazi ambayo 
ilikuwa ikiendelea viba rua wanachaguliwa  na Ward Administrator .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika itakuwa ni hujuma kwa Mwakilishi wa Wodi kama hatahusishwa 
kikamilifu kwa kuchagua vijana ambao wanafaa kufanya hizo kazi Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
(Applause)  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ukienda mashinani na uangalie i le pesa ambayo imepeanwa kwa 
wale vijana kwa siku moja na ile kazi imefanywa haz ifanani. Mheshimiwa Spika wale Ward 
Administrators  ambao wako ground hawakai pale ku  supervise  ile kazi, kwangu imefanywa 
jana na kusema kweli huwezi sema kama ni kazi ya shilin gi elfu moja.  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika Ward Administrators  wanafaa wakalishwe na 
waongeleshwe MCA awe involve d in each and every process in his Ward. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Chairperson do you have a 
response on the issue that have been raised?  
 Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na naona Mheshimiwa mwenzangu 
anataka kujua na tena anatoka lakini Kamati ya Mazing ira ndio inafanya hizo kazi kwa saa 
hizi sio Uchukuzi .  
 Kuna kandarasi imetolewa na Kamati ya Mazingira  wanafanya hizo kazi za dharura  
za kusafisha mitaro na ku andika, pia ni wao ndio wana  andika vibarua  hao kwa hivyo kwetu 
kwa Uchukuzi  kazi hiyo haipo.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you.  
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  Hon. Thoya:  I think maybe we are trying t o look at where this problem maybe 
tackle d from, it is the obligation of the Committee of the Environment and Labour and as it is 
said there  is need for the Committee on Labour just because it is evening but if we had a 
morning session we could say the Committe e on Labour and Environment do visit the 
Minister  and go at the ground.   
 We are seeing Mombasa County Assembly is on the new dawn and things should be 
done in the right manner , if at all the job is in Port  Reitz Ward we expect the youth s of that 
Ward to benefit . 
 But if people are going to be transported and there was a day I brought something like 
that in Mikindani and the Labour Committee did visit the site and the same will happen and 
must happen tomorrow in the morning. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you so the Committee on 
Environment and Labour to respond to this House latest by Tuesday next week. Yes Hon. 
Kitula?  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti niliul iza swali langu siku ya tarehe nne Mwezi wa pili nikajibiwa na Mwenyekiti 
wa Maji kwamba Frere Town Kisimani Pipeline ita toa kandarasi  evaluation stage  and award 
of contract  itafanyika katikati ya mwezi mwaka huu .  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini hadi leo mradi huu haujaweza kufanyika wala kuanza 
rasmi.  Kwa hivyo ningepen da kujua kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti mradi huu utaanza rasmi lini na 
ni kampuni gani imeweza kupewa kandarasi  hii? 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chairman Water? Yes Vice Chair?  
 Hon. Hamadi Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Bwana Mwenyekiti . Naomba m unipatie 
mpaka wiki ijayo nitaweza kuwapatia majibu. Ahsante.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. What is it Hon. Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa tunazungumzia hilo tatizo la Mheshimiwa 
Ibrahim Bomoa  na ilikuwa nastahili kusimama kama Mweny ekiti wa Ajira lakini nina yangu 
ambayo yana nichoma ambayo yeye pia lazima ayawajibikie , niruhusu niweze kumpatia dozi 
yake.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed and …  
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ni juzi tu tuliweza kupata ripoti kwa mba 
shule ya St. Mary’s Bangladesh ilikuwako itajengwa ECD lakini ikasemekana ardhi 
imenyakuliwa na ujenzi ule ulikuwa hautaendelea lakini baada ya siku ambazo hazikuzidi 
siku 10 mambo hayo yalibadilishwa ikasemekana hata kandarasi  imepeanwa.   
 Kwa hivyo nataka  nijue je ujenzi ule wa St. Mary’s upo ama haupo na kama upo 
unaendelea wapi? Kwa sababu ilikuwa ni tofauti ya siku tano hizo habari za kukang anya 
kwamba imesimamishwa ardhi  imeibiwa halafu tunaambiwa kandarasi  imetolewa sasa sijui 
wanaenda kujenga wapi? Ahs ante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I would like to inform Hon. Thoya on that 
issue but the Committee on Education did have a site visit and we  are doing a report on the 
relevant areas including the school he has just mentioned .  
April 4 , 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  Therefore Mr. Speaker we do request that they give us a week so that we may come 
up with a very comprehensive and satisfactory report to that . Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members having there no other business the House stands adjourned until the 9th 
of April at 2 :30p.m. 
The House rose at 3 :52p.m. 
 
 
 