July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Friday 3rd July, 2020  
The House met at 11:22a.m.  
      [The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Yes, Clerk?  
 
               PAPERS  
 
COUNTY PUBLIC ACCOUNT S COMMITTEE REPORT  ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL 'S REPORT FOR 
THE  COUNTY EXECUTIVE FOR  THE YEAR 2015/2016,  2016/2017,  2017/2018  
  
 Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, it is with gre at pleasure this morning t o lay  
the County Public Accounts Committee Report on the Auditor General ’s, the report for the 
County  Executive of Mombasa for the year 2015/2016 , 2016/2017 and financial year 2017/2018.  
 
[Paper laid ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
COUNTY PUBLIC ACCOUNT S COMMITTEE REPORT  ON THE AUDITOR GENER AL'S REPORT FOR 
THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE  FOR THE YEAR 2015/2016,  2016/2017,  2017/2018  
 
 Yes Hon.  Amriya, please move the N otice of Motion.  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I hereby give to this Honourable  House 
notice of the County Public Accounts Committee Report on the Auditor General, R eport of the 
County Executive  of Mombasa for  the financial year 2015/20 16, 2016/ 2017,  2017/2018 . Thank 
you. 

July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fa dhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
COUNTY PUBLIC ACCOUNT S COMMITTEE REPORT  ON THE AUDITOR GENER AL'S REPORT FOR 
THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE  FOR THE YEAR 2015/2016,  2016/2017,  2017/2018  
 
 Yes Hon. Amriya Boy.   
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma:  Thank you so much Mr. Speaker . Again, at thi s juncture I wish that 
this Honourable  House adopts  the County Public Accounts Committee report of the Auditor 
General,  Report on the Audit of the account s of the County Executive for the financial year 
2015/2016, 2016/2017 and 2017/2018 laid ju st on the T able this morning by myself and also the 
House to adopt the report by PAC C ommittee on the same. Thank you.   
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  I call upon Hon. Kibwana to second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swale h: Thank you Hon.  Speaker . I do second the report .   
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a q uestion  
that the M otion as  presented by Hon. Amriya on th e Report of the Auditor General on the 
accounts of the County Executive for the financial year 2015/2016,  2016/2017 and 2017/2018 be 
considered in this House with the same term s. 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members the debate is open. Yes 
Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : Mr. Speaker I think this R eport present s to this H ouse a unique 
opportunity in the life time in this House to debate the report of the Audit of the Committee o f 
Public Accounts that th ey have received from the Auditor General and I wish to urge the 
Members to indulge it and to ask any question s that they deem fit and also to look at  the R eport 
because the Committee has gone through thorough investigation, validation and verification  
including going to the site of some of the se project s. So I urge the Hon. Members to give in 
productive input to the report and  I assure you that the C ommittee was impartial , we have done a  
good job so I urge Hon. Members if they have any queries of the same  to bring forward and we 
are here to respond and to debate the same . So I wish to … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Highlight ? 
 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Hon.  Amriya  Juma : I highlight the document , it is a big document but when we are 
dealing with a PAC  Report of the Auditor General of the accounts for the year 2015/2016, I think 
the R eport  is about 22 pages and in this R eport you will notice some of the queries they have 
been cleared because the Executive was able to perform  and to respond to the querie s that h ave 
been raised by the Auditor G eneral and so because of the due of the timeframe 2018/2020 you 
will realise some of the queries have now been bypassed by lapses of time but otherwise I will 
pass you through the ... so I go on Mr. Speaker?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes. 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Okay. I can highlight some of the issues and due to the fact that I 
have already explained that some of the issues have been outdated because of the time from 2015 
to 2016 some issues like the pe nding projects have been completed , by then they  were  50 per 
cent to 60  per cent  but th is time they are 100  per cent  on their completion . So those are the issues 
the Committee felt that they were s atisfied because when we went on  the ground some of those  
projects were finished and again the issue of pending bills you will notice that the G overnor 
through a gaze tte notice appointed a special C ommittee pursuant to the Interg overnmental  
Relation Act , section 11 to 18 which gives power to Intergovernmental  Relation C ommittee to 
look at the issu e of transition of the defunct M unicipal Council to the new County government 
and the C ommittee was able to give a report on those bills that were verified that should be paid 
and then the status is that those bills have been paid and those that were not valid for payment 
are still pending , so that is the status for pending bills .  
The C ommittee observed that there is quit e a progress and we are looking forward to 
clearing this issue of pending bills once and for all and a lso on the issue of variance between  
IFMIS and financial status Mr. Speaker it was clear that there was a problem of the IFMIS  
system because the IFMIS  is not able to reflect cash receivables and cash accounts so that issue 
was s upposed to be rectified by the National T reasury because they are the ones who are in 
control of the IFM IS system and the Executive had indulged the National T reasury they brought 
in an expert and I think there  are also consultations to the E xecutive and T reasury are trying their 
level best to clear the variance between the  IFMIS and financial statement s and also when we 
looked at the recent case of the G overnor of Kiambu the same issue arose  and it was clear that it 
was the national IFMIS  system that was in default . 
Mr. Speaker and then maybe to highlight  the last,  I am just going quickly ... the assets and 
liabilities of the C ounty because there was supposed to be a register by then 2015, this is an audit 
query for 2015 , the County T reasury had not put in place the Asset and Liabilit y Register but we 
are happy as at now there is an Asset and Liability R egister and some of the asset and liabilities 
that have not transited to the C ounty government are in court and some of the bank accounts that 
were used by the Municipal Council  that ha ve not been closed due to the issues of signatories 
and they are non - complian t with section 94 of the PFM they are also in court . 
Mr. Speaker , so that is just a highlight and I wish M embers to contribute . Thank you. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwa limu) : Thank you Hon. Amriya. Any M ember  
from the C ommittee before other Hon . Members give their inputs? Y es Hon. Mwaka?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Zahoro: Thank you Mr. Speaker, as a Member of the said C ommittee we 
have also given recommendations to the accounting offi cer to look into . 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  For instance there have been issues to do with procurement ; whereby we have 
recommended as a C ommittee that  the Accounting officer to apply the laws that are related to 
procurement for instance the Public Disposal and Procurement Act sho uld be considered when 
issue s of procure ment are done and also the PFM A ct should also be considered for instance you 
find that  the A ccounting officers in some cases one was not f ollowing the said rules so the 
Accounting officers should adhere to the regul ations . You even find out the C ounty revenue 
which specifies the maintenance of everyt hing we recommended that as a Committee in various 
issues that were found and some cases which the C ommittee was not satisfied you  find out that 
we also considered  the ma nagement response and further details are going to be produced for 
evidence.  
We would also like to commend the E xecutive  so you find that the re are various issues 
that the E xecutive has been able to give evidence whereby with time the C ommittee was able to  
clear such issues so when an issue is cleared it may not rise in th e next financial year but as a 
Committee I have noted personally that  there has been an improveme nt in the side of the 
Executive. Y ou know when first the C ounty government was starting it was a new thing and  so 
with time improvement s were  seen and the issues that were found on 2015/2016 they are not the 
same issues that are happening at the moment .  
This means that they have been able to grow as an institution , they have been able to 
carry their duties and also providing the necessary documents that are needed to support the 
expenditures for various departments in the Executive , so when such a thing h appens we 
commend because in a r eport it  is not supposed to be always negative when such has  been done 
which has improvement , which shows people are really trying to work out on such things or 
bettering themselves , we commend such things. We  find that when there are no issues  we agree 
with them and we have been also able to do physical site visit s and we saw the projects and as a 
person I was satisfied with what we saw on the ground and even it was like some th ings I think 
our communication and media personnel should highlight these things that are happening , so 
much is  happening on the ground but  it is not featured that is what I also saw as a person during 
the site visit .  
Mr. Speaker I wish the areas that have slight queries , these are normal audit queries that 
keep on happening and with improvement that the a ccounting officer is doing the R eport is very 
commendable and we wish M embers to look into the report in details , any queries that will be 
raised we will respond with utmost ..., thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kibwana ? 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker when I wa s just going 
through the lines i n this report as my colleague put in very correctly there is some s ort of 
improvement . I think Ho n. Speaker some of the things  are only that there is no correct 
information on the ground be cause otherwise during our site visit we we re able to see for 
ourselves  the projects th at were in this audit report.   
 Mr. Speaker, when you look at the health sector the facilities we were told were not yet 
ready, we found that they are ready ; almost 90  per cent  of the p rojects in the Health s ector were 
completed , only the issue of the equipment and human resource issues were  still pending . Mr. 
Speaker , the other issue of the ECD E which has been raised several times we found that these are 
good projects th at were done in a good manner and I think they are almost 100  per cent  
complete, i t is only the misinformation that is on the ground that raises a lot eyebrow but 
otherwise it is there.  
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Hon. Speaker the other issues that we have gone through in this Repo rt is about the 
unrealistic b udget; m ost of the projects that were yet to be comp leted we are informed that the 
budget either i) the money from the national g overnment does not come  through  at the right time, 
it is delayed which automatic ally will go to af fect the completion of the project but having said 
that the Department has cleared when we went through this Report we found the management 
response was satisfactory because whatever reason they gave and when we look ed at it  we found 
that as a Committee we  had to clear the issues because one, the availability of the response, there 
was either delay or during the a udit being here in the Count y the documents were not around. S o 
I think as we have said this Report Mr. Speaker they should provide the documents at the right 
time so as to avoid a udit queries that are not supposed to be in f uture in this Report  because we 
believe that once the right documents are available, then the Auditors will have no choice but to 
clear those reports Mr. Speaker.  
 Hon. Speaker  all of the audit r eport we found that in some areas and we have even 
recommended that they should do some more investigations because you will find that in area s 
that we still feel that we ne ed to dig deeper as a Committee  we are at liberty to dig deeper and 
see that we realize or we get the good results on  every project that is in this audit Report.  
 Mr. Speaker, b efore I wind up some of the recommendations that we gave out we hope 
that the Chief Officer who is the Accounting Officer will improve on the i ssues that we have said 
that are not all that good so that we expect that in future audit queries  we will not find this query . 
So to me I think the Members have said we need to have a healthy debate Hon. Speaker, we need 
to have a positive mind about this report and also try to help the Committee on area s you will 
feel that there are shortcomings. But to me I think for the first time Mr. Speaker being in this 
Committee there is a lot of improvement that we need also to give them a thumb ups that they 
have d one a good job that we feel that they also need to improve even more so that we do not get 
more queries  in this coming financial y ear Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Hamida Noor . 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker Sir. Mine is just a query about Public Accounts that 
I can see here...  
[Interruption]  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Which financial y ear? 
Hon. Noor:  [Inaudible ]. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, proceed?  
Hon. Noor:  I want to know more about the bank account s that once that we had in the 
Municipal [Inaudible ]. 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy you want to 
reply?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:   [Technical hitch ][Inaudible ]. 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika ningetaka 
kumjibu Mheshimiwa juu ya suala alilouliza ; mimi ni M wanakamati  wa hii Kamati ya kwamba 
Bank Account s ambazo hizi account s zilifunguliw a tangu wakati wa M anispaa, u kienda 
ukiangalia ripoti yetu ya 2013/2014 imeanzia huko tumesema kuwa hi li jambo liko na shirika la 
Anti C orruption  maana benki  imekataa kufunga hii kwa sababu hawa watu wetu walioko sasa si 
signatories . Kwa hivyo wamesema  lazima waletwe wale waliofungu a zile accounts  ndio walio 
na uwezo wa kufunga zile Accounts  na ukiangalia utaona inaendelea 2013, 2014, 2016, 2017, 
2018, zote inaendelea kwa sababu hili jambo liko na Anti corruption  mpaka wao washike hawa 
watu ndio waweze kwen da kufunga zile Accounts . Accounts  zipo lakini mpaka leo bado 
hazijafungwa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity you have given me to air my 
views in this audit report. Mr. Speaker I want to commend the Committee for the good work 
done and the report that we are having in this particular time Mr. Speaker...  
[Applause]  
 
But I want to single out or rather to support my sentiments. Mr. Speaker, Cou nty Public 
Investment Accounts Committee and I can say that the Committee has internalized scripts and 
intensively exhausted the County Executive Accounts for these financial years 2013/2014, 
2015/2016, 2017/2018. Mr. Speaker having said that I want to pro ve my sentiments basing on 
the findings of this report; no 1. Mr. Speaker when you look at the CPIAC Report or the Auditor 
General Report for the County Executive for the year ended 30th June, 2016 page 1, look at the 
observations and the recommendations. I just want to prove my point that they did internalize the 
report Mr. Speaker, they took their time to come up with a very good Report without hiding 
anything, very open. When we look at this observation we have seen that it took the A ccounting 
officer long to realize and  reply to this query while he has qualified persons and this has been 
easily rectified and the PAC recommendation is that, one; 'The A ccounting officer should take 
necessary steps to ensure that accounts staff in their dockets adhere to t he high standards of 
accounting and prepare accurate and up to date accounts consistent with the accepted 
accounting principles and standards of th e Public Finance M anagement Act’ .  
 Mr. Speaker there are some queries that arose like when you look at the q uery number 2.0 
talks about , 'Unsupported payments amount ing to Kshs. 236M illion',  they have that audit query 
which is 2 .0, audit query number 3 .1,3.2,3.3 and 3.4 . Mr. Speaker those audit queries have been 
singled out  and they have given us satisfying findings on those and the management response 
Mr. Speaker which we are having here and I want t o say that moving forward this R eport or 
particular documents is very detailed and it is just easily  understood by the professions .  Mr. 
Speaker Sir some of us are n ot the professionals but we can easily understand the general 
information that has been given , what I would like to advise the  Committee is that it is very 
important for them  to avail the reports to the M embers in advance for the ir perusals so that  the 
Members are in position with the inputs and also to give out a more informed and detailed 
information on the reports , otherwise Mr. Speaker Sir I stand to support. Thank you.  
 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker , being the first Report of PAC to be broug ht in to 
this House actually it i s a good job. Mr. Speake r Sir mine is just to urge the C ommittee that we 
should at least  stick to the rules that ... and again maybe to make the work easy moving around 
looking for projects which  were done in 2015  sometimes becomes difficult . I think if they can do 
these Reports maybe yearly or quarterly I think it can be of ease to them so that I think moving 
forward we should stick to that. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Abrari?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafurahi kuwa leo PAC 
imetuletea R ipoti hizi lakini kwa maombi yangu ningeomba kwa sababu hii ni miaka mitatu 
mtawalia ningependa kwa umakini wa ko hizi R ipoti zingekuja moja moja kwa sababu zina 
maneno mengi sana kujadili kwa kina . Zingekuja  kwanza 2016 tukamalizana nayo ikaja 
nyengine ikaja nyengine ili kila M jumbe awe na wakati mzuri wa kuziangalia kwa sababu saa 
hizi zimekuja zote kwa mpigo inak uwa kidogo na muda hatuwezi kuzipitia zote lakini kwa muda 
kidogo ambao nimeangalia ningependa kusema maw ili matatu niliyopitia kwa hii R ipoti.  
Ripoti ilioisha 2016  mwezi wa Juni hii nimeona kama Mheshimiwa mwenzangu  Amriya 
alivyozungumza kuwa kuna miradi  karibu zote asilimia 90 zimeisha , nataka kumwambia 
Mheshimiwa Amriya kuna baadhi ya miradi  amba yo ilianzwa lakini ha ikumalizwa . Nakuomba 
ufungue masikio yako vizuri kwa sababu tukiangalia katika tashwishi 19.0 kumi na tisa ya  2016 
ambapo kwenye meza ya hi yo R ipoti namba ri nne  kama mko na hizo R ipoti ya Auditor General 
wale a mbao mko nay o waangalie kwenye Ripoti halafu walinganishe na kwenye  Ripoti ya  
Mhasibu Mkuu  nambari nne. Kuna muundo msingi wa maji taka  pale Ratna Square kwa Ripoti 
ya Mhasibu Mkuu  yeny ewe ambayo huko katika mapendekezo  yasema miradi mingi, karibia 
asilimia  90 imemaliz ika lakini huku inasema hiyo nawahakikishia mimi mkitoka mnifuate 
nikawaonyeshe kuwa h io miradi  ilianzwa ikaachwa kati kati. Kwenye Ripoti ya Auditor G eneral  
ya mwaka 2016 ndio maana Mheshimiwa Spi ka nimeku ambia ni vizuri ikiwa R ipoti inakuja ya 
2016 ndio waleta ile Ripoti ya Auditor G eneral   yote wafanye  kulinganisha  na hii Ripoti ya PAC 
kwa sababu watu hapa wako na Ripoti ya PAC lakini si ya  Mhasibu Mkuu  na sijui wanaangal ia 
wapi . 
Mimi niko na Ripoti ya PAC na niko na Ripoti ya Auditor G eneral  2016 ambayo 
nawaambia hiyo miundo misingi ya  maji taka ya  Ratna S quare ilifanywa nusu haikumalizwa 
niko nayo hapa. Katika hiyo hiyo  table  namba ri 6 ambayo inasema  miundo msingi w a maj i taka 
sehemu ya  Makaburini K ongowea kwenye ile Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu , 2016 Mheshimiwa 
Spika hayo ndio makosa amba yo tunafanya tunaleta r ipoti na wengi wetu hawana hiyo  Ripoti ya  
Mhasibu Mkuu  wala hawajaiona...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. F adhili Mwalimu) : Yes, what is it Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri kusoma  Ripoti ya  Mhasibu Mkuu 
yataka ufahamu wa kusoma hizo Ripoti;  Ripoti ya Mhasibu  inapotoka inakuja na  management 
letter , halafu inaweza toka ile management letter draft . 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Wale ambao wanakuwa audited wanakwenda  wanajitetea, wanapeleka masogora wa o 
ama ushuhuda wao kwa Mhasibu Mkuu , wanakueleza hii imekuwa hivi alafu Mhasibu Mkuu  
vile vitu ambavyo atakuwa ameridhika navyo, vile vitu ndio Mhasibu Mk uu ambavyo atavitoa , 
na tukiangalia kuwa sisi hatuwezi kusoma Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu  ndani ya Bunge hili, ndani 
ya Bunge kunasomwa Ripoti ya Uhasibu ya Bunge la Kaunti  na ukiangalia kwani zote ziko vile 
vile zilivyoandikwa na  Mhasibu  na majibu  kutoka kwa wale  watu walikuwa audited  wametia 
ndani…sisi tunakuja kusema kuangalia observation  na tunatoa observations  zetu na tunatoa 
ripoti yetu kusema kuwa kama jambo hili liko sawa ama haliko sawa.  
 Kwa hivyo nataka kumuambia Mheshimiwa kuwa  awe mtaratibu wa kusoma na afahamu 
vile hii mambo ya audit  inavyokwenda.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari : Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa m wenza , nimekuelewa na pia naona 
umechukua jukumu sana kunielezea, lakini tayari man eno haya ilikuwa nayaelewa. Mheshimiwa  
Spika naf ikiri si si tuko hapa kuwakilisha sehemu tunazotoka na Mhasibu Mkuu  nafikiri hata ziko 
kwenye online ama mkanda  ulolo ama sivyo? Mimi hapa nime  download  hii hapa tunazungumza 
hapa na nimeipitia yote na nikapitia na observation  ambayo inayozungumza sidhani kama 
Mhas ibu Mkuu  wata weka vitu ambao hao hawako certified  ama vitu ambavyo vimekuwa 
cleared waweke ndani ya vyombo vya habari . Hii inavyozungumza ... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : There is a point of order.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker  I want to know, whether it  is in order for us to discuss the 
documents which ha ve been downloaded by one Hon. Abrari for his own personal findings  and 
he briefs it so that we c an start discussing in this Honourable  House . Mr. Speaker Sir , I do not 
know if  you got me ; I was saying  I want you to rule on this, whether the Member , one Hon. 
Abrari is in order to discuss the document which  he has download ed Mr. Speaker for his own 
personal findings.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir we want to know the authenticity of that part icular report we  have not 
even see n, is now forcing it to down our throat s and w e just agree with it. Mr. Speaker I want 
you to rule on that, whether it i s in order or not in order Mr. Speaker , thank you.  
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Abrari the document that we  are 
discussing is what that is in front of us and it is a reply of w hatever that was raised by the 
Auditor G eneral, so what you are referring to now Hon. Abrari, we as Members of this 
Assembly, Members do  not have the document t hat you referring to ; first, and secondly whatever 
that can be highlighted in this  report it is a query that the Auditor has raised  so I do  not know 
why and from where you are getting the report that you are r aising now.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Mheshimiwa  Spika nafikiri hizo vitu tunazozungumza zote 
ziko kwenye Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu , tashwishi  ziko hapo hapo.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So you mean the Committee is 
misleading this House on how they are getting those queries?  
 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  There some of these  ambazo hawaku  raise Mheshimiwa  Spika, 
ziko baadhi ya vitu ambazo tunazungumza kuna mapungufu yetu, ambao sisi katika ku shauri hii 
ripoti  hatukuviangalia . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So what is the problem with t he 
Committee?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Mimi ningependeke za, mapendekezo yangu sasa kwa K amati, 
vile vitu zote amba zo Mhasibu Mkuu  ameuliza tashwishi  ingekuwa vizuri ama  vyema kwa kila 
kata ndogo ama W odi ya Mheshimiwa apitie vizuri hii Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu , aangalie zile 
vitu katika kwake ambayo ameguswa, amba yo ana ona katika [??] a mbayo Mhasibu Mkuu  
ameweka tashwishi , amba yo  ha vikutekelezwa ama mpaka sasa bado kuna shida, h io ndio kwa 
maana nimetaka hizo vitu haraka kupitia hio Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu  na kupitia hii ripoti ya 
Kamati ya PAC  ambayo umetuletea niangalie katika hizi ripoti…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : What is it Hon. Kibwana? Just a minute .  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Just maybe apart from my colleague from Kongowea  and 
Members in general when the Chair read this report talking about 90 percent I think it should 
read 90 percent not 100 percent. So when you talk of  90 percent, it means the report has not been 
completed unless she has said 100 percent. The other issue Hon. Speaker, when the A uditor 
came there were projects that were not completed, but by now since we did a site visit th ese 
projects are completed . So any report that can reach 100 per cent Mr. Speaker unless maybe that 
is why I want to share with Members  so that when we talk over the report it should be in their 
mind of a certain area.  
The other thing Mr. Spe aker, not all Wards have these  auditor quer ies in their area, when 
you look at Shika Adabu  it builds a hospital, it  is in the audit query but the pro jects that are not 
here, maybe they will appear in this financial year 2020/2021 that  is for information for  the 
Auditor G eneral. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Proceed Hon. Abrari.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Nashukuru san a Mhe shimiwa m wenza lakini nitaregea pale 
pale kuwa hizi ripoti kuwa hizi tashwishi  sio sisi tuliziandika kwa Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu  na 
kwa kusema kweli ni kama hujapitia  Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu . Mimi nazungumzia  Ripoti ya 
Mhasibu Mkuu iliomalizika  mwaka  2016, tukienda mpaka 19.0, nataka Mhe shimiwa m wenza 
aliyekuwa hapa karibu utaniambia  maana yeye ndio alikuwa mbeleni Mheshimiwa w a 
Kongowea atakuwa shahidi yangu nikizungumza kuwa barabara ninayo  izungumzia kuwa 
Kongowea Exit road kutokea sokoni  ambayo ilise mekana ilitengenezwa na milioni 18, nataka 
kuwaha kikishia kwenye Bunge hili…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 I do not want to be informed.  
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have a seat . Yes, he does  not want to be 
informed. Proceed Hon. Abrari.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari: Baadhi ya miradi  ambayo tunasema Mhasibu Mkuu  alizoweka  
kama kuna tashwishi  mimi nazungumzia katika mradi  mmoja katika Ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu  
hio 2016 tashwishi nambari  19.6.0 ukiangalia utaiona ama uki  download  utaiona, tuna linganisha 
ni R ipoti, sasa sisi tunazungum zia kun a miradi ambayo hata kuanzwa ha ijaanzwa ile 
ninayokuambia . Mimi Mheshimiwa Junior atan itetea hiyo barabara inayosema Exit R oad kutoka 
soko la K ongowea,  soko la K ongowea  haijawahi tengenezwa barabara  tangu ule wakati wa  
flyover  itengenezwe lakini hapa naona wanasema miradi imetengenezwa kufikia asilimia  90,  
hiyo haijaanza kabisa…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, what is it Hon . Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Kombe : Thank you very much Hon . Speaker for giving me th is chance to comment 
on m y learned friend. Mr. Speaker I want to…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Let him finish! Proceed!  
 
 Hon. Kombe: Mr. Speaker , my learned friend could be on the right track but maybe  
because we do not  have that document I am kindly urging him that we do not have that document 
sometimes we use kabambe  we cannot download that whole book so if he can spare time and 
please break it down for us for so that we can be the same and read on the same page we cou ld 
be reaching somewhere … 
 
[Consultations ] 
 
 I hope Mr. Speaker you have heard me?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, I got your point . Hon. Abrari 
proceed.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari : Ahsante Sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi naona sisi tuko hapa 
kwa tunajadili… [Inaudible ]. 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya  Juma:  [Off Mic rophone] . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Please use your mic rophone ! 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Hon. Amriya Juma : Mr. Speaker I rise unde r Standing Order 104 and the reason 
[Inaudible ]… I was waiting for my tim e to respond as a mover of the Motion but I think at this 
rate the House will be misguided if you allow us to proceed in this manner . Mr. Speaker, for one 
the allegatio n that the Hon . Member h as raised on the Auditor General reports  for the financial 
year 2015 /2016 is neither here nor there because in our report we have highlighted all the audit 
queries that were raised and even went ahead and highlighted the management responses that 
were by the Committee and we went ahead and made our observations .  
 So it should not worry the Hon. Members that they do not have the Auditor General’s 
report because all  the queries are in this report , so I am telling all the Hon. Members  to sit back 
and look at all those queries that have been highlighted in bold , are the querie s that have been 
raised by the Auditor General , that is one , secondly Mr. Speaker I am also disturbed because the 
nature of the direction the Hon . Member was talking about the query is right here no.19.0.6 on 
the construction of ECD E schools at that time it was the expectation of the executive … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 At that point, I am trying to clarify…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 I do not want to be informed . 
  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Let her proceed . 
  
 Hon. Amriya Juma:   I am t rying to differentiate why the Hon. Members’ information is 
false by saying what is in this report is the truth, Mr. Speaker the qu ery was on development 
projects … 
 
[Interrupti on] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Let us go to 19.6 . 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:   I was coming to that Mr. Speaker , but I know in your wisdom you 
have... 
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The mover was saying t hat it is not in the 
PAC report … 
 
 Hon.  Amriya Juma:  Mr. Spe aker sorry I was moving to that ; I was saying that on t he 
delayed development project on the ECD Es and whateve r he is talking about is on 19. 6 on 
stalled projects and it is clear here the audit re vealed  the following projects had s talled  on page 
91. Then we also highlig hted the management response  why those projects had stalled , it was 
because of delayed payment s and it is very clear . 
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  Then in our recommend ation the management responded that since there was dela y in 
payment in the financial year it is clear that they were not able to actu alize the stalled project . 
The Committee was satisfied because you realize because you will not realiz e a project if you 
have no funds  Mr. Speaker so the Hon. Member should stand informed  and guided by this report 
and stop misleading the House.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon . Abrari?  Use the mic rophone  
in front of you . 
  
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante Sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Waswahili husema … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : First Hon. Abrari withdraw the statement 
that you said, waheshim iwa hawajielewi . Withdraw that statement!  
 
[Applause ] 
 Hon.  Mohamed Abrari: Mheshimiwa Spika ni dhahiri  shahiri kuwa Mheshimiwa 
mwenza hakua akinis ikiza wakati nikiongea yeye amezun gumzia vitu vingine na mimi 
nimezungumzia vitu vingine tofa uti kabisa kwa sababu anazungumza maneno ya ECD E na mimi 
sijazungumza . Nafikiri kama Karani  ama hapo juu ungekuwa na ripoti umeletewa … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon.  Abrari what Hon . Amriya 
highlighted is the same issue that you are talking about 19.6 in this report that has been submitted 
and the last item it is talking about the Exit... page 22, Exit road of Kongowea  for the year 
ending 30th June, 2016 . 
 
[Hon.  Mo hamed Abrari perusing report]  
 
 Page 22 . 
  
[Continued to peruse]  
 
 Yes, Hon . assist him .  
 
[A few Hon. Members crossed the floor to assist him]  
 
 Yes ok, Hon. Abrari proceed and ke ep in mind that your time is up.  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika. Waheshimiwa wenza wote 
naona  wamekimbia kwangu kwa sababu nime zungumzia vitu ambavyo na wao pia hawana 
uhakika hawajui , nimekuwa m akini kwa sababu ni W odi yangu, t umezungumzia kuhusu hiyo 
barabara ya Exit, Kongowea ambayo haikujeng wa na ni ukweli haijaanz wa mpaka sasa.  
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Halafu chengine ni hiyo 19.0  kwenye ripoti ya Mhasibu Mkuu  ambayo kuna hiyo njia ya 
maji taka  ya M akaburini - Kongowea  tunazun gumzia , hicho kiwanja ambacho njia ya maji taka  
ilianza kutengenezwa ilikuw a ni ya wenyewe na saa hii tuna vyozungumzia imewekwa fence , 
hiyo shamba ilinyakuliwa lakini sijui ..., tuko pamoja Mheshimiwa S pika? Nazungumzia 19.0 , 
hiyo tashwishi  nambari sita  ambayo ni njia ya maji taka  ya M akaburini  - Kongowea ambayo 
mpaka sasa ni moja wapo katika ile miradi ilisimama,  halafu katika hapo  hapo ukienda 19.1.5 
ambayo ni njia ya maji taka ya Ratna  Square  ambayo hiyo pia ilifanywa nusu mpaka sasa.   
 Kwa hivyo mimi kitu ambayo naomba  ama mapendekezo yangu PAC  wawe 
wakiandamana na W aheshimiwa kwenye W odi waonyeshwe hasa ile miradi  ambayo ilisimama 
ambazo zilikuwa na tashwishi  ili so te tuwe kwa barabara moja ili tu endelee . Hatuko hapa ati kwa 
kubishana , tuko hapa kuelimishana na kuweka s awa Mheshimiwa S pika, kwa hayo mafupi au 
macha che, a hsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Abrari . I think the 
mover  of this M otion is here and hearing the advice that you have given the Committ ee. Yes 
Hon. Chief W hip? 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Wambua ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. M imi kwa dakika 
kidogo  ambayo tumepitia  hii R ipoti ambayo ni nzuri na mli jaribu sana kuiangalia wakati huu  
mukafikia hiyo miradi mkaiona vile ambavyo  imefanya na kazi n inaona mum eweza ku fanya 
vizuri  sana. Kile amb acho ninataka ku muambia rafiki yangu M heshimiwa A brari, kazi  yake ni 
nzuri lakini ripoti am bayo anataka kuingiza  katika B unge haiko  hapo na ni n gumu sana tutoke 
kwenye R ipoti haiko  hapa… 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Ahsant e sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon.  Chief Whip , whatever  Hon.  Abrari 
raised is in the report. Yes the mover of the M otion?  
 
 Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr.  Speaker. At this juncture  i wish to thank the 
Members , espec ially the issue raised by my sister  Hamida , duly replied by Hon. Hatimy . Maybe 
to clarify , of all the bank accounts tha t were pending all of them the T reasury managed  in their 
response to close except for the three  bank accounts  at Standard Bank , KCB and C hase bank and 
they have given the reasons  why they were unable to close  these  banks . KCB was controlling the 
salaries  of the staff by then and the signatories by then were quite different and they are different 
now so there has been an issue from the bank,  the KCB  since the signatories are different there  
are not receiving instructions as Hon. Hatimy said. 
 We have made a recommendation that it be forwarded to  Anti–corruption,  also 
recommend ed that Inter -governmental  Committee to work  fast and furious under the Inter-
governmental  Relations Act on matters of Transition A uthority were handed over to the Inter-
governmental  Relations Technical Committee from M arch, 2015  and it is now five  years . Mr. 
Speaker we have said that they should  be handling  this matter,  so I hope that is satisfactory  my 
sister.   
July 3, 2020                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           28 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 The other issue that was raised and i think it is because the H on. Member  had not perused  
the last page but I am sure he has now had the time that t he issue that the C ommittee has very 
well highlighted here is th at on pending projects . It was the Committee’s  recommendation  that 
the Treasury should give priority , i think it was also in the ADP of this year that the pending 
projects should be first completed before  any other new  projects were put in place , and I think 
that is the most paramount decision that is important at this point that all the pending projects 
should be completed before new projects and that is all . Thank you Mr.   Speaker.   
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . Hon. Members I see no  
debates on the  Reports, I now stand to put the question that the M otion by Hon. Amriya Juma 
Boy on the adoption of the PAC Reports on the Auditor General report for the E xecutive for the 
financial year s 2015/2016,  2016/2017 , 2017/2018 be approved in this House in  the same terms as 
moved.  
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 There being no ot her busines s this H ouse stands adjourned Sine Die. 
 
The H ouse rose at 12:30p.m. 
 
 