April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         28 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 5th April, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Twenty Eighth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  10:15a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulka dir): Please take your seats. Clerk?   
 
STATEMENT S 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CH AIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPR IATIONS , HONOURABLE KIBWANA SWALEH ON THE SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL DEVELOPMENT  
PLAN (ADP), COUNTY INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PLAN (CIDP) AND COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY 
PAPER (CFSP) TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh  Chairman Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations please respond to the statement.  
 
Hon. Kibwana S waleh : Thank you Honourable  Speaker. Hon ourable Speaker  I am aware 
of this statement that was raised by Hon ourable  Amriya Boy Juma, MCA from Mjambere. 
Honourable  Speaker , previously we stated that we received the letter from the Chief Executive  
Committee  Member (CECM ) Finance in the Finance Committee and as a Committee  we 
present ed that letter in the previous sittings but on our own deliberations as a Committee we had 
asked the Chief Executive Member Committee for Finance to give us the timeline on the Coun ty 
Integrated Development Plan  (CIDP ) and also t he Count y Fiscal Strategy Paper  (CFSP ). At the 
moment Hon ourable  Speaker,  we have not yet received the respon se that could let us know the 
timeline on both documents the CIDP and CFSP . So, Honourable  Speaker in short,  I would ask 
the House to give me more time so that we get the response from the Waziri . Thank you, 
Honourable  Speaker . 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you Hon ourable  
Kibwana , I think that is well understood.  
 
RESPONSE  TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON , COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE HONOURABLE HASSAN  MOHAMED  ON THE FIRE OUTBREAK IN KONGOWEA 
MARKET  
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         28 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 Yes, I can see the Vice Chair is up please proceed and respond.  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Our Report  is not ready because the Chief 
Officer has gone for induction for almost one week  so I will make sure from next week it will be 
ready although we are going for a recess but will make sure we will have the Report  ready . 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Mwaura  do 
you have something to add on?  
 
  Hon. Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker it is just I want to raise a concern that  I am not very satisfied 
with the answer just because the Chief Officer is on induction c annot be a good reason enough 
for answers not to b e brought in this House Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Did she say the Chief Officer 
is on induction?  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  That is what I have heard.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): As far as am aware  they are 
yet to be confirmed,  so please clarify the Vice Chair…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): lady, please clarify that . 
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  That is the report I got.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Ok, Yes Hon ourable  Kibwana?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Mr. Speaker I con cur with my colleague from Kongowea. I think 
fire issues are very sensitive and I hope that the people who lost their properties … So, ther e is no 
vacuum in government so if the CEC is in induction do es not mean we cannot get response from 
them, so we need your indulgence in this issue. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Yes, Honourable  Nyota?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Being a Member of the Committee,  we 
raised  this issu e with the relevant sector and they are following it up, so as my Vice Chair has 
just told you we are going to respond to it as soon as possible. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : I think your response is not 
satisfactory ; first of all, you have not considered the gravity of the matter  this is a matter of great 
concern not only to the Hon ourable  Member from Kongowea but to the whole House. And, it is 
a matter that was before me last week and we decided to give you more time. So, Hon ourable  
Nyota and  the Vice Chairlady together with the entire Committee I think it is only fair you give 
us a response by Wednesday 2 :00p.m. Yes Clerk?  
 
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         28 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT B Y CHAIRPERSON , COMMITTEE ON  EDUCATION AND DIGITAL 
TRANSFORMATION  HON OURABLE  ALLEN  KATANA  ON LATE DIS BURSEMENT OF BURSARIES IN THE 
COUNTY  
 
Yes, anyone form the Education Committee present?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Anyo ne from the Education Committee?  Yes, Hon ourable  Maryam?  
 
Hon. Baimu : Thank you Mr. Speake r. I believe the bursaries had been issued out but they  
have been returned back and we are waiting for the money to be allocated or given to the people 
who have benefited from the bursaries. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Manuari , are you 
satisfied with  the response? Or did you even pay attention to the response?  Honourable  Maryam 
Baimu please respond again if you do not mind ! 
 
Hon. Baimu: Ahsante Bwana Spika . Kitu nasema bas ari zilitolewa , watoto wakajaza na 
zikarudishwa . Kwa hiyo kisisi kama Kamati ya Eli mu tunasubiria pesa zi we allocated  ili watoto 
waweze kupata hizo basari. Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Manuari?  
 
Hon. Juma Ma nuari: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nimuulize atupe ile siku 
mwafaka kwa sababu kufikia s aa hizi watoto wetu wengi washarudi wapo nyumbani na 
wanadaiwa hiyo pesa na tunaomba kitu kama hicho kifanyiwe kwa haraka kwa sababu ni suala la 
kijamii na ndio sual a muhimu katika suala ambalo Mheshimiwa Gavana aliliweka mbele katika 
masuala ya elimu . Kwa hivyo utuambie muda ule mwafaka usituambie tu iko tayari, iko tayari 
muda mwafaka ambao  hundi  zitatoka.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Senior Hon ourable  
Kibwana?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: Honourable  Speaker , I think the Member is misleading this 
House; I remember we had a meeting with the Governor at Mombasa Beach Hotel but the 
respon se from the Governor is not the issue of money but the amen dment of the Bill so who is 
giving this House the correct  information Hon ourable  Speaker ? 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Kibwana , are you 
alluding that Hon ourable  Baimu is deliberately misleading the House?  
 
Hon. Kibwana S waleh:  Honourable  Speaker , I was not alone . I think Hon ourable  Speaker 
you were also there and I was very keen to that meeting . Mr. Speaker and t he issue of bursary 
came out and the Governor said that there is amendment to the Elimu Fund ; the money is ther e 
but cannot be issued until we do that amendment of that Bill . So that is the word of the Governor  
and I do not know where the Committee is getting th e answer , maybe just for clarification for 
this Hon ourable  House.  
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         28 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Well,  noted . Honourable  
Kibwana  it is very ironically however that you are very vocal when it comes to Statement 
response when there is a Statement lying on  your Table for the past one month ! Very ironically 
Honourable  Kibwana...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Nyota?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Honourable  Speaker … 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Just take your seat please. 
Honourable  Nyota?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you M r. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , I remember this Statement was 
brought in the last session and being crucial , being important it could be only a favor that the 
Committee should work with speed to ensure that this matter is responded adeq uately becaus e 
this issue was raised and it is so critical . I do not comply or I do  not agree with the answer the 
Member from Education Committee is giving this House because we were so passionate about 
this program and as we speak just resounding back to my  Honourable  Member Kibwana has said 
that up  to now those school going kids they have  been sent back home because of school fees of 
which Mr. Speaker they were so attached to this thing knowing that their MCAs and the 
government is working hard to make sure that  they remain in school but up  to now the answers 
we are getting from the Commit tee is not satisfactory Mr. Speaker.  Thank you.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Hamida.  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you . Mr. Speaker Sir abo ut the bursary issue ; as you are aware some of 
us are dealing with childr en who are livi ng with disability and Mr. Speaker, we cannot keep on 
putting these kids in a situation whereby the parents have a tougher time to keep them at home 
and we are giving them hopes that right now Mombasa County is giving bursaries and we do not  
have. Mr. Spea ker, I think this is a very urgent matter and as you are aware again, we are going 
for recess and it will take us about three weeks for our recess, so i f we are not going to be giving 
our wananchi promises that we cannot kee p there  is no need  for us to give the  bursaries at all at 
all. Let it be known that we at Mombasa County cannot give bursaries because this thing for us 
it’s just too much because us as MCAs we are the ground level, we are the ones who are helping 
the wananchi, we cannot do it anymore be cause our salaries are not even enough for us so I think 
Mr. Speaker this thing should be taken very important for us to have bursaries as s oon as 
possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkad ir): Yes, Honourable  Mwaur a. 
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and I’m also not satisfied with the answer given 
by the Member from the Committee because  she is just al luded that we are just waiting for the 
money . So there is no even response from the conce rned offices and they ju st sat and the n 
brought a response to the H ouse that we are just waiting as you are waiting their just desperate as 
we are, yet this House has given  them the mandate to be the Committee for Education and look 
into the matters of educati on Mr. Speaker.   
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         28 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 Mr. Speaker that a nswer  cannot be satisfactory to w hat has been asked and answered,  Mr. 
Speaker also I am a bit I don’t know what to say because I have heard the chair committee on 
finance that we nee d to do some amendments in the H ouse so that that money can  be effected 
Mr. Speaker that is so worrying because we did it in a very much hurry, we were so much 
hurried to do the bursaries  if I do recall yet i t was an amendment that was needed to be done in 
this House and right now we are going t o the recess, Mr. S peaker you can just wonder as we go 
to the recess even the schools are closing so maybe we tell our students and our parents that the 
monies they are  going to come in the second term or third term or when Mr. Speaker? The 
Member needs to  answer. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Baimu , I will 
give you enough time to respond let all the Members exhaust their frustration s. Yes, Honourable  
Kibwana do you still want to contribute?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Honourable  Speake r the member should be aware that we are 
going to wait for longer than he expected but Honorable S peaker I think should go in record that 
currently we don’t have any respo nse in the committee because there is no written. A respond is 
coming from the e xecut ive and I think they have not given us any respon se from the executive so 
those are just words of a member that there is no money and we are waiting for  money  but I 
think   in future I think the chair should come with a respond from the executive to s how t hat this 
words is a reply back from the Waziri, so for now I think the committee need s to dig further on 
this issue because I see that the money may come even after second  term  which will affect our 
student. Hon ourable  Speaker it is in record that my comm ittee has given response in the previous 
sitting and now we are waiting for the response from the executive.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Well , noted . Yes, Hon ourable  
Morgan?  
 
Hon. Matsaki:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, kwa ufupi ili ji bu ambalo Mhe shimiwa  
mwenza amelizungumza pia sijaridhika nalo. Kwa sababu mkutano wa juzi Gavana alizungumza  
ni just amendment of the Bill . Kwa hivyo ni Kamati ya Elimu ishirikiane na Execut ive part 
walete Bill hapa tuipitishe  ili watoto waweze kurudi shu leni kama Mhe shimiwa  Mwenza 
alivyozungumza watoto wengi kweli wako manyumbani, tutakaa mpaka lini? Na hata hivi sasa 
tunaenda recess. Kwa hivyo ni afadhali hio Kamati ijishughulishe na executive  walete hio Bill 
hapa kwa hili Jumba, tuipitishe ili b asari  itoke na zaidi ya hapo tunasubiri b asari  pia za colleges  
zitoke … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Maimuna would 
you like to make a contribution? Just let Hon ourable  Morg an finish and then you will get a 
chance to make a contribution . 
 
Hon. Matsaki:  Kwa hivyo ni vyema tumalize b asari  za shule za s ekonda ri na tuwezeshe 
pia Mstahiki  Gavana , atulete pia b asari za vyuo vya anuani . Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika.  
 
The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you . Yes, H onourable  Maim una 
now you may make your contribution.  
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         28 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Ningependa kuchangia kwamba 
tuweze kuwahakikish ia ya kwamba  zile fomu ya basari  tulizitoa kupitia kwa Finance  waweze 
kupean a…Baada ya hapo tuangalie ma mbo ya b asari ya vyuo vikuu na vyenginevyo  kwa sababu  
tunajua ya kwamba hichi kitengo cha finance ndio kitengo ambacho kinaendesha Bunge hili na 
kinaendesha  Mombasa Kaunti nzima. Kwa hivy o sisi tunataka hii mambo ya fiscal paper  ikija, 
tuweze kukaa na tuan galie vizuri . Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Maimuna , let me 
guide you, you are out of context. We are actually deliberating a statement concerning the 
Department of Education  however,  I unde rstand you . Yes Honourable ?  
 
Hon. Kimari:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika. Mhe shimiwa  Spika ikiwa nimeketi hapa 
nimes ikia Mhe shimiwa  mwenza akipeana statement  ya Kamati ya Elimu, l akini ni kwa mda wa 
mwezi mmoja n a tang u tupeane zile fo mu za basari  maswali yame kuwa mengi k ule mtaani . 
Hatuwezi kujieleza na k ama ni mwe zi mmoja na wiki kadhaa na Kamati ya Elimu, wanasimama 
hapa kwa Bunge kutupatia maelezo yenye kusema kweli si  ya kweli kulingana na wale 
waliokuwa kwa ule mkutano uliokuwa wa Gavana maelezo ambay o hayak o satisfact ory. 
Tungependa hata tukiitisha statement  kwa hiki kikao, wacha ile statement itoke kwa ile Kamati 
husika ikiwa nzima na wakiwa wamefanya upelelezi na kuja kupeana kitu satisfactory . Lakini si 
kusimama tu  hapa kwa Bunge alafu tunapitisha sababu tukirudi kul e mitaani hiyo  imekuwa 
maswali kila siku. Kumbuka kuna wale watoto walikuwa waingie  kidato cha kwanza  wengine 
bado wanasubiri basari muhula wa kwanza tayari ndio hii inafunga, shule tayari ni kufunga 
zinafunga Mheshimiwa . Kwa hio  ni vizu ri hata  kama  Kamati  watapewa muda, wapewe muda 
mfupi yenye itapatikana ndio tukienda mapumziko  tuwe tw ajua wananchi wetu tutawaambia nini 
kwa sababu mara ya mwisho tutapurwa mawe, itasemekana kul e mitaani tulipeana fomu ghushi. 
Ahsante . 
 
The Temporary  Spea ker (Hon. Abdulrahm an Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Nyota?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, given the importance of this 
matter and the response you have just received from the Member of the  
Committee and the dissatisfaction by the H ouse, I think it is only good for the Member to consult 
his Committee Members and the Chair that the matter in this House is very serious, very 
important and it is very crucial so Mr. Speaker you have to be impartial. You have just ruled that 
the C ommittee  of Transport should respond by afternoon on the matter of Kongowea market , I 
think Mr. Speaker this time you have to be impartial to this House so given the gravity of this 
matter of bursaries, I would require your position, I would need a response, a ver y accurate 
response to this House by afternoon today. Thank you , Sir. 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Well, noted . Honourable  
Nyota however please  do not pre -empt the ruling am about to make. Yes , Honourable  Mariam , 
please respond?  
 
Hon. Baimu:  Ahsante san a Mheshimiw a Spika. Mimi kitu ningependa ku anza kusema hi li 
jambo l a mambo ya b asari  nafikiria hiyo siku w alipoenda Mombasa Beach sikuwa katika hicho 
kikundi. Kwa hivyo kwa mimi tangu watoke Mombasa Beach hatujakutana na Mwenyekiti we tu 
wala Naibu  wake. 
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         28 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 Hivyo b asi mimi uliposema kwamba Kamati ya Elimu iweze kujibu kulingana na 
ninachojua mkutano wa mwisho ambao tulifanya ni kwamba bado tuna subiri majibu kutoka kwa 
Executive , pesa zitolewe watoto waweze kusoma. Kwa hivyo kwa heshima nim esikiza hayo 
malalami shi na kusem a ule kweli ikiwa ni h iyo changamoto haiko tu pahali pamoja i naumiza 
Mombasa nzima, kila mzazi analia ni kweli tunaonekana sisi ni waongo . Hivyo basi  kwa ufupi 
kwa sababu kuna  marekebisho  yanatakiwa yafanyike kimimi kama Mh eshimiwa wa finance 
alivyoz ungumza Kibw ana itoke kama order ama ni nini from the Executive kuongelea 
amendments ya hiyo Bill ili ije hapa Bungeni  iweze kujadiliwa kama leo mfano Mwenyekiti  
wangu hayuko . Kwa hivyo kama mimi peke yangu ama sijui wangapi kuto ka Kamati ya Elimu 
wako hapa , hivyo basi  sijui labda mda tutakao  pewa kama Kamati ya Elimu sijui kama itakuwa 
tayari saa nane naweza mpata Mwenyekiti  wetu . Hivyo basi  kwa heshima tutaangalia kama 
Mwenyekiti  tutamtafuta tuone kama tutakaa tuweze kujua tutaw eza kupata suluhisho ama jibu 
mwa faka kutoka kwa executive . Ahsanteni.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdirahman ): Thank you Hon ourable  
Baimu. Hon ourable M embers , I have noted with a lot of concern that Committees are not taking 
their roles serio usly and I think we shall consult Chair of Chairs to  instruct th em to take this 
matter serious ly. It is very unfortunate that the Chairs are not even present to respond to these 
statements and at this rate Members are just taking statements as just a forma lity which in real 
sense Committees are extension of the whole House.  So, this is an issue that needs immediate 
response , the Chairman of Education as well as its Committee needs to get back to this House by 
2: 00p.m  today with a full response to this matt er. Yes Clerk.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Thank you , Members. This House stands adjourned until Wednesday 5th April , 2023 at 
2:30p .m. 
 
The H ouse rose at 10 :43a.m 
 
 
  
  
 