March 7, 2017                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         2 9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certi fied version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 7th March, 2017  
The House met at 2 :38pm. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Members let us sit down, y es Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Yes Hon Zainab  Kithinz i. 
Hon.  (Ms)  Zainab Kithinz i: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika k wa kunipa hii fursa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika napenda kutoa notisi ya kuwasilisha mswada  kuhusiana na kuipa 
jina barab ara ya Kisimani kuelekea Freretown kuitwa Serah Nyamvula Ernest .  
Tukielewa kuwa m arehemu Sarah Nyamvula alikuwa M wakilishi mteule katika 
Kaunti hii na alikuwa M wenyekiti wa Kamati ya B unge hili inayoshughulikia maswala ya 
Vijana, Jinsia na Michezo ; 
Vile vile p ia tukielewa kuwa alifahamika katika kazi zake za utetezi na uwakilishiji 
wa haki za wanawake Mombasa na taifa zima kwa jumla;  
Mheshimiwa Spika, t ukiwa na wasiwasi kuwa kazi njema aliyofanya marehemu Sarah 
Nyamvula Ernest huenda ikasahulika iwapo hatutakuwa na ishara ya kumkumbuka;  
Mheshimiwa Spika nalihimiza Bunge hili kuwa:  
Serik ali ya Kaunti iipe barabara ya Kisimani hadi Frere Town iliopo katika eneo 
Bunge la Nyali jina la Sarah  Nyamvula Ernest Road kama ukumbusho na heshima kwa 
Mheshimiwa mwenda zake. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much.  Yes Clerk.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Yes Hon  Mary Akinyi.  
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Thank yo u Mr. Speaker sir. Mr. Speaker sir, I beg t o give notice 
of the following Motion  on the collection of garbage at night ; 
(Hon (Ms) Akinyi read)  
That aware, that under part 2 (g ) of the Fourth Schedule of the Constiution of Kenya 
2010 ; refuse  removal, refuse dumps and solid waste dispo sal is a mandate of the County 
government;  
Futher  aware that, garbage within the County is collected during the day;  
Concerned that, the afore mentio ned not only causes traffic congestion but also air 
pollution including and not limited to foul smell and litering on the roads;  
Mr. Speaker Sir, I urge this Assembly to resolve that:  
The County government to come up with measures for the collection of gar bage 
removal overnight to stem the ever -increasing garbage in the County.  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker  sir. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon Zainab Mumba.  
Hon. (Ms) Zainab Mumba:  Thank you M r. Speaker sir . Mr. Spea ker sir i beg to 
respond to a state ment which was brought by Hon Mary  Akinyi on areas proposed for 
designation of smoking zone s within  the County  of Mombasa , the above caption ed matter 
and your communication Ref:  CAC /ECM/GEN/VOL.II/ 115 refers . 
The Department of Education and Environment has inherit ted from the defunct Municipal 
Council of Mombasa design ated areas as  smoking zones. Th ey are as follows:  
1. Railway staion, near the toilet , 
March 7, 2017                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         2 9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certi fied version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 2. Makupa roundabout , 
3. Makadar a grounds , 
4. Treasury square, near the Dome, facing KCB , 
5. Pirates (J.K. Beach) near the toilet , 
6. Changamwe roundabout ,  
7. Kongowea Market, near the public toile ts, 
8. County court, behind the toilet , 
9. Mama Ngina Drive, near the toilets , 
10. Ferry stage,  near the toilet , 
11. Uhuru garden near the public toilet , 
12. Buxton ground near the pub lic toilets , 
13. Kengeleni lights ground/garden , 
14. Custom grounds, Kibuyuni (Likoni) , 
However, we have embarked on a review process to check on the suitability of the said 
smoking zones w hich are spread out within the Central Business District, additionally, we 
intend to add new areas across all the six Sub counties.  
This has been necessitated by the economic growth, leading to establishment of 
commercial centres in the sub counties.  
We anticipate completing the review process and ma pping of new zones within 30 days 
from the date of this communication. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you , Yes Clerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
  There  being no  other business this  House stand s adjourned untill tomorrow morn ing. 
The House rose at 2 :46pm . 
 
   
 
 