March 8 , 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 8th March , 201 6 
The House met at 2:33p.m 
(Temporary Speaker (Hon. Patrick Siminyu ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
 
       Hon. Opeya : I propose that this session 29th sitting 8th March , Tuesday 2016 Hon . 
Siminyu to be the T emporary Speaker for this session .  
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I second Hon. Opeya that Hon . Siminyu be the S peaker for 
today . 
(Consultations ) 
(Question proposed)  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu ): Hon. Members it has been proposed by Hon. 
Opeya and seconded by Hon. Amur that Hon. Patrick Siminyu to be the Chair of this session  
and open it up to M embers , so I put it to question . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Nzai . 
       Hon. Nzai:   Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . Kwanza nataka kuchukua fursa hii 
kumpongeza Gavana wetu kwa kazi nzuri ambayo amefanya Bwana Spika ; na baada ya kuwa 
nje huko Malindi kama unavyojua Bwana Spika chama chetu  cha ODM kiliweza ku ibuka na 
ushindi mkubwa . Hivyo basi tunataka kuchukua fursa hi i kumpongeza  kwa kazi yake nzuri 
na kwa mba chama kimezidi kupewa nguvu.  Hongera zie nde kwake kwa kazi safi na wote 
waliotumikia hata Mheshimiwa Raila kuja kwake na wale wengine wote ambao wameweza 
kujitoa kwa hali na mali kuona kwamba tumeweza ku kipata ten a kiti cha ODM. Ahsante,  
Bwana Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu) : Yes Hon. Duncan Onyango . 
       Hon. Onyango:  Ahsante Bwana Spika, mimi namuunga mkono jirani yangu hapa ; 
nafikiri sote tumeziona kwa runinga na hiyo ni thibitisho wazi kwam ba hata katika uchaguzi 
ujao bado hatutakuwa na mtu wa kupingana nae . Yangu  ni kupongeza sana viongozi wetu wa 
ODM kwa kazi ambayo imefanyika kule Malindi. A hsanteni . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu) : Yes Hon. Amur . 
       Hon. Amur : Ahsante Bwa na Spika, nami nawaunga wenzangu kusema kwamba 
Mombasa na Pwani  nzima itaimarishwa na ODM. Hii ni dhihirisho kwamba  Gavana wa 
Mombasa kupigana na serikali kuu ilikuwa inaon yesha kwamba ujasiri wa ke unafahamika 
katika Kenya hii.  Hii ni dhihirisho kwamba Gav ana 001 anaweza hata kupigania uraisi kwa 
nchi hii na akaibuka ushindi. I likuw a ni kupimana nguvu kuangalia 2017 uwezo wetu na 
imedhihirika wazi kwamba Gavana Joho anawez a kupewa uraisi katika nchi hii.  Kwa sasa 
Mombasa itaendelea kuwa ODM zone na hata aki ja Raisi na serikali kuu nzima Mombasa  
Pwani  sisi tuna imani kuwa Gavana Joho ameshikilia kiti kikamilifu na hiyo ndio imeleta 
shida kwake na vita vikubwa na serikali kuu kw a kuwa ana msimamo wake na chama chake . 
March 8 , 2016                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Ni dhihirisho Kenya nzima kwamba yeye sio mtu kigeugeu , ana msimamo na chama 
chake na amedhihirishia wakenya kwamba yeye an a uwezo kushika hata makamo wa R aisi. 
       Ni ku dhihirisha kwamba Mheshimiwa Joho ana t ajriba kubwa Kenya na 2022 atakuwa 
Raisi wa Kenya, ah sante Bwana Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu) : Yes Hon. Kizito . 
       Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform my colleagues that I was in 
Malindi  yesterday, specifically at the polling station , and  if it wasn't  for our Governor we 
could have lost.  Secon dly I would like to issue a statement regarding the shor t rains which are 
about to come;  how prepared are we as a County in terms of drainage?  I would like it to be 
directed to the relevant Committee  of the County executive to bring a statement here and 
reply to the House how prepared they are with Mombasa County . his time round, how far 
they have reached. T hank you , Mr. Speaker.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu) : Yes Hon. Opeya I will give you that opportunity 
to bring that statement so that I c an direct it to the relevant Committee , when will you bring 
the statement?  
       Hon. Opeya : Tomorrow morning .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu) : Okay, Clerk, .Hon Zainab  you have a statement ? 
       Hon. (Ms.) Zainab  Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speak er Sir. I wish to bring this statement 
which was brought by Hon. Mary Akinyi regarding a report on provisional protective gear  for 
County environment workers.  
(Hon. (Ms.) Zainab moved the S tatement)  
       The above matter refers . It is the responsibility of the employe r under the O ccupa tional 
Safety and H ealth Act Cap 217 Law s of Kenya to provide for appropriate protective gea r and 
clothing to its employees.  The attached list is the type, size of the requirements for  year 
2015/2016.  In the department of W ater, Environment  and N atural resource , we have 347 
workers and the sizes are medium, large, XL , XXL , and XXX, Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Mumba end ed reading and table d) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu) : Yes Hon. Dharwesh . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab Said : Nimesimama hapa ku unga mkono ripoti  hii. 
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Siminyu) : The House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
morning at 9 :00a.m. 
The House rose at 2: 46p.m. 