April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         29 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version o f this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 5th April, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Twenty Ninth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  2:35p .m at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members , take 
your seat.  Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND INFRASTRUCTURE , 
HONOURABLE HASSAN MOHAMED ON FIRE OUTBREAK IN KONGOWEA MARKET  
 
Yes, anyone from the Committee on Transport and Infrastructure ?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Any Member present ? Yes , Honourable  Joshua you have a response?  
 
Hon. Mose:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Please proceed . 
 
Hon. Mose: We are requesting for more time;  we are not able to get our Chairman . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdira hman Abdulkadir ): That is not a response, at least 
that is not a response we expected as a House.  
 
Hon. Mose: It is a response but it  is not a response you expected but that is what is there 
right now . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): It is very unfortunate . 
 
Hon. Mose: The Chair is not around;  the Vice -Chair is not around and I am just an 
ordinary Member of the Committee.  
 
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         29 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version o f this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Any other Member?  
 
[Silence]  
 
So as Members you have not deliberated on th is issue , since it was brought to the attention 
of the House . Yes, Honourable Manuari?  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Kama alivyotoa jibu ndugu yangu 
kufikia mpaka sa a hizi hatujui t utajibu nini Bunge, kwa sababu M wenyekiti hapatikaniwi na 
msaidizi wake a mbaye angetushikilia pia ni mteja hapatikani samahani.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Prischillah?  
The Majority Chief Whip (Hon. Mumba ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika lakini kadiri 
wenzangu walivyosema nafikiri hata mimi ni ko kwa neno hilo hilo la kuwa hatuwezi kujibu 
lolote mpaka tupate wahusika wa Kamati ambaye ni kwanza tumpate Mwenyekiti ama 
Mwenyekiti Mdogo . Sasa ikiwa hawa wote wanasemekana hawaonekani, Memba  wa kawaida 
hatazungumza nini  na hajapewa majukumu ya kuwa a fanye.  Mheshimiwa Spika ni wakati 
mwafaka wa kuwa muweze kuangalia katika hili suala hawa  Wenye viti  na Wenye Viti Wadogo 
wataweza kupatikaniwa vipi  ili waweze kuwajibika . Kwa sababu sisi ni Memba wa Kamati 
lakini hatuna mamlaka mpaka tusukumiwe yale mamlak a na Mwenyekiti ama Naibu wake ndio 
niweze kuzungumza hapa lakini siwezi kuzungumza chochote kwa sababu saa hizi sina chochote 
cha kuweza kupeana na kuzungumza. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Well , noted Hon ourable  
Prischillah . I understand you are the Majority Chief Whip so when you tell us you cannot get 
hold of the Chairman and the Vice it is very unfortunate . I expected you to whip them to be here 
so since the y are away and the Members  have said that they do not have any response , we shall 
postpone  this response to the next sitting. Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON , EDUCATION AND DIGITAL 
TRANSFORMATION HON OURABLE  ALLEN  KATANA ON LATE DISBURSEMENT OF BURSARIES IN THE 
COUNTY  
I can see Hon ourable  Katana is not here, do we have anyone from the Education 
Committee? Yes , do you have a response?  
Hon. Baimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Today’s morning session after I attended,  we had a 
discussion with Hon ourable  Dee, Chairman Dee...  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Excuse me, who is that?  
Hon. Baimu:  No Hon ourable  Hamisi I believe he had been given the mandate to follow 
the issue with the executive s o your honor kindly, because he is not in, we discussed with him 
and he had agreed to make a follow up, but I believe because he has not come in maybe  if we can 
be given  more time so that we can bring the report to the House. I believe Mr. Ibrahim has 
arrived my able deputy for education, maybe he can elaborate more. Thank you.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, well noted. Hon ourable  
Bomoa  are you aware of the situation? Are you aware that you are supposed to respond to a 
statement? Do you have the response?  
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         29 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version o f this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 Hon. Omondi : [Inaudible] . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Leila?  
Hon. Nyache : Point of order Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay . 
Hon. Nyache : We do  not have Hon ourable  Bomoa  in this Assembly.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Do we have Hon ourable  
Ibrahim?  
Hon. Nyache : Yes? 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Ok my apologies . Honourable  
Ibrahim please respond . 
Hon. Nyache : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
[Silence ] 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Is it a written response?  
Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I have just arrived [Inaudible ] I could not 
make it earlier . So, Mr. Speaker I am aware that there was a statement request from Hon ourable  
Manuari which was made in this H ouse on Wednesday of 29th March , 2023 on the 25th Sitting 
and in indeed the Committee engaged the department on the same issue and as I am speaking, I 
have a response…  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Pardon, did you respond?  
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker you asked a question, whether I’m aware of the statement and 
also whether I’m ready to give the response. I  have just said that I am aware of the statement and 
I’m also ready, I  have received the response so I am waiting for your perm ission so that I can 
read Mr. Speaker … 
[Applause ] 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): That is well advised . So, I’m 
giving you the green light now to respond. Please respond.  
Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity. It is true we did engage the 
Department of Education on the issue that  was the status of bursaries in the County. The 
department has already processed the application and the department is unable to pay the 
bursaries due to a requirement stated in a letter from the office of Controller of Budget … 
[Interruptio n] 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members , please 
take your seats. Just a minute. Now you can proceed.  
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker the Controller of Budget has instructed the County to a mend 
the Mombasa County Educational Development Act , 2014 to show clearly the governance 
structure of the Elimu Fund and other chang es that make the A ct compliant with the Finance 
Management Act (PFM) , 2012.  
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         29 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version o f this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 Mr. Speaker the plan was tabled at a cabinet meeti ng yesterday and upon approval we will 
begin the drafting process in collaboration with the County Assembly legal team and present 
them to the County Assembly to begin the amendment process. The Department of Education 
thanks us for our continuous support for transforming the lives of the children, youth people and 
generations to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I believe that statement has 
been well understood by the Members and the Member who raised the que stion. Hon ourable  
Manuari , I believe you are satisfied with that?  
Hon. Juma Manuari : Ndio Bwana Spika.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Okay, Yes Hon ourable  
Hamida? Are you up on a  point of order or point of information?  
Hon. Noor : I wanted cl arification on the time frame ; because as we are aware Mr. 
Speaker,  we are almost going recess so we just need to know the time frame.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Do we have a time frame?  
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker time frame is no t well stated but what we are saying is as soon 
as possible but the amendments will be brought to thi s House and we shall be able to start the 
process as soon as possible . Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdu lkadir ): Okay  well noted as soon as possible , 
right. Okay yes, Clerk. Hon ourable  Kibwana you have a statement to make please do so.  
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT FROM CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND DIGI TAL 
TRANSFORMATION HONOURAB LE ALLEN  KATANA ON SCHOLARSHIP BY COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF 
MOMBASA  
 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Mr. Speaker , my state ment goes to the Chairperson 
Education and Digital Transformation . Honourable  Speaker , you are aware that in the social 
media there  is a scholarship that is being undertaken by the County government and I saw the 
picture of the Governor and also the CEC of Education and I want just to know from the 
department if there  is any arrangement in terms of partnership between the County government 
and the University of Sudan . Honourable  Speaker , this is so because many people want to apply 
for this scholarship ; they are interested a nd as an Assembly we do  not have  any idea of the 
arrangement s in terms of who is sponsoring the scholarship , who is chipping in this scholarship , 
how is the arrangement and you  are aware that these are foreign cou ntries which as an A ssembly 
we have a du ty to know the arrangement. Thank you, Mr.  Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Vice  Chair if you have 
any response,  you can respond now.  
Hon. Omondi : Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker . On behalf of my able Chairman, this is a 
Hous e of rules ; indeed,  I have heard the question but we expect that the Hon ourable  Member 
will be able to get the response in the next sitting . Mr. Speaker , maybe you could give us that 
particular time so that  we compare a very comprehensive response for him. Thank you.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdilkadir ): Thank you . I think that is fair 
enough in the next sitting, thank you. Yes Clerk.  
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         29 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version o f this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH ASSEMBLY CALENDAR  
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri, Leader of Majority party please move the Motion?  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika kwa mujibu wa kanuni za kudumu sehemu ya 25 katika seh emu ndogo yake ya tatu, 
Bunge hili la Mombasa kulingana na ratiba yake ya shughuli za Bunge iliyopitishwa tarehe moja 
mwezi wa tatu mwaka elfu mbili ishirini na tatu ninaomba Bunge hili liweze ku ahirisha vikao 
vyake siku hii ya leo na kuregelea vikao vyake  vya kawaida tarehe mbili siku ya Jumanne  mwezi 
wa tano siku tatu kabla ya siku yangu ya mazazi mwaka elfu mbili ishi rini na tatu . Nimuom be 
Kiranja  wa Wengi Bungeni  kuunga mkono hoja hii.  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Mumba ): Nina second . 
The T emporary Sp eaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Pardon?  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Mumba ): Naunga mkono.  
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay, Hon ourable  Members I 
now propose the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri on adjournment of 
the County Assembl y in accordance with Assembly calendar be consider ed by this Hon ourable  
House in the same term s as moved . 
[Question  proposed and agreed to ] 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri the Leader of Majority party, please make your 
contribution?  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika nishukuru kwa fursa hii na niwapongeze Waheshimiwa kwa kipindi ambacho tumekuwa 
katika shughuli zetu za Bunge kuwatumiki a wananchi walio  tupatia mamlaka.  Mheshimiw a 
Spika , biashara nyingi tumeweza kuzifi kisha katika Jumba hili , kuna mengi tumeweza kufanya 
na vile vile kwa mujibu wa shughuli zetu mojawapo ni  uwakilishi na katika uwakilishi ni 
kupeleka ujumbe na vile vile kuregesha jibu lililopata la ujumbe uliopewa . Kwa muda a mbao 
tumekuwa Mheshimiwa Spika ni mu afaka kwetu sisi kuweza kurudi nyanjan i kuregesha yale 
tuliyoweza kufikisha na kusukuma kwa niaba yao lakini pia kuweza kushirikiana nao ikiwa 
ratiba za  utengenezaji wa bajeti ya 2022/2023 umeanza rasmi kuweza kuwa nao karibu kupata 
maoni yao na kupata vile wamependekeza ili tutakaporudi katika shughuli hizi tuweze kusukuma 
ajenda ya wa nanchi wetu kama ilivyo  kusudiwa . 
Vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika siku ya Ijumaa siku kuu za Pasaka zinaanza kwa ndugu zetu 
Wakristo ; tunawatakia heri ya siku hizi na baada ya hapo itakuweko ni masiku kumi matakatifu 
ya mwezi mtukufu wa Ramadhani  ambapo baadhi ya Waheshimiwa vile vile watakuwa katika 
safari ya kwenda umrah na kurudi kusherehekea Iddi na wananchi wao. Mheshimiwa Sp ika hii 
pia ni fursa kwa ndugu zangu Waislamu  tuweze kukithirisha ibada ; tuweze kujituma zaidi 
tumuelekee Mwenyezi Mungu . Tuna mengi am bayo tumepitia ; baadhi ya watu husema kwamba 
wanasiasa hudanganya wana nchi, si kweli lakini pia ni wakati wa kuomba toba.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika na vile vile kujumuika na wananchi katika siku kuu za Iddi zitakazo kuwa baada ya juma 
linalo fuata na tukirudi hapa, turudi tukiwa tuko na nguvu mpya . Chambilecho aliyekuwa Raisi 
wa awamu ya nne ya Tanzania, Mheshimiwa Jakaya Mrisho  Kikwete  ya kwamba nguvu mpya, 
ari mpya na kasi mpya katika kuitumikia Gatuzi  letu la Mombasa.  
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         29 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version o f this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na nitakie heri ya likizo kwa Waheshimiwa wote na vile vile 
watakao jivinjari kwa siku kuu hizi  tuombe amani na usalama Mungu awalinde warudi salama na 
kwa ndugu zetu, ndugu zangu Waislamu  wenzangu InshaAllah  Mwenyezi Mungu atakabali 
ibada zetu InshaAllah  na tutakapo rudi hapa, turudi tukiwa na mioyo mikunjufu, m yeupe na 
mapenzi zaidi kutumikia wananchi wetu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you Majority Leader. 
Yes, Minority Leader please make your contribution to this Motion.  
The Leader of Minority (Hon. Matsaki ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi pia naunga 
mkono kwa  ajili ni kweli huu ni mwezi mtukufu wa Ramadhani  na pia Wakristo tuko na  hii 
Pasaka  inayokuja. Ni vyema pia Bunge hili Waheshimiwa wenza waweze kupumzika ; japo kuwa 
tunaenda nyumbani bila lolote lakini Mwenyezi Mungu atatuwezesha na tutakuwa na heri lakini 
usumbufu uko mwingi sana pale mashinani . Kama vile Kiongozi wa We ngi alivyosema ni kweli 
lakini tufanyeje sasa, zaidi ya hapo wacha tu Mwenyezi Mungu atuwezeshe tunaporudi tena hapa  
tutamshukuru  Mwenyezi  Mungu. Ahsante Bwana Spika . 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Patrick 
Mbel le? 
Hon. Mbe lle: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kunipa nafasi hii ; ingawaje umenipata 
kizungu wanasema off guard  lakini pia vile vile ni kushukuru Waheshimiwa wenza kwa muda 
huu ambao tumekuwa pamoja wakati huu wa hatamu hii ya kalenda inasema the phase we have  
just passed  na hii ambayo tunaingia, hii daraja  ambayo kidogo ni ya kwenda kupumzika ni 
vyema  twende tukampumzike . Kwa sababu mambo ni mengi  alivyosema mwenzangu ni kwamba 
tunaenda nyumba ni tukiwa vile tulivyo ; na tunashukuru Mwenyezi Mungu kwa sababu tunaenda 
tukiwa na uhai. Zaidi ya yote kama tunavyojua mvua inakuja na ile ishatupata  kutakuwa na 
maafa. Hatujui kutakuaje , lakini tunaomba Mungu ya kwamba kwa wakati huo tuende na turudi 
salama salmin. Kwa wale ambao wanaenda katika sherehe za Pasaka vile vile naw atakia kila la 
heri na Pasaka njema, kwa wenzangu Waislamu  katika mfungo wa Ramadhan munapofunga 
muzidi kutuombea sote kama Mombasa ili jimbo letu lizidi kustawi na kunawiri. A hsante 
Mheshimiwa Sp ika. 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you for your 
contribution. Yes , Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri please reply.  
[Silence ] 
[Interruption]  
 
Honourable  Ibrahim , are you on a point of order?  
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker , I thought Members were contributing on a Motion. I think w e 
have only had two Members who have contributed. I really want to contribute on this Motion if 
you will give me the permission before the Majority Leader.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Ibrahim , I 
decli ne to give you the opportunity l et the Leader of  Majority reply to this Motion , my apologies.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Natumai ya 
kwamba Mheshimiwa Ibrahim kusudio lake ni kuunga mkono likizo hii kwa hivyo kwa niaba 
yake tunaungama naye kuwa tunaenda likizo kwa nia sa fi. 
April 5 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                         29 
DISCLAIMER : The elect ronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certifie d version o f this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 Vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika niambie ndugu zangu ambao watasherehekea Pasaka ; najua 
hawana nia ya kutualika kwa sabab u wanajua tunafunga lakini hata sisi hatutawaalika ! 
Mheshimiwa Spika , nishukuru Waheshimiwa kwa hali hii vile vile niombe Waheshimiwa ya  
kwamba kwa siku hizi ambazo tutakuwa likizo  tumekuwa ndugu tusichoke kujuliana hali , 
kusalimiana kwa sababu tumekuwa familia ambapo kukiwa na dharura ya kusaidiana tuweze 
kusaidiana. Kwa hayo mengi a hsanteni sana na Mwenyezi Mungu atubariki. A hsante 
Mhesh imiwa Spika.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Members , may the peace and blessings  of the Lord be with you. This H ouse 
stands adjourned until Tuesday 2nd May, 2023 at 10 :00a.m. Thank you.  
The H ouse rose at 2:59p.m. 
 
 
 
 