December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursda y, 7th December, 2017  
The House met at 2: 50p.m. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : May you have your se ats. Yes, Clerk?  
MESSAGE  
 Hon.  Members  we have received a letter from His Excellency the Governor on 
nomination of Chief Officers. The letter goes out . 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) read out the Message)  
 According to the powers  conferred to me by the County Government Act , 2012 Sec.  
45, I hereby forward the names of the nominated Chief Officers for vetting and approval 
before appointment to the position of Chief Officers as follows: - 
1. Department of Finance & Economic Planninng , Ms. Asha Abdi, and I delegate it to 
the Committee on Financ e. 
2. Department of Education Ms. Tuni Mwakulumbi  and I delegate it to the Committee 
on Education . 
3. Department of Youth & Gender Mr. AbdiRahim Farah, I delegate it to the Committee 
on Youth & Gender.    
4. Department of Trade & Investment s Mr. AbdulWahab Mbarak, this is delegated to the 
Committee on Trade & Investments.  
5. The Department of Energy, Environment & Solid Waste Management , Dr. Jeophita 
June Mwajuma, I delegate it to the Committee on Environment.  
6. The Department of Water, Sanitation and Natural Resouces Mr . Francis Katana 
Kombe, and I delegate it to the Committee on Water.  
7. The Department of Transport Eng. Albert T. Keno, I delegate it to the Committee on 
Transport.  
8. The Department of Infrastructure Mr. Thomas Chula Moyo, I also delegate it to the 
Committee o n Transport.  
9. The Department of Fisheries Mr. Uzel Mzera, I delegate it to the Committee on 
Fisheries.  
10. The Department of Devolution & Public Service Administration  Ms. Justina Mwikya, 
I delegate it to the Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs.  
11. Governor’s O ffice Ms. Juliana Cherera , I delegate it to the Committee on Labour .  
 And Hon.  Members  as you have seen from the National Government they have 
extended their calender to give them time to vet the EALA Nominees, am sure we will also 
extend our calender to make sure that the Committees have time to vet the said Chief Officers 
and i would  like all the Committees that we have delegated the Chief Officers to work upon 
and make it as quick as possible because things are not running, the Departments are not 
runni ng well so it is upon  you to vet and bring back the R eports to this Hon.  House. Thank 
you. Yes, Clerk?  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
 Yes Hon. Mwidani , Majority Leader ? 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika ningependa 
kuwasilisha Procedural Moti on kufanya  alteration ya calenda r. Bwana Spika ka ma 
unavyojua kwamba kuna kalenda  ambayo tuliipitisha kwamba leo ilikuwa tukishamaliza 
tunafunga Bunge mpaka mwezi wa Februari , 2018.  Bwana Spika ningependa ku move  hii 
Hoja  kwa sababu, nafikiri kwa  ujumbe wako imeonye sha wazi…  
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 (Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Well Hon. Khamis Musa move the 
Motion first.  
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante Bwana Spika , ningependa kusoma 
hii Hoja chini ya Kanuni za Bunge nambari 25 (4), tuweze kuendeleza hil i Bunge mpaka 
tarehe 21, alahamisi  Disemba, 2017 ... 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the Motion . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now do  propose a question that the 
House debate the Motion as moved.  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
 …Yes Clerk, Hon.  Members  it is upon you to debate the said Motion. Yes, Hon. 
Mwidani . 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante Bwana Spika, ning ependa Bunge 
hili tukubaliane kwamba tunaendelea mpaka tarehe 21 kwa sababu ujumbe ulioletwa na  
Mheshimiwa Gavana ni ujumbe muhimu kwa sababu mpaka saa hii hizo vitengo  zinashindwa 
kutekeleza kazi yake kwa sababu tayari tushaweka Mawaziri lakini bila Chief Officers  
Mawazi ri ha wawezi kufa nya kazi . Ni kweli najua Waheshimiwa  walikuwa wanajisikia 
kwenda mapema kidogo kwa likizo lakini pia tukumbuke kwamba k una umuhimu wa Jumba 
hili kama W ajumbe kwamba bila sisi hakuna kitu kina chofanyika. K wa hio ninge waomba 
Wajumbe tukubali tuombe huu muda kwa sababu ya kutengeza K aunti yetu hata tukienda 
kwa mapumziko  tunajua sasa kazi haita kwama kwa sababu Chief Officer  asipokuweko , 
Waziri unajua hawezi kufanya kazi yake.  
 Kwa hio Bwana Spika ningeomba Waheshimiwa wa nielewe n i kwamba najua 
tumefanya kazi nyingi sana kwa huu muda ambapo ilikuwa inafaa tuende mapumziko, lakini 
kwa dharura hii ni muhimu sana , hivyo basi  ningewaomba Waheshimiwa tuongeze huu muda  
wa wiki mbili na zile Kamati a mbazo ziko husika kwa haya mambo iwezek ane zifanyike kwa 
haraka kwa sababu ni muhimu na lazima tutekeleze wajibu wetu kama tulivyochaguliwa na 
kwamba vile tumepewa fursa ya kwamba haku na linaloweza kufanyika bila kupita kwa hili 
Bunge . Kwa hio Bwana Spika ningewaomba Waheshimiwa wanikubalie  ni kwamba 
tuongezwe huu muda kwa sababu ya hili zoezi tu, otherwise  tungekuwa tumesimama pale 
pale kwenye kalenda yetu , hivyo basi  ningewaomba Waheshimiwa tuweze kuchukua huu 
muda kumaliza hii kazi, tuweze kupeleka mapendekezo y etu kwa Executive  ndio kazi iwe ze 
kuendelea. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwam wiri. 
 Hon. Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa , nimesima ma kutofautiana na Kiongozi wa 
Walio Wengi katika Bunge hili kuhusu M swada huu wa kuongeza idadi ya siku za 
Wahesh imiwa kuwa hapa . Inataka ibainike ya kwamba sisi ni Waheshimiwa tuko na 
majukumu si hapa tu Bungeni bali pia mashinani na kalenda yetu ilipotengenezwa ina muda 
sasa hivi na ilijulikana kila mahali kwamba tarehe fulani Waheshimiwa wanaenda 
mapumz iko kutekel eza majukumu mengine.  
 Kwa hio  kwa mujibu wa ba rua ili okuja leo na kuambiwa ni dharura inaonyesha 
kwamba  tulisahauliwa  sisi kama Waheshimiwa , tulipaswa tupate taarifa mapema, 
tuzipangilie ratiba hizo mapema si siku ambayo tuko na mafikira y a kwenda kwenye  
mapumziko  tunalazimishiwa vikao k ujadili suala kama hili, na pia bado sheria inaruhusu ya 
kwamba sisi kama Waheshimiwa kuitiwa vikao maalum kuja kujadili suala lolote la 
kidharura na tuko tayari kwa hilo lakini kukatiziwa katikati ya kwamba leo wengine tu mekata 
nauli za kwenda, Mheshimiwa Spika naona, wengine tushakata nauli na sijui ni na ni 
ataregesha nauli zetu zile za kwamba tubakie ili tuendelee na vikao tushajipanga.  
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Kwa hio kwa mtazamo wangu sawa sawa tunatambua hili lakini tungepewa nafasi 
japo ni  wiki moja halafu mutuwekee vikao maalum turudi kujadili barua na mapendekezo ya 
hawa walioteuliwa. Shukran Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Maimuna .  
Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi kwanza 
ninashukuru Mwenyezi Mungu halafu pia ninamshukuru Gavana kwa kuweza kuhakikisha 
kwamba ameweza kutuletea Chief Officers  katika Nyumba hii na sisi kuweza kuwapitisha na 
tuweze kukaa katika Kamati zetu tuweze kuwakagua.  Mimi naunga mkono kutoenda 
mapumzikoni  na sababu ya kuunga mkono kutenda mapumzikoni  kwa hizi wiki mbili sisi 
tunajua tumeletwa hapa na watu tukawatumikie , tayari kulikuwa kuna masuala mengi 
ambayo hayawezi kujibika kwa sababu hakuna Chief O fficer  yeyote ambaye anaweza kujibu 
masuala hayo. Kwa hio mimi nimesema naunga mkono kwa sababu sisi ni watumishi wa 
watu, tukifika kule mashinani unaulizwa barabara, unaulizwa mambo  ya masoko, unaulizwa 
maswali me ngi, unaulizwa mambo na bajeti na nini? Na kulikuwa jambo lolote haliwezi 
kwenda is ipokuwa mpaka hawa ma  Chief O fficers  tuwakague na tuwapitishe na tuwaweke 
katika viti ili sisi tukienda mapumzikoni  tayari tunawaacha wao wakifanya kazi, tukitoka 
mapumzikoni  tunaingia nao mashinani tunaanza kuc hambua kazi huko mashinani.  
Kwa hio mimi ninaun ga mkono kwa sababu ninajua ya kwamba sisi tuko hapa kwa 
ajili ya wananchi wale wametuchagua na hata saa hizi tukaenda mapumzikoni  hakuna kitu 
ambacho utamzungumzia mwananchi kwa sababu hakuna kazi yeyote ambayo tunaweza 
kuifanya bila ma  Chief O fficer . Kwa  hio mimi naunga mkono hizi wiki mbili ambazo 
zimewekwa za kuweza kuwakagua na kuhakikisha ya kuwa tumewaacha wakifanya kazi 
tukienda mapumzikoni  tunajua tushakaa na Chief Officer  wa mabarabara ametuambia katika 
bajeti ataweka pesa ngapi? Na kuna bajeti am bao wao pia wakae na waipange . Kwa hio mimi 
sina haraka ya kwenda isipokuwa haraka yangu ni kuja katika Bunge hili na kuhakikisha kile 
ambacho kinastahili kukifanya wananchi wetu wapate huduma bora, mimi nitaweza 
kukifanya kwa hiyo mimi naunga mkono watu k wenda mapumzikoni . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chief Whip . 
Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kusema kweli 
Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kuweka hili wazi ; kama  Kiranja wa Bunge  katika Bunge hili , 
hakuna mtu anapinga kuwa chunguza  hawa ma  Chief O fficers ... 
(Applause)  
Lakini wengi wanapinga muda ambao umeweza kuwekwa wa kwenda likizo 
Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
(Applause)  
Mheshimiwa Spika twafahamu kabambe kwamba hawa ndio wanaofanya kazi kuu 
katika Serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa , tuko tayari kama W abunge wa Kaunti hii kuweza 
kuwa chunguza  lakini muda huu kusema kweli wote ni muhimu Chief O fficers  na vile vile 
wananchi pia wanatuhitaji kuweza kupata majibu yao kule mashinani kwamba hawa Chief 
Officers  tumewapitisha tuweze kuwapatia  muda unaofaa kuweza kuwaelezea majukumu yao 
Mheshimiwa Spika , lakini muda mrefu wa kukaa katika Bunge hili ni muda mrefu 
tungependa kupendekeza a ngalau wiki moja tuweze kuleta R ipoti katika Bunge hili. Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwali mu): Yes Hon. Fahad . 
Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika tuliposema la hatukuwa 
tunamaanisha hatuko tayari kufanya kazi , ningependa kuomba ya kwamba kama alivyosema 
Kiongozi Mama Maimuna tuko hapa kuhudumia wananchi kwa hiyo sisi kama viongozi  
kama tuko hapa kufanya kazi basi hii kazi inafaa ifanywe na masaa 72 ambayo tukianza 
uchunguzi  Jumatatu watu kumi pekee yake ifikiapo Jumatano inafaa iwe imemalizwa . 
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika nakuomba utoe mwelekeo wewe kama Spika ya kuwa 
ifikiapo Alhamisi  kila mmoja awasilishe R ipoti, mimi kama Mwenyeki ti wa Uchukuzi na 
kuhakikishia R ipoti yangu itakuwa tayari ifikiapo Jumanne.  Hivyo basi  kitu tunaomba 
Mheshimiwa Spika huu muda wa siku 14 n i mwingi sana na sisi tunataka tukahudumie hawa 
wananchi waliotutum a kwa hiyo naomba muda uongeze wa wiki moja i li Alhamisi tuweze 
kuwasilisha R ipoti na watu waweze kwenda mashinani kufanya kazi. Ni hayo tu ahsante 
sana.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Samba . 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir , when we say nay it didn't mean necessarily  
that we are opposing the vetting of the Chief Officers , we need your attention please ... 
(Applause)  
...am addressing him . 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Continue . 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr . Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir even the National Assembly 
extended their sittings with only one week and so many people here had prepared mentally , 
psychologica lly prepared that we were going for recess today ; actually this has just caught us 
unaware s so I wou ld request through your Chair that we extend this in case we need to extend 
we adjust it with only one week.  Mr. Speaker Sir I was requesting if we can extend this with 
only one week that is seven days and we will  vet the nominees and relevant C ommittees c an 
work over the day and night provide d that we be within the limited time. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur . 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir let me put it the 
way it is sup posed to be ; for these  Chief O fficers to be vetted first the requirement is a must 
there be an advert for seven days before the vetting takes place , so that one week would have 
elapsed by seeing that advertisement in the paper and then after the advertisem ent of  seven 
days it is when now the C ommittees are  mandated to sit and vet these Chief O fficers .  
Mr. Speaker let us b e very careful with the law , we are the lawmakers here and we 
must be very careful, we can be taken to court if we go out of the law becau se the law 
requires seven days for them to be published , if there's any issue then it be raised and then 
after seven days the vetting should start . Mr. Speaker so I would wish my collegeaus to be 
very careful  with th e law because the law says the C hief Off icers are supposed to be 
advertised positions and then be vetted and then Report be tabled in this same House for 
adoption , that is what I want to put to my colle agues. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. N yiro. 
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker if I may begin from where Hon. Amur has 
stopped you are old and wise and whatever you are telling us it is true then what will (??) us 
be doing here the following week because we can't come here and just wait for the seven days 
to elapse then we begin the other week for vetting ! So if whatever Hon. Amur is telling us is 
true then we should go home then we will be called for a special sitting ... 
(Applause)  
Then we would be able to come and sit . 
(Applause)  
And do the vetting after the lapse of the seven days , so we are going home today for 
seven days then we will come here for one week vet them , and then go back home. Thank 
you. 
(Applause)  
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ali . 
Hon. Ali Shariff:  Ahsante B wana Spika.  Bwana Spika sisi tunafanya makosa 
makubwa sana , hapa tumesahau kuwa jana tulipitisha Mswada wa Bunge la W ananchi , kwa 
hio sisi tuwape wananchi nafasi waje wapitishe M swada kama huu...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. A li you are out of order . 
Hon. Ali Shariff:  Bwana Spika ...  
(Laughter and Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Ali you are misleading the House . 
Hon. Ali Shariff:  Kwa nini Bwana Spika? Bwana Spika nataka kumwambia Mzee 
wangu Mheshimiwa Hamisi Musa Mwidani kwa kutuletea hoja hii hata wale wananchi pia 
tunaweza tuka chagua Kiongozi wa walio W engi miongoni mwao atuletee hoja kutoka kwao 
na pasipo na budi hawa Chief O fficers  tukawakague  Kwale au Kilifi Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Ahsante sana.  
(Applaus e) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Fatuma . 
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa 
fursa hii . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama kidete kuunga mkono hoja ilioletwa na 
Kiongozi wa Walio  Wengi. Mh eshimiwa Spika  nataka kuelezea W aheshimiwa wenzangu 
kwanza waweze kufahamu ukichaguliwa kuwa kiongozi ujue kwanza ni kama ambaye 
umeingia katika kambi ya jeshi , ukiwa katika kambi ya jeshi ukiambiwa leo watakikana 
uende Mogadishu huwezi kusema kwamba mimi nilikata tiket i ya ndege nafaa kusafiri kesho 
kwa sababu naelekea kwenda kwenye likizo ya krismasi Mheshimiwa Sp ika. 
(Laughter)  
…Na Mheshimiwa Spika sisi ni viongozi na tuko hapa kufanya kazi hatukuchaguliwa 
bure bure , mimi kama Kushe sikuchaguliwa bure bure kuja hapa i kifika Disemba siku ya 
mapumziko  au siku yeyote tukiambiwa tunaenda mapumziko  hoja ikija ndani ya Bunge 
niseme ni haki yangu kwenda kupumzika ; mimi nilichaguliwa, mimi ni mfanyi  kazi, ni 
mtumishi wa umma Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
(Applause)  
Kwa hio mimi Mheshimi wa Spika niko hapa k uweza kufanya kazi na nawaomba 
Wabunge wenzangu tuweze kushirikiana tuweze kupitisha hii hoja kwa sababu kuna mambo 
mengi ambayo hayawezi kuendelea mpaka hawa ma  Chief O fficers tuweze kuwapitisha. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applaus e) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Aran . 
Hon. Oindo : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama 
kuunga mkono hoja ilioletwa ... 
(Applause)  
...na Kiongozi wa W alio Wengi. Mheshimiw a Spika nakumbuka mpenzi wetu, 
Gavana wetu Hassan Ali Joho alikuja hapa ndani akasoma hotuba yake tukaanza kuichangia 
na tukasema tutai unga mkono , tutasimama nayo. Mheshimiwa Spika twajua bila ma  Chief 
Officers  hakuna kazi zafanyika na twajua Mawaziri wamechaguliwa na wameingia ndani ya 
maofisi lak ini hakun a jambo lolote wanaweza kufanya.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi n i 
Mwakilishi  wa Vijana saa hii ni likizo ya Disemba tunafaa tuwe na tournaments  lakini 
ukienda kw a maofisi waambiwa kwamba bado Chief O fficers  hawajaingia kwa maofisi kwa 
hivyo hakuna kitu ch asonga , haja gani niende nikae mtaani lakini vijana ninao  wawakilisha  
hakuna kazi watakuwa wanafanya?  Kwa hio mimi naomba Mheshimiwa Spika twajua ni wiki 
mbili iliotolewa na Bunge hili tunajua sisi tunalipeleka kikatiba na twakupenda sana 
Mheshimiwa Kiongo zi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  imesemekana ni wiki mbili na lazima 
tufuate sheria . 
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Kwa hio sisi hii wiki Bunge liangaliwe nini litafanya ndio W aheshimiwa hawa 
wasione watakuwa wako idle wakingoja wiki ile nyengine lakini naomba Mheshimiwa Spika 
tukae tupitishe Chief Officers  tukirudi Januari ni kazi , ni kazi ianze n a tuanze kutimiza ile 
ndoto ya G avana 001. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Leader of Majority wait for your time 
when you will be responding , I will give you time unl ess you are up on a point of 
information . 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ndio maana nimesimama,  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nina taarifa ambayo ni vizuri nikielezea Bunge wakiw a wanachangia waelewe.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika leo ni tarehe 7 ni Alhamisi , kuanzia wiki ijayo  ndio itakuwa kunafany wa hizo vetting  
na wiki ifuatayo ndio wiki tutaka yoenda mapumziko. N ataka kuwaambia Waheshimiwa si 
Chief O fficer  mmoja ama wawili wangelikuwa mmoja au wawili ningekubali yale wanasema 
lakini Chief Officer  kumi na moja hao wanatakikana  wawe vetted  na K amati tofauti kisha 
Ripoti ziandikwe kwa kila Kamati alafu ndio ziletwe B unge tupitishe . Wanachama  si kwa 
sababu nyie wenyewe mwajua mi mi mwenyewe mgonjwa hata n ilikua nimefurahi leo 
namaliza niende pengine naweza ku lazwa hospitali , lakini  nimesema kwa vile ninavyojua the 
nature  ya hii kazi nimekubali hata mimi nivumilie wiki mbili  alafu niangalie matibabu . Kwa 
hio fikiria leo ni Alhamisi , kesho Ijumaa sidhani kama mtu kwa K amati atafanya lazima 
tuanze Jumatatu, wale wale Makarani  ndio wale  mtakuwa nao, wale wale Makarani  
wanatakiwa wapate  muda wa  kuandika hiyo R ipoti kisha  iletwe hapa . Kwa hio  ukiangalia 
kusema ukweli Wanachama hata haitoshi lakini najua tuta jikakamua  hata ha o Makarani , kwa 
sababu Chief O fficers  kumi na moja  sio idadi ndogo .  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Leader of M ajority for 
the information, yes Hon . Raphael Bwire . 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. S peaker, we are all supporting Majority Leader's M otion 
today and that we are willing to vet the people pr esented to us by the office of G overnor, the 
only way we are not getting each other is the timeline, and let me also remind the Hon 
Members  contributing that no one is against t his list, we all supported the G overnor ’s speech 
and that's why we are saying we w ill vet the officer s brought by the office of the Governor 
that 1, 2 , Mr. S peaker this is a House of procedure not a military barracks where we get 
orders ... 
(Applause ) 
…W e debate issues and agree and make resolutions as a Hon . House, therefore I 
quoted wh at Hon . my senior Amur said that there is a gaz zettement that s hould be done in 
seven days so I  just want to remind Hon . Majority L eader that we may not start vetting these 
officers from Monday as you had said because there is a gazzet tement that should ta ke seven 
days, so our worry is M r. Speaker we were to wind up the business of this Hon . House today , 
now com ing the whole of next week Mr. S peaker ...  
(Interruption ) 
Iam on flo or protect me ... 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Are you up on a point of  order?  
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I  agree with what my colleague 
has mentioned , i want to correct ; infact Hon . Amur was right there  is no any advertisement so 
far, the advertisement has already been done they have already applied they a re just 
waiting....  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Leader of M ajority you are misleading the 
House, yes Hon . Raphael continue ... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. S peaker ... 
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur, Hon . Bwire is still on the 
floor. 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you for your protection  Mr. Speaker you see it seems no one 
among the seniors have a clear picture of what should be done, and that is why we are saying 
we are ready for a Special S itting any time we will be cal led back to pass the list and we are 
just afraid that some of us had already lined up a series of activities because we knew we 
were to ad journ today for the long recess. I  therefore say am  in support of those majority 
Hon. Members  who are in support of ha ving the recess fro m today then coming back for a 
Special S itting to debate this list, but being here for the next two weeks unle ss you do 
something, thank you M r. Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hati my: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , nia  ya Wanachama wa 
Nyumba hii  hawana  nia mbaya na hapa ni watu kukubaliana, ni kweli watu wameenda mbio 
wamechoka wanataka kupumzika ... 
(Applause ) 
Lakini M heshimiwa Spika kam a Mheshimiwa alietoka kuzungu mza sasa hivi hapa 
amesema hii N yumba ni ya sheria tuangalie Kanuni za Bunge nambari  42 yasema nini na 
nataka nauliza Karani wa Bunge atusomee ili nisije nikaambiwa mimi nime weka maneno 
yangu ; wakati unapo committ to C ommittees  sheria yasema nini ndipo hapo mupate hizi siku 
zilizowekwa kwenye hii Hoja  kusema kuwa ni wiki mbili, twa weza kukubaliana 
Mheshimiwa S pika sijui kwa ruk hsa yako wa weza kumwambia Karani wa Bunge  atusomee 
Kanuni ya Bunge nambari  42 yasema nini kwa committal to C ommittees  kabla sijaendelea 
kumaliza.  
Deputy S peaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy  it is un procedural to tell the 
Clerk to read , you are supposed to read the Standing O rders . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nafikiri  waweza muomba Karani wa Bunge  asome kwa 
sababu Mheshim iwa Spika sitaki niambiwe nime weka m aneno yangu ndani ya haya maneno 
kwa sababu naona mjadala umekuwa mzito , kwa hio  nafikiri Karani wa Bunge  anaweza 
kusoma mtu aki muomba  ama ukitaka nisome mimi nitasema.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes proceed Hon . Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Approval of public appointments, committal to 
Committees ; 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read)  
42(1) Upon  receipt of a notification of nomination for appointment to an office as is 
under the Constitution or under legislation required to be approved by the County Assembly, 
the nomination shall s tand committed to the relevant sec toral Committees of the C ounty 
Assembly for consideration,  
2. Despite paragraph (1 ), appointments under Article 179(2)(b) of the Constitutio n 
shall stand committed to the Committee on A ppointments ,  
3. Before holding an ap proval hearing, the Committee  to which proposed 
appointments have been referred shall notify the candidate and the public of the time and 
place for the holding of the approval hearing , atleast seven days prior to the hearing , 
4. The Committee shall conduct  a hearing on the proposed appointment and shall, 
unless otherwise provided in law, table its Report in the County A ssembly within 14 days of 
the date on which the notification was received under paragraph (1) .  
Nafikiri Mhe shimiwa sote twafahamu haya tuli yosoma lakini kuna njia ambayo hata 
mimi nakubaliana na Waheshimiwa twa weza ku sema kama wiki ijayo tupatiane K amati 
muda  wa Bwana Katibu  kuchapisha  na ku weka kwa gazeti , twaweza kukubal iana kuwa hii 
wiki twa weza kuahirisha  maanake tukienda mapumziko  ni mane no mengine tofauti ya watu 
kwenda mapumzikoni  na ku ahirisha vikao  ni mambo mengine . 
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 Kwa hi o sisi twa weza sema wiki ijayo  twaweza kuwa  huru...  
(Applause ) 
Kusema kuwa tutakuja hapa wiki inayof uata ambayo lazima tutatoa siku saba kwa 
sababu kuna watu kwenye h awa waliotajwa pengine wana madhambi yao , watu wana mambo 
yao wanataka kuja kuzungumza mtu am efanya makosa kwa hio ni lazima raia wapewe nafasi 
ya kuleta yale malalamiko yao alafu tuangalie tutafanya nini . Kwa hio hizi  Kamati kumi  
baada ya wiki hii turegee  sasa tuanze kazi ...  
(Applause ) 
Siku tukimaliza tuki zileta Bunge hizo R ipoti tukipitisha ama tusipitishe siku hiyo 
mapumziko  ndio yataanza ndio tutaweka maana hivi sasa hii haijakuwa gazetted  na 
mapumziko  lazima iwe gazetted , kwa hi o twa weza kuchukua wiki  moja mapumziko kiasi  
twangoja hii mambo mengi ne yanafuatiliwa M heshimiwa, ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika . 
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Ibrahim Omondi . 
Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr . Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity to ai r out 
my views, first of all the Motion that is just ahead of us is a very import ant and significant 
Motion to this House and even to the whole Mombasa County and even to the people that we 
represent. We need to giv e it whatever it deserves so  that we may be able to serve our people 
properly and i have listened to the Members  contr ibuting towards this M otion carefully, and 
first and for emost i actually want to remind the people concerned that it ’s always very 
important to whip the Members  before some of the se Motions are brought. We have the Chief 
Whip in the House and to me I felt that it could be better if the Chief W hip could have 
received this information early enough and maybe he would have whipped us before we came 
in this House.  
The reason why am sayi ng that Mr. S peaker sir is that most of the Members  when you 
look at the mood of the Members  we were psychologically prepared that we are going for our 
long recess today , but this one has come and it's a matter of surprise to the Members , and  
that's why yo u see most of the Members  are on opposing side and i though t maybe if the 
Whip could have whipped us some three , four hours before maybe we would have done our 
discussion s outside and would come here and we just know what to do. M aybe som e of these 
procedu res that our C hairman is suggesting would have maybe  been  discussed them outside 
the House before we came in so that we just come and know what we are supposed to do. 
Okay I am go ing to say that as far as this M otion is concern ed Mr. S peaker sir, as the pa per 
work is being done , communications being done i think we need to rest and once the paper 
work has been done wel l as my able C hairman has said we should be back again to finish our 
part, communication through G azzet tements and other parts as they are be ing done i think we 
can have a rest because of the psychological attachment which is actually on the Members , 
that’s what i could request, thank you Mr. S peaker sir . 
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Thoya Renson . 
Hon. Thoya: Thank  you Mr . Speaker  am rising here to appreciate and congratulate 
the Hon.  Members  that for the first time we are rea lising our independence that a M otion can 
be brought here and we be able to discuss it at length … 
(Applause ) 
…I thought we are getting out of the crammed word ayes, we are very happy that we 
will exercise this independence , am happy that your solomonic directive will help this House, 
we appreciate the message that has been brought from the Office of the Governor but I think 
we’ve got books of la w as our senior C hairman has a lead  and it is what we were e nquiring 
because some of us are new in this maybe we will debate out of the procedures and books of 
law but as it is very clear ly indicated by the Chairman we need seven days .  
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 The great question  is, the whole of next week shall we be in charge of all the gazetting  
of these names o r maybe a given officer of the C lerk will be gazetting ? So if the role is given 
to a certain office , one office then we can just decide to go and then we come back afte r one 
week because nobody can explain the job that we are about to do next week because it will be 
the time that the gazettement will be done . So we support the agenda from the G overnor’s 
office but it is very healthy for us to discuss at length  because th is House  is independent , 
again I appreciate Hon. Bwire  this is not a military camp it’s a Hon. H ouse… 
(Applause ) 
…That you need to give us time to deliberate on the matter and going forward  (??) 
will not come here but a M otion will come here because you kn ow as a word come s here as 
(??) (??)  we will deliberate many things at length so that we give you something of substance , 
thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith . 
Hon. (Ms.) Boniface : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa tia nafasi kuchangia hii 
mada ya leo na kwa (??) mli osema sioni haja ya sisi kuja hapa wiki ijayo ilhali kuna mambo 
ambayo yanafaa kutekelezwa , tumekaa hapa tumekuwa nadra kule mashinani na tunahitajika 
kule kwa hio ningeomba wiki ijayo tukae kule mashinan i kwetu na tunaomba tuitwe kikao 
maalum  tuje t upitishe hizi  teuzi za Chief O fficers . Hatuendi mbali na hotuba ya Gavana na 
tunamuunga mkono na hizi kazi zitaenda kwa Kamati husika  kwa hi o tukishamaliza n aomba 
muitishe kikao maalum  ndio tuweze kujadili hili . Kwa hi o naunga mkono kulingana na sauti 
ya wengi kuwa na mapumziko , ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Nzai.  
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii na mimi kuweza 
kuongea mawili ma tatu, order Honorable Members ! Tafadhali Mheshimiwa Spika mwanzo 
nataka kutoa pole yangu maana jana mchana n ilikuwa pale Mombasa Hospital nikitibiwa 
mpaka nikatoka leo lakini sa a hii najis ikia buheri wa afya . Nafikiri Mhe shimiwa Spika 
tumesema hili ni J umba la sheria na nimetazama na Wa heshimiwa wenzangu kuhusiana na 
wiki hizi ambazo ziko machoni kwetu lakini kwa sababu Jumba hili lina Kamati ya U tenda 
kazi wa ha pa ikiwa mimi mmoja wao katika Jumba la biashara nitamshauri M wenyekiti 
wangu ili aweze kuwapang ia kazi hata kama ni  mafunzo  ya wiki moja waende Kilifi ili 
wasijione wanaboeka kisha wakirudi hapa Mheshimiwa Spika waweze kupitisha 
mapendekezo ya Gavana wetu . 
Kwa hi o hilo ningependa niwaambie  wasiwe na wasi wasi maana sisi ni  wamoja na 
hawataboeka tuko  pamoja na ma  Chief Officer  ni wetu kwa ajili ya kazi zetu mashinani , kwa 
hio ikiwa ni mambo ya Jumba la sheria M wenyekiti wetu atayapangilia na kila Mheshimiwa 
atapata jawabu ikiwa ni Mheshimiwa Hatimy t uko naye ametoa mwelekeo mzuri kwa hi o hio 
wiki moja  isiwe jambo kubwa  mtapangiwa kwa sawa sawa. A hsanteni.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Mheshimiwa Naliaka.  
Hon. (Ms.) Wafula : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii kuweza 
pia kuongezea sauti yangu kwa mjadala wa leo , mimi k ibinafsi ninge penda kuomba hili 
Jumba ya kwamba tuweze kuelewana na vile Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  amesema 
tuongeze hizo wiki mbili manake kuna mas uala mengi hata mimi wiki iliopita  nimeleta 
taarifa  ya kuongezeka kwa taka lakini hata sikupata suluhu ya kuridhisha kwa sababu wale 
wahusi ka wa ile K amati ya kuangalia masuala ya waste management  hawajielewi kwa vile 
hawajapata mafundisho ya kutosha kulingana na kutatua swala hilo . Kwa hio ningependa … 
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Shebe  Salim : A point of information  Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshim iwa Spika 
ningependa kujulisha B unge hili … 
(Interruption)  
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Under which point of order Hon. Shebe.  
Hon. Shebe  Salim : A point of information Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok then proceed.  
Hon. Shebe  Salim : Mr. Speaker I would like to inform this Hon . House that it’s very 
disheartening  and kind of hard to hear a Hon. Member standing in front of other Hon. 
Members  claiming that the Chairman or rather the Committee of Environment i s not carry ing 
its mandate or rather it’s not finding itse lf on the right way Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker it’s 
very unfortunate because we have made some effort , we have done as the Chair of the 
Environment and my C omm ittee we have summoned the CEO Chief O fficer of Environment 
we have raise d issues , even the Members  themselves know that we have taken great stride s 
and steps  to make sure this issue of garbage menace of Mombasa County is well taken care 
of. Mr. Speaker  kindly ask the  Hon. Member to withdraw that statement  and apologize …   
(Applause ) 
…Because Mr. Speaker sir lend me your ears ; I beg , I would like  the Hon. Member to 
apologize to this Hon.  House and specifically to the Chair of Environment and its M ember s 
because if it’s matters concerning the statement I hav e read the statement here in the  House 
and steps are being taken even as we speak  the CEO or C hief of enviro nment is at Kibarani … 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you.  
Hon. Shebe  Salim : In fact we have already organize d a field t our between myself and 
the executive with Hon . Feddis here to go to Jomvu and Mwakirunge Mr. Speaker , thank 
you. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank Hon. Sh ebe you have well 
informed the H ouse, yes Hon. Naliaka continue.  
Hon. (Ms.) Wafula : Mheshim iwa kabla sijasema lolote hapo ningependa 
kukushukuru maana wanasema wacha kunyeshe ndio utajua ni wapi kunavuja , nisingelisema 
hivyo haungejieleza kwa ufasaha , kwa hio nakushuru umeweza kutueleza pale umeweza kwa 
hivyo nime  withdraw . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok thank you , proceed. The M ember has 
withdrawn her statement.  
(Laughter and Applause ) 
Hon. (Ms.) Wafula : Hata hivyo Bwana Spika bado kuna shida hata kama tunajitetea 
kwa leo kwa kuwa tumejaribu kufanya mawili , matatu lakini bado tuko mb ali na kazi kwa hio 
vile Mheshimiwa Kombe amejaribu kusema kuhusu mambo na  mafunzo  mimi ningeongezea 
mkono wangu pale angalau tukapate kwa hili juma moja amba lo itakuwa tumekaa bure 
tukaweze kujifun za zaidi kulingana na mambo na K amati zetu , ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika . 
(Laughter and Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Milka Moraa.  
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this ch ance to also 
contribute to the Motion that was brought by the M ajority  Leader,  am here in support of the 
Motion that we should not adjourn till 21st…  
(Applause ) 
We do have a lot of pending issues … 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Fa had, please give me time ! Mr. Speaker protect me from Members  who are 
almost mauling me ; we have a lot of pending issues if I can supp ort what Hon. Naliaka has 
just put across but there are statement s that came here and we’ve not had answers yet and we 
should be dedicated Hon Members . When we come up with statement s like we have already 
book ed tickets to go upcountry that should not be b rought to this Hon . House they can … 
(Interruption ) 
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Why are you up Hon . Bomoa? Which 
point of order?  
(Loud consultation ) 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker sir I stand on a point of information , if you may allow 
me. 
Deputy Speak er (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok continue.  
Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir . Mr.  Speaker I have listened , I was here 
since we started our Motion from the start  and I have not heard any M ember from any corner 
uttering  or saying tha t they are requesting for this M otion to be adjourned for us to go for a 
recess so that people to go upcountry or people who have booked to go upcountry . I wonder 
where the Hon . Member has got this information on that I just want … 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwa limu) : Ok thank you Hon. Bomoa.  
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you Hon. Bomoa I think my ears are not letting me down I 
have  heard  two Members  saying they have already booked to travel upcountry yes … 
(Applause ) 
Now I … 
(Loud consultations ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fa dhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur , consult in a low tone please.  
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker for protecting me ; from the informa tion 
we have from the M ajority and also from Hon. Amur we need enough time for the se 
nominees , the nature of work that is pe nding to be carried out should not be done in a hurr ied 
manner and this coming week most Hon . Members  are saying we shall remain id le, I think 
we have a lot of work to come and do here for example yesterday we were in a meeting 
‘kamkunji ’ and we realize d that there are some meeting s we do which collide and therefore 
that is why we never get paid . We could come here next week and look at those documents 
and do s ome C ommittee meeting s to improve on our miserable pay slips that will also be for 
our welfare … 
(Interruption ) 
Now Mr. Speaker … 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  let Hon . Milka to 
continue.  
(Loud consultations ) 
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Do you have something to say, talk through the Speaker . Thank 
you Mr. Speaker … 
(Laughter ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Continue . 
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : I strongly think that we should not adjourn ; we come here until 
21st so that we carry out all the pending issues and go home after having accomplished what 
we are supposed to accomplish as Hon . Members . Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Shebe . 
Hon. Shebe Salim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kunipatia fursa hii manake 
nimesimama nikangoja milele kidogo nife bila kelele. Nashukuru Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
tukisema tu naendelea hivi tutafika mpaka jioni kwa hio ni bora tukubaliane kupigwe kura 
hapa ambao wanapendekeza twende wiki moja halafu turudi ni sawa kabisa , ama wale ambao 
wanapendekeza tuendelee sawa tutaendelea . Mheshimiwa Spika sasa mimi napendekeza ili 
kukusai dia na sisi wenyewe pia tujisaidie hebu twendeni kwa debe tukubaliane tusipoteze 
muda ... 
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy and the Leader of 
Majority will respond . 
December 7, 2017          MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Sp eaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : On an information ... 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Under Standing Order 28 (2)...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Standing Order 28 (2) . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes proceed . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker under Standing Order 
28 I seek leave of this Hon. House that this County Assembly do now adjourn until Tuesday . 
Mr. Speaker I want to request Hon. Bwire to second this Motion. Thank you.  
(Laughter)  
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker allow me to consult my Chairman , kindly please.  
(Consultations)  
Thank you Mr. Speaker I was consulting which Tuesday , I am in support that we 
adjourn and to come back the other Tuesday and not next week.  
(Applause)  
(Silence)  
Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : The Mover of the Motion may respond, 
the Mover of the Motion on amendment .  
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker may I take this opportunity first of 
all to thank all the Members ; you know am the Leader of Majorit y and always you go with 
the majority so ... 
(Applause)  
…So let us amend our Motion that the House to be adjourned p ursuant to Standing 
Order Number 28 (1) and resume on Tuesday 19th December, 2017 at 2: 30p.m. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker Sir.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Sp eaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  I now stand to put a 
question that the House to be adjourned until Tuesday 19th December, 2017 at 2:30p.m. 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Applause)  
Hon. Members  by the adjournment the Committees a re still in place you are allowed 
to have your Committee meetings.  
(Applause)  
Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
The House sta nds adjourned until Tuesday 19th December , 2017 at 2 :30p.m.  
The House rose at 3:58p.m  