March 29, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
Tuesday , 29th March, 2022.  
The House met at 11:10a.m. 
 
[The  Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPER  
COUNTY GOVERNMENT BU DGET IM PLEMENTATION REVIEW REPORT  
 
Yes Honourable  Leader of Majority?  
The Leader of  Majority Leader  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  Mr. Speaker 
may I take this opportunity  to  lay Paper , County g overnment Budget Implementation Review 
Report.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
[Paper l aid] 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
STATUS OF BOATS DONA TED BY JOMVU BEACH M ANAGEMENT UNIT  
 
Yes, Honourable  Francis Kombe Nzai? Yes,  Honourable  Mwaka Zahoro?  
 
Hon.  Mwaka Zahoro : Thank you Mr.  Speaker. I  am standing here on beh alf of the 
Committee because my Chair is not there and I am a Member o f the said Committee . Mr. 
Speaker  I hope each Member  has a response to the Statement so I would like to read just in 
case one does not have one like my colleague  here is saying he  does not have one so pay 
attention.  Mr. Speaker this is the response  to Statement on Status of Boats Donated to Jomvu 
Beach Managem ent Unit  by Honourable  Francis Kombe Nzai (Chairperson,  Committee on 
Agriculture,  Livestock,  Fisheries & Co -operatives).  Mr. Speaker Sir , this is a response to 
Statement requested by Honourable  Athuman Shebe Mukono , MCA Jomvu Kuu W ard during 
18th Sitting on Tuesday 8th March, 2022. The Honourable  Member wanted the fo llowing 
matters to be addressed; One, Mr. Speake r is the Chairperson aware that the two boats and 
other e quipment donated by the County g overnment of Mombasa to the Jomvu Beach 
Management U nit (BMU ) has been privately hired to operators in Kilifi County without the 
prior approval or resolution by member s of the BMU and t he knowledge of the Member of 
the County Assembly. Two, how much has the boat earn ed prior to being hired out and how 
much was the hiring fee?  
March 29, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Lastly Mr. Speaker,  what measures will the County g overnment take to remed y the 
situation and ensure Members of the Jomvu BMU retrieve back their asset and benefit from 
it. Mr. Speaker Sir, due to low capacity and skills of off -shore fishing the department found 
that the BMU agreed to seek external investors so as to hire the boats and gain higher 
earnings compared to using them for their fishing. Mr. Speaker Sir , the BMU found some 
investors from Kilifi County who made negotiations on hiring of  the boats for fishing 
purposes . They had an agreement and were to sign an MOU so as to seal their term s of use 
and of payments and this will have  to be submitted to the County F isheries office for their 
consent and recommendation before proceeding to sign the agreement. Mr. Speaker Sir , the 
Department through ASDSP project conducted group dynamic training in the County BMU 
with the aim revamping the BMUs and to ensure there is sound leadership so as to advance 
fisheries issues in the groups and especially management structure.  Thank you Mr. Sp eaker 
Sir and this is from the C ommittee of Agriculture , Livestock, Fisheries and C ooperative. 
Ahsante . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Honourable  Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have an is sue with the response from the 
Committee; one Honourable  Speaker , the S tatement was directed  to the depart ment and we 
therefore expected  the response to come from the D epartment signed by the Authority from 
the department,  two we all know that the boats and all t his kind of material that were bought 
by the County g overnment of Mombasa were to benefit the peop le of Mombasa and they 
were not there to be hired by other Counties for them to generate income, they were to help 
the peo ple of Mombasa. It is therefore  up to the g overnment to train our fishermen, to gi ve 
them skills on how to use these  equipment not to find out that our people do not have the 
skills so that they can hire this equipment  to other C ounties t o benefit other people who are 
not Mombasa people or resident s of Mombasa.  I therefore found this response not suitable 
and I would like under your  directives Honourable  Speaker to ask this departme nt to have a 
sit down with the C ommittee plus the M ember who raised these concerns, thus cannot be a 
Statement the Honourable M ember representing Jomvu Kuu W ard who is not here is out on 
official duty and canno t take this response to his people, this is a response worth to be taken 
to his people  who elected him. Thank you Honourable  Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Honourable  Bwire . Yes 
Honourable  Mwaka Zahoro?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Zahoro : Mr. Speaker I would really like to inform Hon ourable Bwire 
that this Statement is coming from the D epartment and here you can go through it and so that 
you get satisfied but this letter comes from the D epartment , here it is I have a copy here … 
 
[Gestur ed towards Hon ourable Bwire]  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Address the C hair. 
 
Hon. Mwaka Zahoro : What I was reading is coming from the D epartment Mr. 
Speaker,  and it  is even more elaborated on the status of the BMU boats and it is even signe d 
here and this is a copy of the document . So this sh ows that it is coming from the Department 
so whatever that the C ommittee did here was summarized in this letter to read  here in the 
House.  
March 29, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : So Honourable  Bwir e what is your 
main concern?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Honourable  Speaker I am  very clear in my mind she is seated  next to me 
the response she was reading is this one and it i s the same response that every M ember has, 
the other document she is showing me or she is sho wing you Members do es not have it we 
only have one document that is signed by the Chairperson. H ow I wish these other responses 
were photocopied and sup plied to each and every M ember ?! I am reacting from the one that I 
have as a Member Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Honourable  Mwaka have your seat, 
Yes Hon ourable  Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I am wondering if it is a deficiency in English 
or what because  the Member who is representing the C hair A griculture is saying that they 
want to sign a Memorandum of U nderstanding, to my un derstanding I think signing of 
Memorandum of U nderstanding comes first before any  other issue takes its effect s o we want 
clarity in this thing  and the fact that the lett er has come f rom the D epartment does not mean 
that we are now satisfied by it. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Honourable  Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker, being a Member of the same 
Committee, I do s uppor t my co Member who represented the C hair, on the response because 
the respon se it was an obligation of the C hair to respond t o this House so it is upon the 
Committee to write to the D epartment , Department writes to the Committee then the 
Committee does its  submission to this House . That is why any response i s supposed to be 
signed by the C hair and that  is the response Honourable  Zahoro was reading in this House.  
The other one was just a write up to the Committee  and not to whoever is requesting to know 
if the Department wrote to us or what; s econdly  the Department or the County government 
issued these  boats to the BMU’s to benefit the BMU’s on its operations. Mr. Speaker , the 
regulations and usage of the same was  totally subjected to the BMU s o the BMU have their 
Constitution and guidelines on how to use the boats and if they saw suit able to hire them, and 
they agree with whoever they enter into agreement with to us it is an issue because they are 
not supposed to, we are not collecting anything from the BMU’s  they are not supposed to 
report to us every day but to give us monthly reports on the use and other operations on 
fisheries and other sea uses . So the BMU ’s have the autonomy to operate as per there 
regist ration and the ir Constitution s o we cannot put a l ot of emphasis or regulate everything 
they do on a daily basis Mr. Speaker because they are registered organizations fully mandated 
to operate and as a government our concern is just to oversee and support where need be. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon ourable  Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone.  
March 29, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker some of us  do not have the copies the Honourable  
Member is refer ring to because you have heard Honourable  Bwire claiming the one 
Honourable Zahoro  has read is not what Members should have. So what exactly should we 
have?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ok. Honourable  Samba we will make 
arrangements for yo u to get the copies…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 Hon. Samba:  So if I do not have the copy here, what am I going to do with that copy 
at home? If I cannot get it here Mr. Speaker ... 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Honourable  Samba the copies were 
issued since Thursday and I am assuring you that we will make arrangements for you to get 
other c opies for your perusal. Yes Honourable  Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Honourable  Speaker , we are the people representatives and we cannot 
just assume everything is right when w e are seeing everythin g is wrong. Honourable  Speaker 
even if you look at the response, the alleged response it tells a lot that they are yet to enter 
into an agreement just like it  has been said by my fellow Honourable  Ogutu. As we speak the 
statement itse lf Hon ourable Speaker  says that the equipments as we speak are in Kilifi 
County o perating in K ilifi County. The response says that  they are yet to enter into an 
agree ment, it seems and it means Honourable  Speaker our equipments are being used without 
prope r arrangements. Now leave alone people l acking  space, the equipments are in Kilifi 
County, they were taken there by the BMU or the Authority, there is no any agreement, is 
then they are yet to enter into an agreement between the BMU or the Mombasa County a nd 
Kilifi County.  Honourable  Speaker, if our equipments get lost in Kilifi Count y we will have 
no one to ask  because  there is no agreement, there is no MOU and as we speak the equipment 
of Jomvu Kuu Ward BMU is being used to be Kilifi. So I just appeal tha t this House acts in 
good favour and in good faith of the people we represent, to ask the Department  to bring back 
those equipments; let them use  the proper channel if they cannot train our people to have 
skills on how to use these equipments, then what is  the essence of using our public money to 
buy these equipments?  We thought that these equipments were bought to help our people, to 
train our people and in fact our people were to train before the equipments were bought. Now 
they bought the equipment, they  realise our people do not have skills and  they are ta king o ur 
equipments to other Counties  which also gets money and they are also in a position to buy 
these equipments for our fishermen.  Honourable  Speaker , it is very sad that we are discussin g 
this and it is very sad and I said earlier, this  is not the response that a Honourable  Member 
representing Jomvu Kuu can take back to his people. T hank you Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Honourable  Bwire . Yes 
Honourable  Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba: Yes Mr. Speaker I got a copy and I agree with Honourable Bwire  
because as we speak the boats are in Kilifi County and that was n ot the intention of the 
County g overnment that we deliver the boats and then they go to benefit the people of Kilifi.  
Mr. Speaker , another point t hat also brings worries is that  the BMU s were to sign a 
memorandum, but I think the memorandum should be signed  first before any agreement or 
before any action has been taken.  
March 29, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 So in this case we find that the boats are already in Kilifi and we cannot even get the 
financial status and we can not even get the records of the financial implications ; how the 
transactions have happened since the boats were given out or delivered to the said persons.  So 
Mr. Speaker I see in the absence of the Hon ourable  Member who requested for this 
statement, I think it will be unfair if this House would come to an agreement that this is the 
best response to the Honourable  Member. I thin k they can still have more time  because we 
are here to repr esent our people and we are here because th at is the sole responsibility or  the 
main reason as to why we are here.  So Mr. Speak er I think I would request the D epartment, 
the Committee of Agriculture, to just take their ample  time to go and get a clear and 
convincing and a very articulated response . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Honourable  Samba . Yes, 
Honourable  Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker we shall report 
back after confir ming if indeed the MOU was signed or  not because it has been reported that 
the guidelines of the  BMU were to enter into an agreement through sending of a  
Memorandum of U nderstanding. So as it is it  is true  we are not clear if it was signed or not, 
we shall  confirm and report back to this House . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Honourable  Mwam wiri 
for representing your C ommittee and your Chairman. So we as the Assembly we will give 
you four weeks or as soon as the first thing after coming back after recess, that will be  our 
first business in this Honourable  House and also am requesting the C ommittee to make a site 
visit to Jomvu and come back with a very comprehensive R eport . Thank you , yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , there being no other business, the House stands adjourned until 
30th March in the afternoon . Thank you.  
 
The House rose at  11:31a.m . 
 
 
 
 