April 9 , 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 9th April, 2019  
The House met at 2:39p.m.  
   
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats.  Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE T O STATEMENT BY CHAIR PERSON COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT , WASTE MANAGEMENT 
AND ENERGY HON . ATHMAN SHEBE ON CLOGG ED DRAINAGE IN AIRPO RT WARD  
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Environment , Waste Management and Energy, Hon. 
Athman  Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Thank yo u Hon. Speaker in regards  to the S tatement requested by 
Hon. Ibrahim Bomoa. Mr. Speaker Sir I just received…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Athmani Shebe we do  not have Ibrahim 
Bomoa!  
 
 Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Sorry! Sorry Hon. Speake r! Hon. Ibrahim Omondi , yes thank you. 
Yes H on. Speaker in response to the S tatement requested by Hon. Ibrahim I just have a report 
and I would wish Hon. Ibrahim Omondi was here so that he can he ar from the h orse’s mouth.  In 
response to H is Excellency  the Governor 's directive on 1st April , 2019, the Department embarked 
on a five day countywide exercise of clearing garbage out of drains in certain hotspots prone to 
flooding and identified by the Sub County Administration.  
 The reports of the five day activit y have since been shared with the Department of 
Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works together with the Department of Environment, Solid 
Waste Management and E nergy which is mandated with the function of unclogging drains and 
can respond candidly over  the matter of clogged drainage in Airport Ward.   

April 9 , 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Hon. Speaker as far as am concern ed the work has been done , the removal of the garbage 
is just the work  in progress in regards to the D epartment of  Transport and I nfrastructure to 
unclog th ese sewer s. Than k you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Athuman Shebe.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Yes Hon. Thoya I can see the seat is hot, what is it?  
  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . We appreciate the good work that has been going 
on kule mashinani  but w e want again to request that the five days or the days that were planned 
to do this kind of job are so few , we would request if at all you can consider adding more days 
because there  is a lot of garbage in the open sewer s whatsoeve r so we are calling up fo r the 
Chairman to request the D epartment that the days be increased because still the work needs more 
days to be done. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ath man Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Shebe Athman:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . My fellow C hair I als o want to thank 
him because he is appreciating that something is being done on the ground and in regards to the 
magnitude of the job we have alrea dy discussed with the relevant D epartment so that they can 
try,  rather increase in terms of the days because there is a problem or rather there i s a challenge 
in terms of the human resource which is supposed to do the work so we have already agree d and 
they are working on that modality Hon. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to appreciate the C hairman on 
Environment, Waste M anagement but it  is clear that there  is more to be do ne in this area so we 
urge the C hairman to push the D epartment to pull up their socks. Thank you very much.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Faith?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Thank you very much Mr. Chair for giving me this chance . It is just to 
emphasize for the D epartment to add more days to unclog the remaining drainage syste m 
because the rain season is very near. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Athuman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Shebe Ath man:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . Once again the relevant D epartment is 
working around the clock to make sure before the rain started beating us Hon. Speaker I think 
this sometime round is the only time that Mombasa County will be well prepared , thanks t o the 
well preparedness of the D epartment and also the ov ersight role played by the two D epartments ; 
especially Department of Environment and Solid Waste Management and also T ransport so work 
is on progress. Thank you.     
April 9 , 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Thoya, what is it?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Yes, I want to seek a Statement. I understand that am a Member of W ater 
but I should be allowed to ask this, there is acute shortage of water in Mikindani and Jomvu, I 
think my fellow Member of County Assembly Jomvu did appreciate, but as much as he 
appreciated I should say it was a public relation s exercise  because it only happened a single day 
and then we  have gone back to the situation of water shortage in Mikindani and Jomvu at large, 
what is going to be done to address this because actually wananchi need a lot of answers than the 
question are existing at th e moment.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Thoya.  I understand the issue 
was supposed to be replied by the Leader of M ajority and I think the House Business Committee 
has allotted time of when they are going to respond on issue of shorta ge of water in Mombasa 
West.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . We appreciate and it has been that way but the 
issue of water cannot be postponed;  we are saying as much as you are doing all this, what kind of 
mitigation strategies are you putting in pla ce? My people are suffering Mr. Speaker and as much 
as we are to get response from the Leader of M ajority, I think we are in week two or three now 
still waiting for that an swer! O kay even if we are going to add a month but we want to see some 
water trucks helping those people, mitigation factors strategies, what are you going to d o? So 
that will be waiting the Leader of M ajority at his best time because am thinking we are waiting 
him at his best time while our people are suffering, wha t are you going to do right now?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Chair  Hon. Renson Thoya. A s 
the issue is wi th the office of the Leader of M ajority, Hon. Members will let the Hon. Leader of 
Majority to respond to this Hon ourable House or any Member from the Committee on W ater 
latest by Thursday afternoon. Yes Hon. Athmani?  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  I think Hon. Member or rather the 
Committee of W ater has to take real  charge because in terms of the responsibility which was 
directed of c ourse  by you Hon. Sp eaker to the Leader of Majority  I want to appreciate the fact 
that the Hon. Leader of Majority  has played his role and Jomvu S ub County water was beginning  
to come in Jomvu.  
 In fact it was supposed after Jomvu Kuu Ward to go to Mikindani W ard but unfo rtunately 
due to the follow up I think it is more a matter of Committee now to follow up because as far as 
am concerned Jomvu Kuu W ard now are really enjoying themselves because there is plenty of 
water there but it was supposed to reciprocate to my fellow Hon . Member  who is my neighbour , 
at least from Jomvu to come to Mikindani Ward  and then it comes to Changamwe.  
 So it is a matter of the Commi ttee of W ater to really take charge Hon. Speaker but to the 
Majority Leader I think according to my opinion he has already played his role. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
April 9 , 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Mr. Speaker indeed I remember I was the Chair when I directed the Hon. Majorit y 
Leader to take ov er from the C ommittee since there was no M ember of  the said C ommittee and 
the issue was of emergency and indeed I directed Hon. Hamisi who is the Majority Leader to do 
a follow up and on the same note  I also directed the Committee to take charge as a C ommi ttee on  
Water and last week the Member from Jomvu confirmed that the Majority Leader made some 
efforts and indeed he received some tanks of fresh water and I thi nk it was now the turn for the 
Committee to take charge . 
 This is  because what the Majority Leader did was jus t coming in since there was no 
Member of the said C ommittee ; I now urge this House Mr. Speaker to make this C ommittee on 
Water be responsible for what it should be doing . I think they have overslept , they are always 
absent when ever we need a nswers from this C ommittee, they have also promised to bring 
answers last week, this week still we have not seen anything coming out in terms of their 
responsibility, so I urge this Comm ittee to wake up and serve the C onstituency of this County. 
Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Bwire. Yes Hon. Renson?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika pale ilipofika hatungoji tena kama labda sitaingilia 
uamuzi wako lakini kama unaweza kuamrisha Kamati hii iweze kufika kule mashinani ijue kile 
kiwango kwa sababu tunaweza nun g'unika lakini hawajui kile kiwango pale imefikia, imefika 
mahali ambapo wananchi wameamua waweze kuunda water forum , watu waje waambiwe ni nini 
inaendelea.  
 Kwa hivyo ikiwa itawezekana  Kamati uitume kule Mikindani  iweze kujionea ile shida 
iko pale ili wakija tuwe katika barabara moja, sitakuwa ninazungumza hapa watu wakaona ni 
ufahari wa kujipiga kifua  kwa watu wa Mikindani lakini kila mtu  tusome katika same 
wavelength  kama itawezekana  waambie  hii K amati Kesho asu buhi ipitie Mikindani ndio waje 
wakupe ripoti tatizo ni nini? Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. S o Hon . Member I had  already 
directed that the Committee on W ater to take charge on this issue and report back to t his House 
by Thursday afternoon so the C ommittee will also if they wish make a site visit to Mombasa 
West area, Mikindani to be precise and bring back a report to this Hon ourable  House. Yes Clerk? 
What is it Hon. Athman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Ath mani Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker for ju st noting me standing. I am 
standing just to request for a S tatement related to the matters of l ands Hon. Speaker under 
Standing Order 41(2) (c).   
 This problem it has been a thorn in the flesh in Jomvu Kuu and as we speak Hon. 
Speaker it happened just the  other day it was on Sat urday I had a meeting with the c ommunity in 
relations to land grabbing. I brought this issue to the Assembly ; I think this is the third time now 
but unfortunately I do not know what is happening? The relevant Committee has not yet t aken up 
this matter seriously and we are talking about public l and being grabbed by a selfish individual . 
 Through your indulgence I kindly request you to take this matter seriously because it 
seems the relevant Committee  do not know what is happening, t hey are just being there but it 
has never been acted upon there is an issue of grabbing, school land being grabbed, public land 
being grabbed , so Hon. Speaker please help me out here. Thank you.  
April 9 , 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           29 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Shebe. The Hon. Members 
from the Lands Committee this will be our final reminder for the Committee to take note on what 
has been raised by the Hon . Member from Jomvu Kuu Ward , work or go on a site visit to that 
area, talk to the residents of that area and bring back a report to this Honourable House. Yes 
Hon. Bwire?  
STATUS OF BURSARY  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I would like to know from the 
Committee on Education how fa r they have gone as far as the bursary is concerned b ecause the 
process was ongoing ; we intervened and they were some directives that were given out by the 
Deputy Govern or who also doubles up as the C EC Member on Education. So far Mr. Speaker we 
have not received any communication and yet our offices was to be involved direc tly to the 
whole process of bursary.  
 So I would wish to know from the Committee on Education and Mombasa Vision  2035 
how far they have gone? Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Raphael Bwire . So the Chair 
to respond on tha t issue by tomorrow afternoon, tomorrow afternoon the Chair Education 
Committee to respond  on the issue of the status of bursary. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members there being no other business the House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow 10th April , 2019 at 9 :00a.m. 
The House rose at 3 :00p.m. 
 
   
 
  
 