September 26, 2017               MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A ce rtified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 OFFICIAL OPENING OF SECOND ASSEMBLY  
 
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 26th September, 2017  
The House met at 2:58p.m. 
 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  entered the Chamber in a procession 
accompanied by  His Excellency T he Governor Hon.  Hassan Ali Joho and  three Table Clerks)  
 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) in the Chair)  
 PRAYERS  
  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Members you may be seated. Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) on his feet)  
His Excellency, The  Governor Hon.  Hassan Ali Joho,  His Excellency, T he Deputy 
Governor  Hon.  Dr. William Kingi Kazungu,  The Senator  Hon.  Mohamed Faki,  Hon.  
Members of Parliament , Members of the County Assembly.  I take this opportunity to 
welcome you all to the official openin g of the Second Assembly. As we are all aware, the 
first sitting was held on 6th September , 2017 at 9: 00a.m after His Excellency T he Governor 
convened the first sitting of this Assembly and published the sitting in the Kenya Gazette . 
Your Excellency, I and  on behalf of the County Assembly, c ongratulate you on your re -
election as the Governor of Mombasa County for a second term. .. 
(Applause)  
Your re -election is a confirmation that residents of Mombasa have faith in your 
leadership and it is an acknowledgemen t that you were able to ensure that Mombasa becomes 
a better place.  I wish to congratulate Hon.  Dr. William Kingi for being elected as the Deputy 
Governor. .. 
(Applause)  
I further congratulate our Senator  Hon.  Mohamed Faki and our County Women 
representativ e Hon.  Asha Hussein  for making it to the Senate and National Assembly 
respectively.  
(Applause ) 
May you always champion and protect the interest s of Mombasa at the n ational level.  
Congratulations to all Members of Parliament and the M embers of the County A ssembly for 
making it to the National Assembly and County Assembly respectively. .. 
(Applause ) 
Your Excellency, Standing Order No. 17 provides that the Governor shall address the 
opening of each new elected County Assembly. Today is therefore your day to ad dress the 
Second Assembly for the purpose of setting  the agenda that your administration has for the 
County for next five years.  We, as an Assembly commit in supporting your agenda. We shall 
pass the necessary legislation to enable your administration impl ement the plans that you 
have for our great County.  Your Excellency, i n observing good governance we as a County 
Assembly will provide oversight to the executive. We will ensure that there is accountability 
in the exercise of power and use of resources on the part of those charged with the 
responsibility of service delivery.  We however affirm that in exercising oversight, we shall 
observe mutual respect and separation of powers between the two arms of Government.  
September 26, 2017               MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A ce rtified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 Your Excellency, w e recognize that we are on e government and as much as we are 
two separate arms, with different functions, our common goal is to ensure that the residents 
of Mombasa access services from the County Government as required by the constitution.  
The Assembly therefore commits to workin g in harmony with the executive for greater good 
of Mombasa.  My hope is that at the end of the five years period the lives of Mombasa 
residents will be better than it is today. We are committed to ensuring that positive change is 
realized.  It is now  my duty and honour  to welcome you to address this Assembly. Karibu . 
(Applause ) 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair)  
(His Excellency The Governor Hon. Hassan Ali Joho in the Chair)  
(Applause)  
OFFICIAL ADDRESS  
His Excellency, The G overnor  Hon. Hassan Ali J oho: The County Assembly 
Speaker , Hon.  Members of the County Assembly , Hon.  Members of Parliament , 
distinguished guests . Once again, allow me to congratulate you Mr. Speaker  on your election 
to head this H ouse and also congratulate all the Hon.  Members of the County Assembly on 
their respective victories. Hongera Kwenu nyote ... 
(Applause ) 
It was a hectic battle for all of you during the campaigns and your resolve to win; I 
believe was driven by the urge to serve the great people of Mombasa County. Mr. Speak er of 
Mombasa County, the electorate  has given us the opportunity to keep lighting the way and 
lead them to prosperity. To achieve this we need to play our distinctive and interdependent 
roles. The dawn of devolution comes with very high expectat ions from the residents of our 
beloved County. Together as leaders of Mombasa we must do all that it takes to meet these 
expectations.  The role of the County Assembly in the devolved Governments is k ey in 
unlocking the unrivalled potential in our County. The County Assemblies are the watch dogs 
of the people. You are required by the Constitution to meet the following objectives of 
devolution.  
1. Promotion of democracy and accountable exercise of power  
2. Fostering of national unity by recognizing our diversity as a nation.  
3. Give powers of self-governance to the people and enhance their participation in 
decision making.  
As the Governor of Mombasa County I look forward to working with you in creating 
and making legislations that will be beneficial to the County.  
(Applause ) 
In fulfilling Article 185 of  our C onstitution you have a huge responsibility in ensuring 
that we deliver the promise of d evolution. To this end we shall be presenting to this H ouse 
various Bills that are set to concretize the Mombasa Vision 2035, as you be aw are this is a 
common vision crafted rigorously through people participation and in summary it is meant to 
achieve ten important transformative programmes.  Programme number 1:  
1. Addressing youth employment and e mpowerment through skills training, engaging the  
youth in employment through innovative design of our public works programmes, 
support for youth cooperative, talent support programs and addressing threats posed by 
drugs by enhancing rehabilitation programs, community outreaches and surveillance.  
2. We aim to maintain and develop  a sustainable environment by investing in an 
Integrated Solid Waste Management Plan at Kibarani. We will provide incentives to 
the youth to engage them in garbage disposal and waste management practices.  
We will work with communiti es to improve public health and environmental 
management.  
September 26, 2017               MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A ce rtified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 3. We will continue to invest in the i mprovement of s ecurity in the County through 
support to community policing, revamping of the Social Services Department in order 
to identify, counsel and support y outh at risk of social vices. Together with partners, 
we will implement the Action Plan for Countering Violent Extremism. These 
initiatives will help build up a more secure environment in which to conduct business.  
4. In the water & s anitation sector we endea vour to institutionalize rainwater harvesting 
to not only meet demand but also limit flooding. We will invest in water infrastructure 
in all settlements. We ai m at working with neighbouring C ounties to develop the bulk 
water infrastructure. We will look at  opportunities offered through adaption of 
desalination technologies , this is to utilise seawater into human consumption.  
We will build public toilets and baths in selected areas and invest in both drainage and 
sewerage systems  
5. Further to the gains alread y registered in the Health sector, we hope to strengthen 
primary healthcare by upgrading facilities and equipment in our institutions. At all 
times, our health facilities will have essential drugs and other medical supplies.  
We will also work with communi ties through outreach programs to minimise disease 
risk.  
We will roll out a health insurance program for the elderly and women in informal 
settlements.  
6. In the social sector, we also hope to revamp our investment in Quality Education by 
developing a Centre  of Excellence in every Sub County while continuing to support 
post-secondary bursary programmes.  
We will invest in Information Technology to support research and management 
services in the education sector.  
7. Business is the cornerstone of our city. A vibrant economy is in the heart of business. 
To spur business activities and investment in Mombasa, we will offer incentives for 
business through support for entrepreneurs, deregulation and targeted reduction of 
levies and taxes.  
We will modernise the Marikit i and Sega markets while working on a program of 
weekly markets for informal traders in the CBD.  
We will develop Business Informati on & Incubation centers in the Sub -Counties to 
support youth entrepreneurship. The Government procurement system will focus on 
local goods and products to boost local business.  
In collaboration with other stakeholders we will deepen our investment in fisheries; 
especially deep sea fishing. To increase the ease of doing bu siness in Mombasa we will 
have zero tolerance for c orrup tion among County Government workers.  
(Applause ) 
8. Reliable infrastructure is the backbone of any modern and vibrant city.  
We will work with the National Government, the private sector and other stakeholders 
to develop and implement the Transport & Mobility  Master Plan. We will construct 
new access roads in Likoni, Kisauni, Changamwe and Jomvu while maintaining estate 
roads in all areas. We will construct a multi - storey car park at Baluchi Street and a 
multi -storey terminus at Likoni Ferry Station.  
(Applaus e) 
9. We will maint ain and develop s ustainable tourism as we target new tourist sites such 
as Shelly Beach, Mtongwe, Tudor Creek and Mtwapa Creek plus the Miritini -
Mwakirunge Corridor. We will ensure 24 -hour surveillance and security in all tourist 
areas, enh ance cleanliness and revitalize cultural centres like the Swahili Cultural 
Centre.  
September 26, 2017               MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                   2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A ce rtified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 10. Our vision of a modern and prosperous Mombasa will not be achieved if we do not 
enhance Urban Planning, Housing Development and Lands Management.  
To this end we plan to upg rade seven informal settlements using low cost building 
materials and construction techniques. We will support development of housing for 
low and middle income earners, create a County Housing Development Fund and 
establish more commercial areas for retail  trade. We will also stop the proliferation of 
informal settlements and address historical land injustices.  
 
Mr. Speaker , The first County Assembly was tasked with the duty of laying the 
foundation for this devolved government. That done, we now have the r esponsibility ; 
to deepen and broaden the gains of devolution in our beloved County.  
Mr. Speaker , finally I would like to remind this Hon.  Assembly  that the laws you enact 
are considered part and parcel of the laws of Kenya in your jurisdiction.  
You are n ot subordinate legislators and therefore you must take your crucial role to 
ensure proper public participation.  
The County G overnment has a responsibility to respect and enforce national laws and 
equally the National Government has the duty  and responsibi lity to respect and enable the 
enforcement of County laws.  
Therefore incidences as have been witnessed in the recent past  where National 
Government Represent atives have disregarded County l aws and mandates is truly uncalled 
for. For this reason we want to make it clear that , that is against the Constitution. Article 
191(4) of our Constitution protects legislations passed by the Counties.  
To this end Mr. Speaker , I call upon this Hon.  House as well as the S enate to address this  
very dangerous  emerging trend . 
I thank you Mr. Speaker  
(Applause ) 
 (His Excellency The Governor Hon. Hassan Ali Joho exited the Chair)  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) in the Chair)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon M embers the House stands adjourned  until 
Wednesday  27th September,  2017 at 9: 00a.m.  
The House rose at 3: 14p.m. 
 
 
 
 