April 10, 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 10th April, 2019  
The House met at 9:30a.m.  
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  
 
(Consultation s) 
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Clerk what was the response  about?  
 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
 Yes the issue is about coming CASA  and Hon. Murfad is not around so will refer the 
matter ba ck to House B usiness . 
 
(Business differed)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY COMMITTEE ON HE ALTH SERVICES MEMBER , THE DEPUTY 
SPEAKER (HON. MWALIMU ) ON ESTABLISHMENT OF A METHADO NE CENTRE IN LIKONI SUB 
COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Any other Member from the  Committee? Y es Hon. Fadhili.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker on 
behalf of our Chair, he is not around today.  

April 10, 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Mr. Speaker th e issue was brought forward by H on. Mwaka Bakari Mwalundonda, 
she was requesting on the County to have a Methadone Centre in  Likoni S ub - County.  Mr. 
Speaker to our understanding there is a public participation that has been done around that 
area, and the Department of H ealth has i dentified almost three locations;  one in Port Reitz 
Ward and Likoni and Mwembe T ayari.  
 These are three poin ts that they want to start the Methadone C entre, and to what is 
within the Committee  the knowledge is that the Department is fast  tracking to see that by the  
next financial year this Centre will start working by hopefully the next early financial  year. 
The reason as to why the D epartment has identified the locations  is because the Chief Whip, 
there was a time the Chief Whip was complaining of peop le who were using drugs in his 
Ward, so the D epartment decide d to at least decongest Frère Town Methadone Centre and 
have the three other C entres .  So Mr. Speaker in the next three or four months the Centres  
will be ready and they will  be opened as soon as possible.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Fadhili. Yes Hon. Mwaka 
Bakari.  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana  Bwana Spika . Kwa kulingana na hii Taarifa  
waliongea  Kamati ya Afya Hon. Makarani, kwa kusema kweli hili jambo nimelileta mbele ya 
hii Nyumba kwa sababu L ikoni wanapata shi da, shida hii ni ya siku nyingi. M beleni 
walikuwa wakipata zile M edically Assisted Therapy Tablets pale Kliniki ya Shika Adabu na 
hiyo ilikuja ikafungwa  na vijana wanapata shida ambayo kwamba siku nyingi sana takriban 
mwaka mmoja sasa vijan a wa Likoni wanaenda Kaunti ya K wale kupata M ethadone kule na 
kama kwetu hapa Kaunti ya Mombasa ni mbali mpaka wavuke F eri waende  mpaka Frère 
Town na hiyo hawawezi ku pata tikiti ya kwenda Kwale ama k wenda  Frere Town . 
 Hilo nataka litiliwe mkazo kwa haraka  sana na Kamati ya  Afya kwa sababu vijan a 
wanaathirika, wanapata shida na isiwe  tu ni kusema tu  hapa four to three month s naiwe ni 
hadithi . Tafadhali naomba K amati ya Afya mtilie hili  jambo  mkazo kwa haraka sana ili 
vijana waweze kufaidika ama kupata matib abu kwa haraka. A hsante Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwaka. Y es Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY COMMITTEE ON HE ALTH SERVICES MEMBER , THE DEPUTY 
SPEAKER (HON. MWALIMU ) ON STORM WATER DRAIN AGE SYSTEM AT MAGONG O HEALTH 
DISPENSARY  
 
 Yes again Hon. Fadhili M akarani.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the 
Statement on storm water drainage system at Magongo Health dis pensary was brought to this 
Honourable  House by Hon. Benard Ogutu and what the Chairman communicated to me is 
that the Hon. Member has started painting the health facility and there is a team that  is going 
round the County in all the Wards . So Mr. Speaker they  have allocated a day that the 
Members or the team will visit the Health Centre  to look upon the drainage system around 
that health facili ty. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Fadhili . Yes Hon. Bernard 
Ogutu.  
 
April 10, 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spi ka. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi niliitisha Taarifa  
kuhusiana na kliniki ya M agongo mwezi mmoja na nusu uliopita  mpaka leo bado 
wanazunguka tu hakuna kitu cha maana wametuambia na mvua ndio hiyo inakuja. T unataka 
tupate jibu mw afaka, kutuambia ku wa wanaenda round  hilo sio jibu,  Mheshimiwa Fadhi li 
anajua hali ya hiyo sipitali;  kukinyesha leo kutafungwa kwa wiki mbili , watu watakuwa 
hawapati mat ibabu . Kwa hivyo leo mimi naomba  atupatie majibu, atuambie kesho ma  
Engineer  watakuwa  mashinani  wafanye ile kazi watu wetu wapate huduma . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Cha rles K itula.  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. N i desturi mbaya 
Waheshimiwa wan apoleta changamoto kutok a katika  maeneo yao Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  
lakini nimechu nguza sana katika Bunge letu la Mombasa kwamba wengi wanakuja n a majibu 
yakiwa katika karatasi;  wengi wanakuja na majibu ambayo hata pi a sasa hivi hayajatoka 
Wizara hu sika lakini la  kushangaza M heshimiwa anal eta pendekezo lake liweze  kutimizwa 
wakati pia kule  mashinani wanapof uatia majibu h ukaa kwa m da wa wiki moja yeye anarudi 
kule mashinani kusema kwamba ndani ya wiki moja nitakuja niwatekelezee jambo hili. 
 Lakini matumaini makubwa huwa yako kwetu katika Bu nge hili Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ; la kushangaza ni majibu yanayaotoka katika Idara husika, hivyo basi mimi 
ningependeke za na kupitia muongozo wako enda po kutaletwa  Taarifa  hizi ni bora zaidi yule 
mhusika aliyeleta  Taarifa  na yule mhusika ambaye anastahili kujibu Taarifa  ile aitwe aweze 
kuja hata kama ni katika  Chumba cha Mkutano  ili mtu aridhi ke na jibu lake. Lakini ikiwa leo 
hii Mheshimiwa atajibu na wakati kuwe Idara haina ufahamu wowote kama jibu lile limetok a 
katika id ara hiyo .  
 Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti k wa hivyo ningependekeza ku anzia leo Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ikiwa ni Taarifa  wacha yule mhusika aje ajibu katika chumba cha mikutano  
halafu baada ye Mheshimiwa ambaye aliuliza  Taarifa  ile aridhike na majibu yake ikiwa 
mumeon ana kwa ana na ikija Bungeni  tayari atakuwa asharidhika. Lakini ikifikia hali hii 
itakuwa ni mbaya na angalia sasa hivi Mheshimiwa wa Changamwe hana nia nzuri na majibu 
ambayo yametokea kwa Mwakilishi wa Kamati ya A fya.  
 Hivyo basi  hivyo pendekezo langu n i hilo na kutakapokuwa na ushirikiano tutatendea 
haki wananchi wetu wa Mombasa. Ahsante . 
   
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:   Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker some time we do  not give the 
priority w here priority needs to be given; some of the S tatements that we normally raise  here 
touch  on the lives  of citizens directly and you can read sometime when one give s a response 
and you clearly suggest or other s know that it is not a response from the Department but this 
is a response to cover up the Committee. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker, the issue of Health is not an issue that should take more than one or two 
weeks to be responded or acted upon. Hon. Ogutu has raised this issue severally and I think it 
was wise for a Department or rather the C ommittee to have a site visit to assess the situation 
of the said health facility.  
April 10, 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  So I do no t doubt either the response of O rder number 9 or number 10 respectively 
but in my opini on these were views given by M embers but I doubt wh ether it was a response 
of the D epartment. Thank you Mr.  Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim Bomoa …Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank Mr. Speaker S ir I just want to share humbly of the sentiments 
that my fellow Hon . Members have said. It is true;  I also happen to fall a victim and really do  
support that sometimes these so called CEC s or the so  called CEO s do communicate 
sometimes and whatever is being communicated is not implemented. They just c ommunicate 
for the sake of P ublic relations  to please the M embers and to make us believe that the 
solution has been solved but at the end of it all nothing is implemented and nothing is done 
and it is true.  
 It is very true that time has come when these so called concern ed or the CEC or even 
the CEO should come physically and face the Committee or even  face the W hole House and 
answer that parti cular question directly to the Members Mr. Speaker S ir. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to tell Hon . Members and also to 
bring it to your attention that th e way in a manner in which our Committee s are conducting 
their business  Hon. Speaker is really wanting and that is why you find a s ituation where  we 
do not have a C hairperson neither Vice Chair and the communicat ion that we are being given 
by Members  are not satisfactory and I would wish to tell this House the responsibility that we 
have been given, one day we will be accountable.  
Hon. Speaker m atters to do with Health are sensitive matters and here we do  not have 
the Chairperson neither do we have the V ice Chairperson and as routine of this House or the 
Committee Members do not do their duti es satisfactory in a case whereby we need a very 
conclusive convincing report . You will find that even they did  not summon any of the 
officer s that need to be s ummoned ; they are always caught unaware s wherever they are 
supposed to respond to a Statement and tha t is why we always find they ask for more time 
one week , three weeks, two  weeks . There is a Department that has requested more than ten 
weeks and still there is no report that has been given to this House.  
I would urge my Hon. Members in case you are a Chair be responsible and  Members 
also should also should attend Commi ttee meetings, we cannot leave Chairperson 's alone and 
when they are making decision they are some of the decision that they are making due to lack 
of quorum.  
So I would wish if we can do awa y with Whole House Committees so that at least  we 
might come up with  the Committees of our choices and it should be a new start to u s, but if 
we continue like this  there is no even a single report that will convince the Members, thank 
you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Tobias . Yes, Hon . Fadhili.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika naf ikiri nimetangulia kusema ; kwanz a nilianza na kusema Mheshimiwa aliyeanza 
kupaka  rangi hospitali ile  tulikuwa tunampa pongezi kama Wanakamati na Mheshimiwa 
Spika drainage  ambayo inapita mbele y a hospitali ile inayozungumziwa  tayari Wachina 
waliokuwa wanatengeza barabara . 
April 10, 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Mhesh imiwa Spika, wameweza kutengeza  isipokuw a bado pahali padogo ambayo 
itakuwa ni yenye kuunganisha kutoka kwa ile h ospitali mpaka kwa ile barabara  na vile vile ni 
kuwa storm water  haiko na idara ya afya ndio maana ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon . Renson, under what S tanding Order are you 
standing?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Am standing on  a Point of I nformation Mr . Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Am standing on  a Point of information.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Point of information Mr Speaker Sir, it is just very clear that the Hon . 
Member who is tr ying to respond is cooking this  because f rom the start he said a group , there 
is a team going round, now he  is trying to bring Chinese on board . It is much better be cause 
Hon. Members are depending  on the service of this Coun ty government especially the 
Executive and they have decided to go extra mile in their pockets, he  is talking about Hon . 
Ogutu  painting using his own money, let him  come clear if you are not going to do it Hon . 
Ogutu can still hire people to do it for you, let it be very clear, do  not take us in circle s 
Chine se these people going somewhere ...! K ama unapika tuambie unapika leo Mheshimiwa 
msemaji . Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon . Ogutu.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Clarification  Mheshimiwa Spika, nimeweza kutumia pesa yangu 
kupaka ile hospitali rangi ambayo sio kazi yangu na idara iko na pil i ikiwa hatutapata jibu 
mwafaka  tutafanya na  wale wananchi walionituma hapa  tutachimba peke yetu na tuendel ee, 
ikiwa idara  imeshindwa  watuambie wame shindwa , tuanze hio kazi pengine leo.  Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon . Fadhili you can continue.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mheshimiwa Spika ningepend a wenzangu  pia waelewe ya kuwa  kwanz a kabisa tumeona ni 
idara gani ambao inaendelea kushughulika na kutengeza storm water  ndani ya Kaunti ya 
Mombasa . La pili  Mheshimiwa  Spika nilisema kuwa  kuna t imu ambayo inat embea na 
imetembea karibu kila Wodi kujaribu kufungua hizi drainage  za kuhakikisha mvua itakapo 
kuja maji itakuwa hayana vizuizi na vile vile nimesema na hata naweza kumwamsha 
Mheshimiwa Ibrah im Omondi akathibitisha hapa mbele ya hili Bunge kuwa  Wachina 
wametengeza njia ya maji kupita mbele ya ile hospitali na vile vile palipo bakia ni pahali 
padogo Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Ogutu let the Hon . Member f inish giving his 
response . 
April 10, 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  Hon. Ogutu:  He is misleading the House Mr . Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : How is he misleading the House? Can you prove that?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  I want to prove. Mheshimi wa Spika hio hospitali iko kwa Wodi yangu, 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili naf ikiri anatumia ile njia akija  huku Bungeni, hajawahi kushuka kuingia 
pale hospitali sijui ni miaka mingapi.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Member you cannot prove that, are you l iving with 
Hon. Fadhili?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Am goin g there Hon.  Speaker , there is an  allocation ambayo ilifanywa 
katika b ajeti yetu na hio  allocation iko katika  Wizara ya Afya  na tunaongea  drainage system 
ambayo iko Kliniki ya Magongo , kuna drainage system s nyingi ndani ya  Changamwe, lakini 
hatujaonge a hio, kwa nini tunaongea juu ya  afya? Kwa sababu hio ni hospitali ndio 
tunaongea drainage system yake hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika naf ikiri tutaf ute suluhisho 
tusihepe majukumu . Mimi ningetamani kus ikia kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa Fadhili kuwa  
Wanakamati waende waangalie nini iko kwenye ground, kisha warudi na majibu, sijui hio ni 
ngumu kiasi gani . Mheshimiwa Spika Ah sante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon . Fadhili.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika nafikiri nimetangulia kusema kuwa anayeweza kudhibitisha maneno ninayozungumza 
ni Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi na akiongezea Mheshimiwa Junior Kyaka . Mheshimiwa 
Spika ni kuwa drainage  imeanza kutengenezwa na imebakia pahali p adogo ambapo idara 
inayohusika tutaweza kuwapelekea malalamiko haya ili waweze kuunganisha padogo 
palipobakia na mvua itakapokuja hospitali ile haitaweza kuathir ika.. 
Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa Mheshimiwa aweze kuelewa kuwa ikiwa anasema 
kuna bajeti ambayo imetengwa ya kuongeza storm water  ni lazima pia awe katika akili yake 
anajua ni drainage gani ama ni storm water  gani ambayo ilikuwa imelengwa katika bajeti ile 
hakuwekwi tu blank  cheque  kuwa hii itatengeneza storm water  huwa imekusudiwa hususan 
itatengeneza pahali fulani ndio maana nasema tutajaribu tushirikiane na idara husika na vile 
vile kuna timu ambazo zina tembea ndani ya Kaunti Mombasa Wodi zote 30 kuhakikisha 
wamefungua zile sehemu ambazo maji ya mvua yanapita ili kusiwe na shida yeyote na pia 
tutajaribu tuwasiliane na timu zile tuhakikishe maji ndani ya hospitali hili hayataweza 
kuathirika na ni na imani Mheshimiwa pia anayezungumza anajua kuwa kuna timu ambazo 
zinatem bea na nin gemuomba pia timu ikija katika Wodi yake aweze kuipeleka katika ile 
hospitali na kuona ni vipi tutaweza  kushirikiana baina ya yeye na Idara ya Afya na hii Idara 
ambayo inashughulika katika kuhakikisha storm water  zote zimeweza kurekebishwa. Ahsan te 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank Hon. Fadhili. Hon. Members I think, yes Hon. 
Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Shebe Athumani:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti . Nasimama  na 
kipengee 41 (2) (c) katika Idara ya Afya Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ningependa Kama ti husika 
ya afya iweze kukumbuka ama kujumuisha ziara watakayo  tembelea katika Wodi yangu ya 
Jomvu Kuu . 
April 10, 2019                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Ni miezi takriban minne Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti unakumbuka vizuri hospitali 
yangu ya Jomvu Kuu ya CDF iliweza kufurika maji na mitar o ikaziba na placenta pit  pia 
imejaa na nilitoa Taarifa  hii miezi minne iliopita na mpaka leo ni masikitiko sana hakuna kazi 
yeyote imefanyika . Kwa hivyo ningependa  kupitia mamlaka yako na himaya yako 
Mheshimi wa Mwenyekiti uweze kujumuisha K amati husika katika mpango mzima wa 
hospitali ya Wodi  ya Jo mvu Kuu . Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe. Yes Hon. Renson?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mine is just related to the rains ; as the 
Chairman of Labour I just have a feeling that our staff or workers should work unde r a very 
conducive environment ; yesterday I did visit the Sub County Education office which is based 
at Chan gamwe f ire station and whatever I saw is as if th at place is not inhabit ed by people but 
animals ! Paa limetoka , ceiling  imeanguka na najua wakati wowote mvua itaanza ikiwa sekta 
hiyo ya elimu inataka tuandike walimu ni lazima pia watuhakikishie kwamba ma zingira ya 
hao walimu yatakuwa vizuri, itakuwa si vyema kwamba walimu tutakuwa tunawaandika 
halafu pale mahali pa  kuwaweka tunaweka kama ni wanyama.  
Kwa hivyo ningependa Mwenyekiti wa Elimu na Kamati ya Elimu waweza kuzuru ile 
Sub County office   ambayo iko pale Changamwe fire station  kuasisi zaidi kwa kina ili tujue 
kama haitarekebishwa wapeleke miavuli pale. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fadhili, the Member of the 
Committ ee on Health you can reply the Statement from Hon. Shebe by  next week Thursday 
and H on. Ibrahim you will reply the Statement on next week Thursday as well from Hon. 
Renson Thoya…  
 
(Silence)  
 So Hon . Members again I just want to remind you under Standing Order 40 (2) 
which I think Hon. Kitula was talking about that , ‘A Member who wishes to seek leave to 
raise a matter under thi s Standing Order shall before 3 :00p.m. on the day the Statement is to 
be ma de hand to the Speaker a written notification of the matter, but the Speaker shall refuse 
to allow the request unless satisfied that the matter may properly be discussed  in the County 
Assembly’ . And again I want to remind you under Standing Order 41 (2) (a)  A Member of the 
County Assembly Business Committee designated by the Committee for that purpose shall, 
every Thursday or on the last sitting day for not more that 10 minutes, present and lay on the 
table a Statement informing the County Assembly of the Bu siness coming before the County 
Assembly in the following week’ .  
 So Hon . Members I want t o remind you about the general Statement which is 42, 
you need to write down the Statement so to enable the other Members to have the c opies 
when you are asking your Statement just write down your Statement and bring it to the House 
so that all the Members will know what you are asking for and the reply will be written as 
well. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Wednesday, 10th April , 2019 at 
2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 3:00 p.m. 