March 30, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of th e Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 
 
   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
Tuesday , 29th March, 2022.  
The House met at 3:00p.m. 
 
[The  Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwi re): Tunaweza kaa W aheshimiwa. O nce again 
welcome Hon ourable M embers to this sitting , Yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T ON THE STATUS OF BURSARY IN  THE COUNTY BY  THE CHAIRPERSON , 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATI ON, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND MV 2035  HON OURABLE IBRAHIM 
OMONDI  
 Yes Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi, Chairperson Committ ee on Education kindly give 
the response.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker , I want to respond on the status of bursary. Mr. 
Speaker Sir, I wish to respond to the S tateme nt brought to this House by Honourable  Bernard  
Ogutu on Wednesday 9th March , 2022 a t 2:30p.m, during the 20th Sitting seeking to know the 
status of bursary . The County Chief officer … 
[Interruption ] 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  What is it Honourable  Benard?  
 Hon. Ogutu: Mr. Speaker , I was just standing in for Honourable  Fadhili, he is t he one 
who requested for the S tatement.   
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes? Order ! Honourable  Ogutu w hy are you 
standing in and the M ember was  up giving the response to the S tatement paid.  
 Hon. Ogutu:  To a S tatement rai sed by Honourable  Fadhili Mw alimu , MCA P ort 
Reitz W ard. 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You can only  stand for him when giving the 
Statement and when there is a response you have to listen to the response you do  not have to 
stand.  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker , you read the response.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Oh he mentioned Honourable  Ogutu ’s 
name? Thank you Honourable  Ogutu, n ow  Honourable C hairperson you are responding to a 
Statement made b y Honourable  Fadhili Mwalimu.  
 Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker . 
March 30, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of th e Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  I wish to respond to a Statement re quested in the House by the Honourable  Fadhili 
Mwalimu on Wednesday, 9th March , 2022 at 2:30 p.m during the 20th Sitting , 2022 seeking to 
know the status of bursary in the County.  The County Chief Officer in the Department of 
Education on his le tter Ref DOEG822B/Vol.1/90 dated 16th March , 2022 responded as 
follows.  
1. That the bursary forms have been designed and are ready for printing, awaiting 
confirmation on availability of funds to facilitate th e payment of bursaries for all W ards 
in Mombasa Count y; 
 
2. That the Department has allocated Ks.150M illion  for bursaries this financial year and 
is following up on the vouchers in the Department of Finance for the funds to be 
relea sed into the Elimu Fund Account;  
 
3. That the expected date of issuing t he bursary forms is depended on the availability of 
funds from the Department of Finance.  
  
         Thank you Mr. Speaker  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes Honourable  Tobias Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker , I always have issues whenev er response is made to matter s 
to do with bursary is always given out and I think this is the same kind of response we have 
always been given. I do not know whether they copy paste and then they  just change dates, 
because the  issue has always been that the  forms are ready, they have been designed awaiting 
confirmation on the availability of funds. So Mr. Speaker I do not know whether we have 
been running out funds for now two consecutive f inancial years? !  
 Because I think the C onstituency Development Fund  have been issuing their burs aries 
each and every financial y ear, but Mr. Speaker we have issu es when it comes to our County 
government. So I do not think whether this response is sufficient to the House because the 
last time bursaries were given out I thi nk it is 2019, if I am not wrong, i f not 2019, 2020. So 
for these two f inancial years that have passed, the allocati on that been allocating to the 
education docket more so bursary I do not know where they have been taking them too.  
 But Mr. Speaker if the re is any Department that needs to adjust, and pull up their socks, 
I think it is the Department of Education more so when it comes to bursary disbursement. So 
I feel that we have failed our people so much and if you allow me, I would advise  the Chair 
mayb e if you can sit down with your Committee and also with the Department so that at least 
you may know what exactly is the problem, because it now two  years without our people 
seeing bursaries. Thank you Mr. Speaker, that is my greatest concerned.  
 
         The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Honourable  Tobias Samba. Yes 
the Chairperson, the response to issues raised by the Member?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker , I concur with the Member, indeed it is true that we need 
to have a meeting with the Members  of Committee so that we should go deep into this matter 
and then we shall respond back to the House Mr. Speaker if allowed.  
  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Am interrogating my calenda r, you see 
Honourable  Members . This is an issue that has been ra ised by so many Members here and we 
also understand the situation out there . 
March 30, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of th e Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  I think by  the end of April the students will be opening  school again. So Honourable  
Chairperson I think after the recess if time allows you God willing, kindly bring a 
comprehe nsive response over the same issue on 18th May and kindly note that  we need the 
specific dates on when this will be ready. We cannot be operating  on other availability of 
money, we all understand the situation yes, but again we are also acting on the peopl e we 
represent. So I know it is also affecting you as a representative of the people, so you also 
have to push the department over the same. So kindly after we resume after the recess, kindly 
make an effor t of having a meeting with the D epartment and insis t on having the specific 
time lines on when our people should be expecting these bursaries . Thank you.  
Hon. Omondi : Most obliged.   
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes, C lerk?  
MOTION  
ALTERATION OF THE CO UNTY ASSEMBLY CALEND AR BY THE LEADER OF  MAJORITY 
HONOURABLE HAMISI MW IDANI  
Yes Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani , Chairperson and Leader of Majority Party.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I wish to move a M otion. Mr. 
Speaker Si r, I beg to move the following M otion;  
THAT, pursuan t to the provision of Standing Order 25(4), this Assembly resolves to 
alter the Calen dar of the County Assembly and a djourn today, Wednesday, 30th March, 2022 
until Tuesday, 10th May, 2022 . 
Thank you and I call upon Hon ourable Samba to support the M otion . 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Honourable  Tobias?  
Hon. Samba:  I second Mr. Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Honourable  Members . I now propose a 
question that the M otion moved by Hon ourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani, on adjournment of 
the County Ass embly be considered by this Honourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
Yes Hon ourable  Majority Leader . 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Bwana Spika nime leta hii hoja kwa sababu 
kuanzia tareh e sita  Wahesh imiwa  wana takiwa kuenda mjucho wa vyama , kwa  hivyo tumeona 
ni vizuri pia tuwapatie Waheshimiwa  wakati mzuri wa  kuweza kujiandaa kwa hizi 
nominations  na ndipo tukajaribu kuona tuirekebishe kalenda yetu ambayo ingelikuwa 
tumeanza mapumziko tarehe 14 lakini t umeisongeza tuanzia tarehe ya  leo kwa  sababu 
kuanzia tarehe sita kunakuwa na mchijo wa vyama . Kwa hivyo Waheshimiwa  ningewaomba 
tukubaliane kwa sauti moja tuweze  kupata huu wakati tuweze  kujitayar isha kwa sababu ya 
uchaguzi zetu. A hsante Bwana Spika.  
The T emporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Honourable  Members this is a 
Procedural M otion and we all know there is no much debate on it, however the M otion itself 
says tha t we are adjourning and as the M otion mover has said we are head ing to P arty 
primaries  so may be I will just allow few or three  to five minutes to allow Members to 
contribute then we wind up. Yes Honourable  Mwamwiri?  
March 30, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of th e Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika binafsi 
nishukuru tu ushirikiano wenye  tulikuwa  nao katika B unge hili lakini pia tunapok wenda 
katika likizo hii na vile vile kwenda katika kura ya mchujo juma lijalo  kwangu ni kujiombea 
na kuombea W aheshimiwa wote ambao wanaenda kupitia kisu hiki , Mwenyezi  Mungu 
atufanyie  sahali iweze kuwa na neema na b araka kwetu . Mheshimiwa Spika tutakaporudi 
kutoka likizo turudi na tabasamu ya  kwamba tun ajiandaa na kura kuu ya tarehe tisa  mwezi 
wa nane. Mheshimiwa Spika pia nihimize na kuhasa waheshimiwa wenzangu nikiji hasa na 
ma binafsi ya kwamba siasa sio mwisho wa maisha yetu, tujiandae pia na matokeo ya 
mchujo , vyovyote itakavyokuwa lakini uzima wetu, uhai wetu na uwajibikaji wetu kutumia 
jamii hauwezi ishilia kwa kukosa fursa ya kuwakilisha katika Bunge hili ama  kuwa viongozi 
chaguliwa .  
Mheshimiwa Spika, pia kuna nafasi nying ine za kutumikia jamii mbali na hili muhimu 
ni tunaomba ushindi kwa kila mmoja wetu lakini isiwe sababu tukasikia maeneo kadha  watu 
wameingia viwanjani kukata miti kuhofia ya kwamba kuna Mheshimiwa amepoteza kura ya 
mchujo huenda akajinyonga . Tunatakiana h eri Mheshimiwa Spi ka. Mwenyezi Mungu atupe 
subra, atupe utulivu wa nafsi zetu, atupatie amani na upendo na vile vile mahaba na heri 
tumekuwa  nayo kwa wananchi isikatike na kuishia kwa  sababu tu ya swala la uchaguzi na 
siasa . Mheshimiwa S pika lakini pia tuhimizane kama W aheshimiwa tukiwa ni vyeo vya jamii 
kuweza kuhamasisha watu  wetu mashinani kuzingatia sana  swala la amani kwa  sababu siasa 
ni mapito baada  ya hapo kuna maisha ya  kuendelea na watu wote ni jamii moja, watu wote ni 
ndugu na maendeleo ha yaji pas i shikamano na pasi na utul ivu na amani katika maeneo yetu. 
Kwa hivyo Mungu  atujaalie kila la kheri n a nitakie kila la heri katika miongoni mwetu hapa 
na zaidi maafisa wetu ambao wamekuwa wakituongoza katika kuendesha shughuli zetu kwa 
muda wote huo ya k wamba tunawatambua tunawapenda na tunawaambia tunawaombea 
Mungu awafungulie milango ya heri na baraka muzidi kupanda . Zaidi ya hapa miaka ijayo 
wengine tukiwa katika Bunge la Sen eti na Bunge la Taifa pia  kukatana kule tuweze 
kutekeleza majukum u yetu kwa wana nchi wetu Ahsante  na Mwenyezi Mungu atubariki.  
 
[Applause]  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Honourable Athman. I really feel 
your contribution  yes it seems Members are okay and Honourable  Mwamwi ri has contributed 
on behalf of … 
         [Applau se] 
[Murmuring ] 
[Laughter]  
 
 Honourable  Members , allow me to wish you well in your P arty primaries and I also 
promise you that my office is very wide open for you guys , I am only a phone call away in 
case you need my assistance in any way.  Yes in whichever  aspect I am there for you and I 
will  always be there for you.  I wish you well Honourable  Members , I pray th at you all come 
out as winners and that you also come back to serve the great people of this great C ounty … 
[Applause]  
 Allow me now to invite the M otion mover to reply.  
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Members for supporting this 
Motion and actually it has been mentioned here the exercise which is going to take place on 
April 6th. I wish all the Members the best because mine is a dir ect nomination , I am not going 
for nomination you know I am standing as an independent candidate . 
March 30, 2022                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of th e Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 So I may say that I  wish all of you going through nomination go through well. In  fact I 
will be very happy if things go well for Honourable Mwamwiri  to have this seat … 
[Applause]  
 From my presence and actually I will pray a lot to God so that you may succeed. 
Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
[Applause]  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire ): Thank you the Majority Leader.  Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE C OUNTY ASSEMBLY  IN ACCORDANCE WITH T HE ASSEMBLY CALENDAR   
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Okay Mr.  Speaker , now I move another 
Motion, Adjourning of the County Assembly in Accordance with the Assembly Calendar.  
 
THAT, pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 2 8, this Assembly adjourns for 
Recess until Tuesday, 10th May, 2022, in accordance with the Calendar of the County 
Assembly (Regular Session).  
Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Who is your seconder?  
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Honourable  Mwamwiri will be my seconder?  
[Applause]  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon . Bwire) : Yes Honourable Athman Rama Mwamwiri?  
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri : Thank you Mr.  Speaker . I hereby do second.  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you. Honourable  Membe rs I now 
propose a question that the Motion moved by  Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani on 
adjournment of County Assembly be considered by this House in  the same terms as moved?  
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 Yes Honourable Hamisi? Yeah you just have to sa y something on the Motion you 
moved.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : I think we have really said a lot and no w 
we are heading to around 4:00 p.m you know we have some issues to the ground so Mr.  
Speaker I don’t have much to say because I know Members  want to go down to their areas to 
prepare for the exercise of the 6th April . Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you. Honourable Hamisi Musa 
Mwidani.  Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , there   having no other business  this House stands a djourned until 
Tuesday of 10th May, 2022 at 10:00a.m.  
The House r ose at 3:22p.m . 