May 3, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 3rd May, 2018  
The House met at 2:39p.m. 
(The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker : Have your seats, yes Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
 
 Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir a statement was requested by 
Hon. Samba...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker :  Just table the report . 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give the following stateme nt on Recent 
Employment...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker : Hon. Renson Th oya just table the report then you  will read 
your statement afterwards .  
 Hon.  Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give the following Statement on 
Recent...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker : Hon. Renson Thoya you are out of order, you have to table the 
report, the report is in the hands of the County Assembly so just wait for the order and you 
will respond to the statement. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 

May 3, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Hon. Feddis Mbura?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mbura:  Thank you Mr. Chairman for giving me this opportunity. Mr. 
Speaker Sir I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and 
Public Works whether he is aware of the poor statu s of feeder roads in Mwakirunge Ward 
brought about by the heavy rains, and whether  the Cou nty government has any immediate 
plans to remedy the situation like putting murram as a temporary measure. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
 The Deputy Speaker : Yes Commit tee on Transport any response?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari: Yes Mr. Speaker I am aware that this is a rainy season 
all over the Country so I wish to take this opportunity to discuss the matter with the 
Committee of Transport.  
 The Deputy Speaker : So it means you are awa re? 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari:  Yes I am aware . 
 The Deputy Speaker : So you will respond back after sitting with your Committee?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari:  Yes. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker : Yes Hon.  Feddis Mbura ? 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mbura:  Sawa, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba tu kum julisha 
Mwenyekiti wa Uchukuzi  kwamba hali ni mbaya. Sasa mimi ninataka kujua kama kuna 
mikak ati gani kwa wakati huu wa mvua . Sasa wakisema watakaa kama Kamati na wanajua 
kwamba kuna mvua, na wanajua kwamba Mwakirunge kuna shida mimi ninataka kujua tu ni 
mikak ati gani ime wekwa kulingana na Mwakirunge na hali ilivyo halisi saa hii. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker : Thank you Hon. Fe ddis Mbura, Hon. Mwaka Bakari?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika n ilikuwa nataka 
kumregeshea Mheshimiwa Fe ddis kwamba nimesema kwamba ninajua ya kwamba haya 
matatizo ya ko kila mahali na kwa sababu ya hiy o ndipo nikamuambia tutaka a kama Kamati . 
Kwa sababu kama N aibu Mwenyekiti siwezi kulijibu hili swali hili peke yangu ambalo 
kwamba ni donda sugu kwa Kaunti nzima na ni don da sugu katika kila W odi na pia vile vile 
katika Kamati yetu ya Uchukuzi  kuna shida kidogo hilo ndilo tatizo ambalo kwamba 
nimekuambia kwamba nitakujibu wakati tukikaa pamoja. Vile vile pia nataka kuwahabarisha 
kwamba sisi kama Kamati ya Uchukuzi  tutaweza kukaa na Chief Ex ecutive  wetu wa 
Uchukuzi  na Waziri wetu tuweze kuweza kuzungumza hili jambo.  
 The Deputy Speaker : So Hon.  Mwaka  due to its urgency the Assembly  will need a 
comprehensive report on Tuesday afternoon.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari:  Yes on Tuesday  afternoon . 
 The Deputy Speaker : Are you satisfied Hon. Fed dis, by Tuesday the response will 
be in the House.  
 Hon. ( Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari : Umeridhika Mheshimiwa Fed dis? 
 
(Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura st ood and bowed) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker : Yes Cler k? 
 
STATEMENT  
 
May 3, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  The Deputy Speaker : Hon. Ibrahim Omo ndi, Chairperson Committee on Education, 
Information and Technology under MV 2035 ... 
 
(Silence)  
 
 Any Member from that Committee?  
 
(Loud consultations ) 
 
 …Hon.  Members you are out of order, Members on my left side you are out of order. 
Out of o rder! Because it is not a public baraza  when consulting consult on a low tone.  Yes 
Hon. Nyiro any response?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker I think the issue that was ...the burning issue that 
was in this House was concerning the bursaries that were  given out last year and the same 
bursaries amount that was discussed in this House was given out last two weeks. So maybe 
we wait for the department to tell us wh en they will be ready with the bursaries for this year 
but the bursaries that were burning is sues were concerning the ones that were given last year I 
think they were awarded to the respective beneficiaries in the last t wo weeks. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker . 
 The Deputy Speaker : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Yes Clerk . 
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION ON T HE RECENT EMPLOYMENT  OF WORKERS BY THE CO UNTY 
GOVERNMENT  
 
 Yes Chairperson Committee on labour and social welfare Hon. Renson Thoya , 
respond to the statement . 
 Hon. Thoya:   Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I wish to give the following statement  on 
the recent emplo yment of workers by the County government , a concern raised by Hon. 
Tobias Samba in this House.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir, recruitment in the public service is based on an existing scheme of 
service; a scheme of service is a career entry and prog ression guide which provides well 
defined career structure s and clearly defined job description and specification at all levels.  
The recruitment and selection  process by the County Public Service Board (CPSB)  involves 
the following:  
1. Declaration of vacant po sts 
2. Advertising the vacant posts  
3. Receiving applications (Manual and Online)  
4. Capturing applicant’s information  
5. Verification of applicant’s bio data  
6. Shortlisting/pre selection  
7. Selection interviews and  
8. Appo intment by the County S ervice Board.  
 Mr. Speake r Sir, the following interviews were conducted by Mombasa County 
Public Service Board as at March, 2018 . 
 Interview for MSF conducted between 5th and 8th March , 2018 at the MCSPSB Board 
room.  The following position s were advertised and filled competitively  
1. Clinical Officer - Sexual Violence program - 1 post  
2. Clinical officer - Anesthetist -1 post  
May 3, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 3. Medical doctor -5 post s 
4. Nurse midwife -11 post s 
5. Medical Activity Manager -2 post s 
6. Psychologist  
7. Sterilization Technician -3 post s 
8. Nurse Triage -3 post s 
 
 Interview for positions  in the office of the Governor . 
 Mr. Speaker sir, the following positions were advertised and filled competitively 
within the officer of the Governor.  
1. Assistant Director, Monitoring and Evaluation  
2. Assistant Director, Counter Terrorism and Extremism  
3. Assistant Director, Strategy and Development.  
 Interview for Medical Specialist, Health Department held on 29th January , 2018.  
The following position s were advertised and filled competitively by the Board  
1. Radiologist  
2. Intervention Cardiologist  
3. Plastic and reco nstructive Surgeon  
4. Orthopedic Surgeon  
 COCSESCA Interview held on 23rd January , 2018  
 After the interview only three candidates satisfied the Board to be given an 
opportunity for the training that was scheduled to commence in March , 2018.  
Mr. Speaker sir, I h ave already tabled the report on recruitment and selection process in the 
public Service by the County government of Mombasa  for further information and 
clarification, otherwise we have done great research and we are still have great meeting with 
our Boar d.  
 Our real aim as a Committee is to ensure that recruitment s are centralized and 
streamlined at the Board, in the mean time when you  call the Chief Officer or the Public 
Service Board to give you any happening in a given department you may understand he is n ot 
ready to say . So we are trying to ensure that all recruitment s are done by the Public Service 
Board  because it is in this House that we saw some of the Hon.  Members exchanging words 
not very happy some of them may be exchanging close here because of th e issue of 
recruitment, and as a Committee we are not happy and we are call on the Boar d and the Chief 
Officer Environment also to tell us what is going on there . The previous recruitment for the 
casuals may be we did not cancel it but if we  are forced , if they do  not satisfy  whatever this 
House read we will be required to cancel that recruitment  so that it follows that directive 
they’ve given us . So we are trying to cal l everybody on the Board , other departments that are 
supposed to do their jobs the Board will recruit and deploy the staff to the necessary 
departments and if at all they cannot do they give clear guidelines on how to do in that given 
department. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker : Thank you Hon.  Renson Thoya and you can see there was a 
big applause for the report thank  you for that. Yes Clerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ALTERNATION OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY C ALENDAR  
 
 
 The Leader of Majority?  
May 3, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . I beg to move a 
Procedural Motion on alteration of County Assembly calendar.  
 
(Leade r of Majority ( Hon.  Mwidani) moved the Procedural Motion)  
 
That pursuant to Standing order 25(4) of the County Assembly Standing  orders 
this House RESOLVE S to alter the County Assembly calendar for year 2018 to 
adjourn on Thursday, 31st May, 2018 and resume sittings on Tuesday, 19th June, 
2018.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker : Who is your seconder ? Be audible . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I support.  
 The Deputy Speaker : I now propose a question that the Procedural Motion on 
alteration of the County Assembly Calendar be debated in this Honorable  House?  
 
(Question proposed and  agreed to ) 
 
 Majority Leader?  
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mheshimiwa Spika tumeanza kufa nya 
marekebisho kwa kalenda yetu kwa sababu kuna mambo ambayo yamebaki na pia ukijua 
kwamba kufikia mwezi wa Mei tutakuwa na Ramadhani. Kwa hiyo tuliona tuchukue angalau 
wiki nyengine mbili za Ramadhani tuweze kumaliza yale mambo ambayo yamebaki ny uma. 
Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika ningependa Bunge hili tukubalie haya  marekebisho ambayo 
tumeyafanya  kwa sababu baada tukishamaliza wiki mbili za Ramadhani tuweze kurudi 
kuweza kufunga Ramadhani yetu vizuri sana. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker : Yes Hon.  Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama hapa kuunga mkono 
na naomba kupitia kiti chako kwani wajua huu ni wakati wa bajeti Kamati ya Fedha kwenye 
Bajeti watakuwa wakiendelea na kazi. Kwa hivy o wakati wa kwenda mapumzik o (recess) 
tupatiwe ruhusa tuendelee na kazi yetu isisimamishwe Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante  
 The Deputy Speaker : Yes it seems the House is in full support of the alteration , so 
the Mover please respond . 
 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Sawa ahsante Bwana Spika nashukuru 
Wabunge  kutuunga mkono kwenye Hoja hii. Kwa sababu pia nashukuru Mwenyekiti 
ameeleza pia jambo la muhimu ambalo ling efaa tufanye kabla tuende mapumziko  (recess) 
ambayo ni bajeti na bajeti ndio kiungo cha kila kitu. Kwa hivyo Waheshimiwa nawashukuru 
kwa kuunga mko no Hoja hii kuweza kuona tufanye ndio alafu tuende tupate mapumziko  
(recess) . Kwa hiyo ahsante sana Bwana Spika na pia nawashukuru Waheshimiwa walioko 
katika hili Bunge walivyoweza kuipitisha hii Hoja. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Question put)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker : I now stand to put a questi on that the Motion on alteration of 
the Mombasa County Assembly Calendar by the Leader of Majority be adopted in this 
House ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
May 3, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Members there being no other business the House stands adjourn  until Tuesday 8th at 
2:30p.m.   
 
The House rose at 3 :07p.m. 
  
 
  