March 9, 2016                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednes day, 9th March, 2016  
The House met at 9:18a.m. 
(Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  (Mrs.) Serah  Nyamvula  in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Kindly Hon . Members have your seats.   
STATEMEN T 
       Yes Hon . Stephen Wangudi . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to present a 
statement on the status of Chaani and Changamwe Markets.  
(Hon. Wangudi moved  the S tatement)  
STATUS OF CHAANI AND CHANGAMWE MARKETS  
       Madam Speaker Chaani and Changamwe markets were constructed using Constituency 
Development Fund (CDF) during the  last regime. It is worth noting that despite the 
substantial completion of construction of the said markets, they are not in operation a nd 
currently they are being used as parking of carts, motorcycle and dumping site and this may 
lead to the dilapidation of the market hence a waste of tax payers money.  
       I therefore seek a statement from the relevant department to shed light on the following 
issues;  
       1. Have the markets been handed over to the County g overnment;  
       2. If not when are they going to be handed over;  
       3. What steps have the County g overnment through the relevant department taken to 
ensure handling over ta kes place;  
       4. Once handed over what criteria will be used to allocate the stalls to the members of the 
public?  
       Madam Speaker I beg to put the statement. Thank you . 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Thank you Hon . Wangudi this is  a good 
statement , yes M embers any reaction on this statement? Yes Hon . Amir . 
       Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , ningetaka kumshukuru Mheshimiwa 
Wangudi kwa kuleta taarifa  hii katika Bunge  na ni masikitiko makubwa kwa sababu kama 
masoko yame tengenezwa kwa ajili ya kufanya biashara halafu ionekane sehemu hiyo 
haitumiwi ipasavyo , kwa sababu masoko yale yamejengwa ili watu wetu waweze kufanya 
biashara ila inafanywa kinyume masoko yale yanatumiwa kuegesha mikokotoni .  
       Kwa hiyo ningeomba Mh eshimiwa Wangudi aweze kuigeuza taarifa  hii ili iweze kuwa 
mswada  ili tuweze kuijadili vilivyo , kwa hivyo ombi langu ni hilo Mheshimiwa Wangudi 
aweze kuigeuza iwe m swada  ili tuijadili kwa kina kwa sababu ni jambo nzuri sana. A hsante 
sana. 
March 9, 2016                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Yes Hon . Enock .  
       Hon. Mwinga : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Pia mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono 
taarifa  iliyoweza kuletwa na Mheshimiwa Wangudi . Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la 
kusikitisha sana kuona kwamba mahali ambapo ku metengwa kwa watu wetu wa Mombasa 
haswa haswa kwa watu wa Changamwe kuweza kufanya biashara pamegeuzwa na watu 
binafsi kuweza kuweka magari yao na hata mikokoteni yao .  
       Mheshimiwa Spika wakati huu am bao tume ona wafanyi  biashara ndogo ndogo 
wameweza kuvunjiwa kwa sababu ya ile barabara kubwa inayotengenezwa kule Changamwe . 
Kwa hiyo watu wa Changamwe hawana mahali pa  kuweka biashara zao pale mahali ambapo 
wangeweza kufanya biashara pamechukuliwa na watu binafsi na wamepageuza kuweka mali 
zao Mheshimiwa  Spika . Hili ni jambo la kusikitisha na naomba kupitia kwa kiti chako 
Mheshimiwa Spika Bunge hili liweze kuamuru mahali pale pafunguliwe kuwe kwa biashara 
ili watu wa Changamwe wakaendelee kufanya biashara zao . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Temporary Sp eaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Hon. Zainab  Mumba . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , hata mimi nimesimama 
kuunga mkono taarifa  hii ya Mheshimiwa Wangudi . Vile vi le mimi pia ningependa 
kumuambi a Mheshimiwa Wangudi ya kwamba anapole ta hii taarifa  pia kuna hizi vijumba 
vyetu vya  polisi  yaani ‘booth’  ambapo kuna moja kule Frere  Town inatumika vibaya sana 
watu wanajua ni kijumba cha polisi lakini sasa imegeuzwa inaishi watu na kuna watoto pia. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Tempo rary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Hon. Karume . 
       Hon. Karume:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi pia ningependa kuunga mkono 
hii taarifa  na ningeomba Mheshimiwa Spika utoe uamuzi  kwa Kamati husika ili tuletewe 
ripoti kamili na tuweze kuijadili pia kusudi tuweze kujua yale yote yanayotokea pale tupate 
ukweli wa eneo lile. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Yes Hon . Patrick Siminyu Muriuki . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you M r. Speaker for giving me this opport unity  it is so sad to see 
taxpayer’s  money going to waste...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Yes what is it Hon . Enock?  
       Hon. Mwinga : Madam Sp eaker  I’m wondering that the Hon . Member  is addressing you 
as a he....  
(Laugh ter) 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Madam Speaker has been promoted to a she ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Madam Speaker I just want to say that it is sad to use taxpayer’s  money  just going to 
waste as it is I have seen in Changamwe and Chaani. Madam Speaker the issue needs to be 
looked into  so that we can know whether the money which w as used to construct these 
markets and the committee which will be directed to help us revive them so that we can have 
those markets to help our people as we understand the road construction af fected most of our 
March 9, 2016                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 people so these markets are going to help the m and if they are going to be handed to the 
County government .  
       Madam Speaker if these markets are handed over to the County and the relevant 
committee to deal with it will help the peo ple of Mombasa and i fully support my colleagues  
and I ask the report to be brought next week so that our people could benefit. Thank you . 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Hon. Karisa Nzai . 
       Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Bi Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii baada ya kuniona , baada ya 
kusimama kwa muda mrefu. Bi Spika nami nataka pia kumshukuru Mheshimiwa Wangudi 
kwa kuleta taarifa hii kwa sababu  Bi Spika huwa kuna pesa ya umma kutumiwa vibaya kwa 
kisingizio ya mahali panapot engenezwa kule.  
       Bi Spika nashukuru kwamba siku ya leo labda utatoa uamuzi vizuri tujue watu wa shirika 
la Transitional Authority (TA) wamefikia wap i? Na ni miradi ambayo tulipewa na 
imemalizika ama haijakamilika ndio tujue kwamba jukumu letu litakuwa limefikia wapi?       
Inaweza kuwa hapo sababu ya mikokoteni na baiskeli yanayowekwa kwa masoko yetu ya 
Kaunti kisingizio ni kuwa Mjumbe alisema anataka kuchukua h ayo masoko na kwa  sababu 
watu hawakutaka kubishana wakampatia nafasi ya kufanya lakini mpaka sasa hajaleta ripoti 
kwamba mradi ule ulimalizika ama bado? Mkandarasi , aliyepewa ame shapeana mradi , ama 
bado haja peana ? Hatuwezi  kuingia katika mradi ambao bado una  utata ama bado 
haujamalizika . Kwa hio uzuri Mheshimiwa Wangudi amekuja na taarifa  kama wamemali za ni 
lini tutape wa mradi huo? Na kama haujamalizika tuta pewa taarifa  kutoka kwa TA watueleze 
kwamba mradi huu ambao ulikuwa unafanywa kama umemalizika na sasa uje kwa Kaunti 
tupeleke maaskari wetu wauchunge mradi ule . Sioni kwa nini mradi ambao umekula 
mamilioni na sasa k una mikokoteni, mapikipiki na inatumika kama jaa la taka.  
       Tukiwa tuko na  vijana wa kitengo cha ‘Inspectorate ’ yetu ambayo inataka kuchunga 
mahali pale tunataka kujua kama mradi umemalizika ama haujamalizika basi tupatiwe vile 
ulivyo kwa sababu tuko na wafanyi  biashara wengi wenye biashara ndogo ndogo , wanaotaka 
kupewa mahali nadhifu na wataweza kukuza uchumi wa Kaunti kwa sababu wafanyi  biashara 
wanataka kufanya biashara zao mahali salama. Kwa hivyo Bi Spika tunaamini kwamba leo 
utatoa mwelekeo mzuri  na hususan  hii taarifa  iwe mswada  sasa ili tuweze kuijadili kwa kina 
na tuweze kusaidia wafanyi  biashara wetu. A hsante sana Madam Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Well thank you I have seen the Chairman 
of Trade Committee Honorable I brahim Kondo am giving you this opportunity . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante  sana Bi Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii ; mimi kama 
Mwenyekiti wa Biashara ingekuwa sawa Kamati yetu tukikutana na Waziri na wahusika wa 
masoko yale kama alivyosema Mheshimiwa Nzai ili tuweze kujua kwa sababu gani mradi ule 
bado uko mashinani na haujapeanwa kwa Serikali ya Kaunti . Kwa hivyo Bi Spika kwa 
uamuzi wako utupatie muda nipate kukaa na Kamati na tuweze kupanga muda wa kuweza 
kwenda kuangalia sehemu zile vile zilivyo . Ahsante , Bwana Spika . 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Thank you very much Hon.  Ibrahim I 
would like first to congratulate Hon . Wangudi for bringing this statement even if it is a bit 
late, honestly I wish it could have come some time back but it i s good that it has come .        
One of our mandate s Hon. Member s is to oversight, secondly another mandate is to represent 
the people, thirdly the  project we are talking about is in our County and so my thinking is that 
whatever the project is it is in our  County the money used is public money . So we have a duty 
and a responsibility to ensure that we know the status and the TA know the status and so am 
very happy that we have discussed and this has come to us , but let us remember even if it is a 
March 9, 2016                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 project tha t has not been funde d by the County g overnment it is still a project within the 
County and funded by Public money and so it is our responsibility and one of the thing which 
is very convenient some of our MPs think we cannot touch their CDF projects because  they 
belong to their CDF kitty . The CDF kitty belong s to the people of this Country , the people 
who pay tax and the woman who buys a packet of maize meal so it is public money 
whichever way it is public money . So we have duty to go and see what they are d oing and a 
lot of things have been said and I just want to to uch on the very important thing  which I have 
heard; and it  is that we are have shortage of market s in Changamwe and everybody know s 
that there's a construction of a Highway and our people have be en displaced and if someone 
used CDF kitty doing a project that is not her/his money .  
Another thing that I have heard from you is our opportunity to collect revenue and 
this has been very clear from Honorable Karisa Nzai ; it is a revenue collection that w e are 
missing because that is our market and we are getting nothing from it and then another thing 
the market is under us , it doesn't matter what project we have and so I agree with you Hon . 
Members now the TA should come out clearly  to give us the status about that and I heard you 
say that you want this statement to become a Motion . It is very clear that Hon . Members want 
to know the status of these amazing markets  and the police booths. The police booth  actually 
is a shame that a police booth which was do nated is abandoned and it is used as a home so we 
have a lot of things , so for me am taking , so I will like to direct the right committee to 
investigate come back and give us the report and then come and see if it will be a Motion  but 
first we should go ou t and investigate . So I call upon the Committee on Trade the Chairman 
being here to go out an d give us and come back within seven  days to come up and bring a 
report on the status of the two markets so as to move on with the speed .  
(Interruption)  
       Yes Hon . Patrick S iminyu  what is it?  
       Hon. Siminyu : I have a statement if you may allow me Madam Speaker . 
      Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Yes go ahead .  
STATEMENT  
      Hon. Siminyu:  Mine is similar to this Madam Speaker and it had passe d in this House 
almost a year ago ; about public toilets which were constructed in Tudor and the donor wants 
to take the money back which was to construct the public toilet. Madam Speaker I have do ne 
a letter to the Environment d epartment and I have sat wit h the minister concerned but there's 
no result and it is a concern where they are going to scare away donors ; like the funder for 
that public toilet  is UN Habitat . So Madam Speaker there are many complaints concerning 
the department of environment , I think  it will be better  to speed up this project of public toilet 
so that we can have a public toilet and also for donors to come up and fund our County so 
that we can move on . So I beg the relevant committee and the able Chair of the committee of 
Environment  to go out and investigate so that they can come with a good comprehensive 
report about this issue. Thank you Madam Speaker.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Thank you Hon . Patrick Siminyu for that 
statement but nevertheless equally the repres entation and oversight that we were talking 
about  it will be interesting to hear about this project , about the status and if you have taken it 
to the relevant authority and nothing has been done it will be interesting because the Chair of 
the Environment Honorable Zainab Mumba and her Committee M embers will go out and 
investigate about the status of Tudor public toilets within seven  days and come back so that 
we can find out the  status of the toilets in Tudor . Thank you very much.  
March 9, 2016                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 (Interruption)  
       Yes what is it Hon . Wangudi?  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Madam Speaker I rise to seek permission  if you will allow a procedural 
Motion  and allow this House to start earlier , the afternoon sitting so as to go and join our 
Governor who is coming back  from Malindi. Madam Speaker give us permission to allow 
this.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.(Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Hon. Wangudi you are not clear ; are you 
asking for the afternoon sitting to start a bit early or are you asking for the Procedural Motion  
to adjo urn the afternoon sitting .  
       Hon. Wangudi:  I’m asking for the afternoon sitting to start early at 1:00 pm.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.(Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Okay go ahead . 
(Hon. Wangudi read Motion ) 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Bi Spika kwa ru khsa yako ningepe nda kutoa mswada kwamba kikao 
cha mchana kiweze  kufanyika saa saba mchana ili W aheshimiwa wapate fursa ya kuweza 
kumpokea Gavana wetu kwa sababu kuna ratiba ambayo inasema kuanzia saa 1.30pm  
waheshimiwa wote wawe wamefika eneo la Shanzu ili kumpokea Gavana . Kwa hi o Bi Spika 
naomba Nyumba hii iweze kuunga mkono ili tuweze kupata nafasi ya kufanya mambo 
yanayoweza kusaidia Mombasa na pia kumpokea Gavana na pia tuwe ni wenye kusherekea 
pamoja kutokana na ule ushindi aliotoka nao Malindi.  Bi Spika naomba kuuwek a Mswada 
huo na naomba Mheshimiwa Siminyu aweze kuunga mkono .   
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Yes Hon . Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Madam Speaker I second the Procedural Motion  because we are proud of 
our Governor who has campaign ed in M alindi and c ame back with a win from Malindi.  
Thank you . 
(Question proposed)  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : I now p ropose  a question that this House 
allows the afternoon sitting , today the 9th of March, 2016 to start at 1:00 p.m. 
 (Question  put and agreed ) 
       We can now debate this, Yes Hon . Wangudi . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Bi Spika, kama wanachama wa CORD na W abunge wa 
Mombasa tunahisi kuna haja ya kuungana na Gavana wetu anapotoka katika uchaguzi mdogo 
wa Malindi . Hili linaonekana  wazi kwa kuwa ushindi wa Malindi ni ushindi wa Mombasa 
kwa sababu sisi ni mandugu na kama Gavana wetu anarudi rasmi katika eneo lake la 
Mombasa na ameamua kuingia kwa shangwe , vifijo na nderemo na ni wakati ambao 
hatuwezi kukubali kubaki nyuma ama kuweka sababu yeyote ya kutuzuia kujumuika pamoja .        
Sisi watu wa Mombasa na wote viongozi wa CORD wakiwa watamkaribisha Naibu 
Mwenyekiti wa chama cha ODM na tukijua tuko na Miswada  ya kujadili kat ika Jumba hili 
haina haja ya ku ahirisha Miswada  ila tufanye k ikao kiweze kuanza na mapema ili tuweze 
March 9, 2016                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                    30 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 kwenda kuwa pamoja na Gavan a wetu na kwa sababu hiyo tu ndio ninaomba kuungwa 
mkono na waheshimiwa wenzangu. A hsante.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Hon. Karisa Nzai . 
       Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Bi Spika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi nami naunga huu mswada 
ulioletwa na Mheshimiwa Wangudi kwa dhati kwamba kikao cha mchana kianze mapema 
tuje tujadili yale ambayo yako mbele yetu kisha tuende kule Shanzu . Kama ilivyo desturi 
tuna mila zetu ni kuwa watu waki shaenda kwa vita wakija wana poke lewa kwa furaha na sisi 
watu wa Mombasa tukiwa ni watu wa furaha , sisi tuna raha zaidi na zaidi kwa sababu Gavana 
wetu akiwa kinara wa ODM aliweza kukita kambi Malindi zaidi ya miezi mitatu kuhakikisha 
kwamba mambo yameenda sawa sawa , na baada ya kushinda kwa mshindo mkubwa zaidi ni 
jukumu letu sasa kama Jumba hili kwa heshim a kuweza kwenda kumpokea na kum karibisha 
nyumbani kwa kazi nzuri ambayo ameweza kuifanya na wakaazi wa Mombasa wajue 
kwamba Gavan a alikuwa Malindi kwa ka zi nyengine na imeonekana wazi  kwa yale mazuri 
ambayo ameweza kuyafanya na aka weza kuyaleta kwa uongozi wa chama chetu cha ODM.         
Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika naunga mkono kwa dhati tuweze kuupitisha na tuweze 
kuwakilisha maeneo yale ya Shanzu ili tujumui ke kwa pamoja. A hsante sana Bi Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Hon. Hudson Karume . 
       Hon. Karume:  Ahsante sana Madam Spika . Mimi naunga mkono mswada ulioletwa na 
Mheshimiwa Wangudi . Mheshimiwa Spika ni muhimu tuwe pamoja na mbab e wetu wa 
Pwani Gavana Hassan Ali Joho ameweza kutekeleza jambo amba yo kwamba waliofikiria 
wao ndio mababe wameweza kubwag wa kwa njia ya aibu kabisa . Sisi ndio tunatakikana 
tumpongeze, tus imame imara na yeye wajue kuwa ODM iliwakilishwa na sisi ambao 
hatuk uwa kule tunatakikana tujitokeze tuwe na wao kule Shanzu. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
Spika naunga mkono kabisa mswada tujitokeze na tufanye majukumu tuliopewa  mapema na 
ili pia tuweze kumkaribisha Gavana wetu  kule Shanzu.  
(Applause ) 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon. (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Yes Hon . Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Madam Speaker it is important for us as CO RD leaders to be 
with the other  CORD leaders in welcoming our Governor of Mombasa County. The 
afternoon sitting should start earlier than expecte d because it is very important to be with our 
leaders who have been in Malindi to make sure they arrive safely . Madam Speaker I fully 
support what Hon . Wangudi has brought to this House and I urge all Hon . Members to 
support this.  
(Question proposed)  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula : Now thank you Hon . Members and I now 
put a question that the afternoon sitting to resume early at 1:00 p.m. 
 (Question put and agreed  to) 
       This adjournment is guided by Standing Order 27.  
ADJOURNMENT  
       This House stands adjourned until today at one o'clock.  
The House rose at 9: 56a.m. 