March 8 , 2017                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         30 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 8th March, 2017  
The House met at 9:06a m. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down . Yes Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Yes Hon Moha med Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speake r I wish to give the 
following Notice of M otion;  
(Hon  Mohamed H atimy g ave a Notice of Motion ) 
Mr. Speaker Sir , 
 THAT AWARE THAT  the County g overnment is charged with the responsibility of 
controlling air pollution and other public nuisance under the Fourth Schedule Part 2 (3) of the 
Constitution of Kenya 2010;  
FURTHER AWARE THAT  street families, street children and beggars who mostly 
emanate from the neighboring  Counties have become a nuisanc e to shoppers, tourists and 
locals in commercial and residential areas by begging for food and money;  
NOTING THAT  the street families, street children and beggars are mostly children 
who are between the ages of 10 to 16  are in most instances school drop o uts; 
FURTHER NOTING THAT  Mr. Speaker the presence of these street families, 
street children and beggars within the County contravenes some of the local and international  
laws such Children Act (Kenya) Chapter 141, African Charter on the Rights and Welfare  of 
the Child and UNCHR Convention on the Rights of the Child;  
CONCERNED Mr. Speaker THAT  despite the valiant effort s by the County 
government to addre ss the issue of street families;  street children and beggars within the 
County, the problem continues to persist;  
I therefore Mr. Speaker urge this County Assembly to RESOLVE  that: 
1) All street families, street children and beggars be removed forthwith from the 
streets.  
2) The County g overnment to work in tandem with other stakeholders in jointly 
addressing the  issue.  
3) The County g overnment to coordinate its measures in addressing the issue of street 
families, street children and beggars with the neighboring  Counties.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker sir I beg to move . 
(Hon Mohamed Hatimy moved)  
ADJOURNMENT  
Thank you ver y much Members there being no other business this House stands 
adjourned until 2 :30pm. Thank you.  
The House r ose at 9: 12am.  
 
 
  
 