March 8, 2017                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       31 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 8th March , 201 7 
The House met at 2 :30pm. 
(Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down. Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 Hon. Jimmy Khardati Odari?  
 Hon. Odari: Thank you Hon . Speaker . 
(Hon  Jimmy Odari gave notice of Motion on referral of disciplinary matters to t he County 
Public Service Board For d etermination ) 
 THAT AWARE that, dis ciplinary matters in the County g overnment are dealt with 
at departmental level ; 
 FURTHER AWARE that the hu man resource department in the C ounty executive 
determines disciplinary issues without involving the County Public Service Board ;  
 CONCERNED that the said departmental disciplinary committees may lack 
impartiality when it comes to the determination of employees matters;  
 I urge this Assembly to resolve that ; 
 All disciplinary matters at the County government be referred  to the County Public 
Service Board or the County Assembly Service Board as the case may be for determination in 
accordance with the labour laws.   
(Hon Odari moved)  
 Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Clerk?  
MOTION  
 Hon.  Hatimy?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir,  I beg to table  
the fo llowing M otion;  
(Hon. Hatimy m oved Motion on creation of proper records m anagem ent system within the 
County)  
 THAT AWARE that  the County g overnment has ten d epartments and the Assembly;  
    FURTHE R AWARE that the document being produced and used within the  County 
are government records which must be handled, stored and maintained in accordance with the 
government policies;  
 CONCERNED that the County has not developed guidelines on record keeping, 
guiding, planning, creation, control maintenance and use of records including disposal and 
hence the County continues to manage records without a policy which leads to mishandling, 
loss destruction and lack of confidentiality when handling records;  
 I urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that; 
1. The County Sec retary and the  County Assembly C lerk to each constitute committees 
consisting of Heads of Departments to develop policies to guide record management;  
2. The County Secretary/ Clerk in developing the aforementioned policies to engage 
experts particularly from the National Ar chive s to work with the Committee 
appointed to develop the policies. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Hon Mohamed Hatimy tabled)  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Second er? Hon Hamisi Mwidani.  
(Hon  Mwidani b owed) 
 Members I now proposed the question, it has be en proposed that the County creates  
proper records management system within the County. Yes Hon Hatimy . 
March 8, 2017                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       31 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2   
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika, mada hii nimelet a mbele ya Nyumba 
hii ili N yumba yetu iweze kuwa na nidhamu kuhusiana na mambo ambayo yanahusu 
stakabadhi  za Bunge la Kaunti  pamoja na Kaunti  kwa jumla.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika  utakuta kuwa stakabadhi  zina zunguka kila  pahali, kuwa hakuna 
kuweka kisiri wala hazihifadhiwi  pahali ambapo panatakikana , kwa hivyo naomba N yumba 
hii tuweze kuwa himiza   hawa ma  Clerk na Secretary  kuhakikisha kuwa wamekuja na policy  
ya kuweza kuhakikisha kuwa haya makaratasi ya Kaunti yanahifadhiwa vile yana vyo 
takikana . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika k wa hivyo naomba J umba hili tujaribu tuwe n a mipangilio ya  
kuweza kuwa na stakabadhi  zetu v yenye inatakikana.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Odari…  
 Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon  Speaker.  Hon Speaker I wish to support this M otion 
whole heartedly , the  Motion by Hon Hatimy  on keeping of records is matter of vital 
mandatory bearing in min d that unless you have records you cannot be able to trace the issues 
of matters which have been deliberated in this Hou se. 
 Unless you have records you cannot be able to remember and also to be able to make 
a follow up of matters that have been transacted  in this House , matters that have been 
transacted by this g overnment and so many other things , therefore it is very important for this 
government  to consider and come up with a proper system of maintaining records so that to 
ensure that whatever we do can be kept for the present use and also for posterity . 
 Theref ore Mr. Speaker I support this Motion a hundred per cent . Thank y ou Hon 
Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Amur…  
 Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I stand to supp ort the M otion,  the 
major problem that I have seen personally is the confiden tiality of the information leaving  
almost every minute out of this House and records that are supposed to be of a very high 
confidentiality are exposed . 
 Unless we have  proper re gulations , people be accounted for, for those leakages Mr. 
Speaker and as we talked about policies you cannot hold a person responsible unless duties 
are allocated to each and every person but if such information leaks or a paper document gets 
off somebody ’s hand, we shall know who to name . 
 Mr. Speaker as we are the documents for this County g overnment office Assembly 
you find it with a stranger;  a stranger can show you a copy of a document that is a part of the 
government issue , that is with a stranger . 
 Mr. Speaker unless we bring people to be accountable these documents are the ones 
going out and then we are being ch allenged,  so I think it is the right time people be given 
their duties so that if and any confidentiality issues goes out then we know who i s responsible 
for that particular issue, thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Boma.  
 Hon. Boma:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii mimi pia n aunga 
mkono mia kwa mia  hoja hii ambayo imeletwa na Mbunge  maalu m, Mheshimiwa Mohamed 
Hatimy . 
 Suala la ku weka records  Mheshimiwa hili ni s uala muhimu sana, nikiangalia mambo 
haya pia mimi mwenyewe yalinipata nilienda KRA huko kutafuta compliance certificate  
nikaambiwa kuwa mimi sijatuma returns  ya kutoka 2013 mpaka 20 14 nilirudi hapa mpaka 
kwa HR nikifika hapo wakaniambi a wakati huo mimi sikuwa kwa of isi hii ni balaa kabisa  
lau tungekuwa na records  zetu tusingepata matatizo kama haya.  
 Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono mia kwa mia. Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Hatimy can you to reply the 
Motion.  
March 8, 2017                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       31 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3   
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika kama 
wanachama  walivyosema na kuzungumza  nafikiria ni  kuifanya iwe sawa .  
 Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sina mengi ila ni  kuifanya kama saa hizi 
Mheshimiwa tuko karib u kumaliza muhula wetu na kuna mambo mengi ya clearance 
yanatakikana kufanywa kwa kila kitengo.  
 Kwa hivyo nataka nite ngeneze  kuwa mtu au Mheshimiwa yoyote asipate tabu 
kuambiwa eti kitu f ulani, k wa hivyo itakuw a ni jambo la busara kwa Clerk ajiandae na ofisa 
wake kuhakikisha kuwa kila kitu kiko pahali panapotaki kana Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Hatimy, M embers let 
there being no further debate I am left with no opportunity   but to put the question to the 
Motion.  
 Members as m any as of the opinion that the M otion in title creation of proper records 
management system within the County by Hon  Hatimy is  passed as it is .  
(Question put and a greed  to) 
 Yes Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Thank you very much. Members this H ouse is adjourned till tomorrow afternoon.  
The House rose at 2:58 pm. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 