March 9,  2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              31 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report i s for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 9th March, 2016  
The House  met at 1:14p.m. 
(Temporary  Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
STATEMENT  
(Interruption)  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Hon.  Wangudi what is i t? 
       Hon.  Wangudi:  ...We discuss ed a very important statement of which I beg us to discuss in 
this sitting so that we can have time to discuss the business at hand in the next sitting ; so I beg 
Madam Speaker to allow us to discuss  adjournment of this House  in accordance to the Standing 
order.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Hon. Nzai .  
       Hon.  Nzai : Thank you H on. Speaker I do second the M otion by Hon . Wangudi because it is 
very important for us to discuss. .. 
(Question proposed)  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Thank you Hon . Nzai;  I propose  the question 
that this House  discuss the M otion of adjournment in accordance to S tanding order 28 . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
       Hon. Wangudi: Ahsante Bi Spika , nikizingatia  swala ambalo tuko nalo kwa sasa katika 
Nyumba hili ni swala ambalo linahitaji muda si swala la kuchukulia hivi  hivi; ni mswada wa 
kujadiliwa na ufasaha ndani ya N yumba lakini ndani ya Mombasa tuko na ya kumpokea Gavana  
wetu na wa andamane nae mpaka pale ataka pofika  atakapotoa hotuba . Naomba kikao hi ki 
tuahirishe hadi kesho saa nane ili tupate fursa ya kujumuika na yeye pamoja , naomba kuungwa 
mkono na wenzangu . 
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Hon Muriuki . 
       Hon.  Simi nyu: Thank you M adam Sp eaker . I was the one who was to give this statement , 
it’s a great concern for Mombasa County and  the C oastal region  and due to the fact that each 
Member wanted to contribute and according to the matter I do agree for adjournment  because we 
should be there at S hanzu around 1:30p.m and  now it’s 1:20p.m, so it is better we adjourn so that 
we can join our coll eagues so I fully support the adjournment , thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Hon. Nzai?  
       Hon. Nzai: Ahsante sana Bi Spika. Mimi pia nimesimama kuunga mkono jambo hili ili 
kwamba kwa sababu ya mambo ambayo tuko nayo tunataka kuchangia lakini kiranja  wa CORD 
alisimama  Malindi na akashinda , na kama wana  CORD tuweze kufurahia pamoja kusherehekea 
March 9,  2016                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              31 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report i s for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 pamoja , hivyo basi kama viongozi  tunatakiwa kuwa mstari wa mbele . Ningeomba kuwa mwaka 
huu tuna angalia maslahi ya kuwa pamoja kwa hivyo tunashukuru kwa sababu wako pamoja nasi 
na ukaturuhusu kama tulivyosema Bi Spika  nasi tutafurahi.  Ahsante.  
(Question proposed)  
       Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Very well Members  having listened to the 
discussions I now would li ke to put a question that this House  adjourn s until tomorrow at 2.30 
pm. 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       This House  stands adjourned until tomo rrow the 10th of March  2016  at 2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 1: 22p.m. 