April 1 1, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           32 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 11th April, 2019  
The House met at 2:37p.m. 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have you r seats . Serjeant ring the quorum 
bell. 
 
(Quorum bell rung ) 
 Yes Clerk confirm if there  is quorum?  
(Clerk confirmed quor um) 
 Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT S 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY VICE  CHA IRPERSON COMMITTEE O N EDUCATION , 
INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY AND MV  20135  HON. ALI SHARIFF ON UPDATE ON THE 
ISSUANCE OF THE BURS ARY IN THE COUNTY  
 Yes Chairman Committee on Education, Information, Te chnology and MV 2035 or 
any other Member from that Committee? Yes Hon. Ali Shariff I understand you are the Vice 
Chair.  Yes Hon. Ali Shariff proceed.  
              Hon. Ali Sharif:  Mr. Chair the concerned Clerk is still printin g the report and am 
looking forward for it to be br ought to the House in the next five minutes.  
             The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Bwire?  
              Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think the Chairman promised yesterday that 
he will be having the report today and it  is my belie f this House w ill not adjourn until we get 
that report as we have been promised by the Chair. Thank you.  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you . Yes Hon. Ali  are you ready with 
your report?  

April 1 1, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           32 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2             Hon. Ali Sharif:  Yes Mr. Chair ; I said fi ve minutes  I did not say tomorrow , I said 
five minutes and it  is ready and it is with me here.  
            Mr. Speake r I wish to give the following Statement response to the statement 
requested by Hon. Raphael Bwire on update on the issuance of the bursa ry in the County on 
Tuesday 9th April, 2019.  
            Mr. Speaker Sir, 2019 Eli mu fund form two to form four bursary update, the County 
form two to form four exercise began on Monday April 9th , 2019 in seven  locations below 
across Mombas a County and the locations are right there in different Sub-Counties which is 
Changamwe which was done in Chaani Social Hall, Jomvu in Mikindani Social hall, Kisauni 
two places Kisauni Water & Mwakirunge Chiefs office , Likoni it was done at Likoni Social 
Hall, Mvita at Tononoka Social Hall and Nyal i at K ongowea Market.  
            Mr. Speaker Sir so far 4900 potential beneficiary were sent a text message on Sunday 
April 8th to collect the application forms, this was based on data they had submitted up to 
April 2019.  
            Below is the update as per April 10th 2019:  
            In Changamwe forms allocated it was 980 by Monday 568, Tuesday 228, number of 
forms distributed was 796, balance 184, distributed percent was 8.22 . In Jomvu distribut ion 
percentage  was 64.46 , In Kisauni distributed percentage was 85.51 , in Likoni the distr ibuted 
percentage was 69.89 , Mvita 70.82  per cent , and Nyali 75.53  per cent .  
            The total distributed percentage was 76.41  per cent ; bursary p rocess and cheque 
disbursement  it was agreed the beneficiar ies will receive the cheques at the Ward level f rom 
the office of the Member of th e County Assembly according to the Elimu Fund payment 
procedure.  
            The logistical cost which include s; contacting beneficiaries’ desk, training Clerks, 
Check register s and security will be done by the MCA. The applications forms are supposed 
to be filled and retur ned by Friday April 12th, after that the Department will enter all the 
forms in the database to find duplicate s, after that all the forms will be vetted by the six 
Counties financial Head Committees . The data of the appr oved forms will be sent to the 
Board of Trustees of the Elimu Fund to decide the award amount per beneficiary, issue 
instruction to the bank for cheque printing, the cheque print ing in Nairobi will take about 
seven  working days and upon receipt of cheques they  will be so rted and distributed to the 30 
MCA’s Offices. The cheques will be disb ursed to beneficiaries in that Ward and all the 
beneficiaries will b e notified via short messages ( SMS ), the Department intend s to disburse 
the cheques before or during the first week of May , 2019.  Thank you very muc h. 
 
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Ali Shariff, the Vice 
Chairperson Committee on Education. Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY VICE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON TRANSPO RT, 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS HON . MWAKA BAKARI ON POOR STATE  OF THE ROAD 
FROM MATERNITY TO BI G MAMA IN CHAANI WAR D 
 Committee on Transport, Infrastru cture and Public Works, yes Hon. Mwaka, the Vice 
Chair?  
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, poor state of the road from 
Maternity to Big Mama in Chaani Ward. The road is included i n the financial year 2018/2019 
Annual Development Plan for routine  maintenance ; letters of award have been issued and 
works will begin in two weeks time. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwaka. Yes Clerk?  
April 1 1, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           32 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY VICE CHAIRPERSON  COMMITTEE ON TRAN SPORT , 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS HON . MWAKA BAKARI ON POOR STATE  OF THE ROAD 
FROM HOLY CROSS CATH OLIC TO MATERNITY IN  KIPEVU WARD  
 Committee on Transport, yes Hon. Mwaka? Use your mic rophone.  
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, poor state of the road from Holy 
Cross C atholic to Maternity in  Kipevu Ward. The road is included i n the financial year 
2018/2019 Annual Development Plan for routine maintenance , letters of award have been 
issued and works will begin in two weeks time. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Vice Chair Transport. Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ENVIRONMENT , WASTE 
MANAGEMENT AND ENERG Y HON . SHEBE ATHMAN ON ILLEGAL DU MPING SITE AT KAA CH ONJO , 
TUDOR  
 Yes Chairperson Committee on Environment, Waste Management and Energy? 
Illegal dum ping site at Kaa Chonjo, Tudor Ward. 
 Hon. Shebe Ath man : Thank you Hon. Speaker but I think Hon. Speaker the 
Statement which is being brought in  front of me right now I answered it last week Hon. 
Speaker I do  not know what is  happening because I brought a Statement response last week I 
remember very well concerning Kaa Chonjo , Tudor . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Then just respond again maybe the Hon. 
Member asked it again . 
 Hon. Shebe Ath man : Thank you Hon. Speaker . I wou ld wish to inform again th e 
Honourable  House tha t the situation at Kaa Chonjo i s being worked upon and we  have agreed 
together with the Me mber of the County Assembly (MCA) of Tudor Ward that the 
Department is going to hire casual staff to take care of that dumping site and this is because 
the area cannot be accessed by the bulldozer . I think we have already agreed wi th the Hon. 
Member that the matter will be sorted out soon. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Tobias Samba, the 
incoming Chair ...? 
 Hon. Samba: Youth, Gender, Sports and Culture. Thank you Mr. Speaker  
(Applause)  
 In fact I want to congratulate my Chairman for Environment he did a noble job, he 
took initiative and went to the Department himself accompanied by the Members and the 
agreement is that we are supposed to look for some reinforcement which was supposed  to be 
sponsored by the County government but so far nothing has been done but I took initiative 
yesterday we did some first aid but I request him to do a follow up so that we may clear the 
dumping site and close it once and for all , but I appreciat e his efforts and thank you so much 
for giving me my time. .. 
(Applause)  
 
 
April 1 1, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           32 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Clerk ? 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON WATER , SANITATION AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES ON  THE TENDER FOR CONST RUCTION OF WATER PIP ELINE IN FRÈRE TOWN  
WARD  
 Yes, Committee on Water, Sanit ation and Natural Resources, respond on the tender 
for Construction of Water Pipeline by Hon. Kitula in Freetown Ward.  
 Hon. Hamad Mgwisho : Thank you Mr Speaker . I wish to make the following 
Statement regarding the above mentioned project, that the project was designed for a total of 
2.6km, I think everybody has a copy of this report, okay let me read for you . 
a. The project was designed for a total of 2.6km pipeline to serve over 1000 people , 
b. The project was planned to be implemented fully for 2.6km pipeline wit hin the 
financial year (2018/2019), however due to the budget cut from Kshs  356.65 Million  
to 167.05 Million , the project was revi sed to be implemented in phases , 
c. Phase 1 will comprise of implementation of 1.0km pipeline and this phase is 
earmarked to start this financia l year upon availability of funds , 
d. The phase two of the project will be done in the next financial year which will 
compr ise implementation of 1.6km of pipeline , 
e. The project was advertised, evaluated and the Contractor for the project was identified  
 Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Kitula, are you okay 
with the response?  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nimeridhika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes  Clerk?  
STATUS OF THE DRAINAGE SYST EMS IN MKOMANI WARD  
 Hon. Kizito Opeya?  
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr Speaker . Mr Speaker Sir I stand pursuant to Standing 
Order 41(2) (c) seeking to know from the Chairperson Committ ee on Transport , 
Infrastructure and Public Works if he is aware of status of the drainage system s in Mkomani 
Ward specifically in the following areas;  
  1.Daytona  
  2.Mnazi moja  
  3.Shauri yako  
  4.Maweni  
  5. Kitaruni  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, the re are several tour s in the following areas  accompanied by the 
County Secretary Mr. Francis Thoya and Engineer Keno  from the Department o f Transport 
Infrastructure and Public Works. 
April 1 1, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           32 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  There are  promises from them that a permanent solution will be found once and for 
all, no work has  been done in th ese areas and this has led to complain ts from the residen ts. 
Mr. Speaker Sir I further wish to know from the C hairperson, whether the County 
government have any plans to remedy this problem in Mkomani . Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 The Deputy Spe aker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Chairperson on  Committee on Transport or 
the Vice Chair?  
 Hon Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kulingana na swali hili ambalo 
limeulizwa na Mheshimiwa Opeya kutoka Wodi ya Mkomani , naomba Nyumba hii iweze 
kutupatia muda wa k uweza kukaa na Engineer  pamoja na M wenyekiti na wanachama wote 
wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi  kushughulikia swala hii. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE C OUNTY ASSEMBLY FOR S HORT RECESS  
 Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker pursuant to 
Standing Order 25(3) and (4) of the County Assembly this House RESOLVES  to adjourn  for 
short r ecess on Thursday, 11th April, 2019 and resume  its sitting s on Tuesday 23rd April, 
2019 . Mr Speaker may I ask Hon . Tobias Samba , the Chair for Youth  to second the Motion . 
Thank you.  
 Hon. Samba:  I second Hon. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula he has not yet been confir med 
that he is the Chair of Youth , he is still the Vice Chair…  
(Loud consultation)  
 Okay, is the incoming Chair. Thank you.  
 I now propose a question that the Motion on adjournment of the County Assembly for 
short recess be debated in this House . 
 (Question proposed)  
 Okay Hon. Members , the Motion is on the floor of the House. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa S pika ni 
dhahiri shahiri kwamba Bunge letu tumekuwa katika vikao vinavyostahili kuweza kuhudumia 
wananchi wetu ; vile vile wiki mbili zilizopita kulikuwa na hoja muhimu baina ya sisi na 
executive  na tukaku a na maelewano d hahiri kuweza kuhudumia wananchi wetu Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  
 Sasa ni wakati umefika kuweza kuwa na mapumziko baina yetu ambao ni Wabunge  
kwenda kukutana na wananchi wetu kuchukua mapendekezo yao ili kuleta katika msimu wa 
kuanzia tarehe 23 ili kuweza kuya leta matakwa yao katika Bunge hili na vile  vile tunafahamu 
kuwa kuna Bills katika Kamati ya investment , Kamati ya Vijana  na vile Kamati ya Mazingira , 
kuna Bills ambazo zinazotengezwa kwa hivyo ni wakati wao kuweza kwenda kukaa na idara 
husika wapatiwe mapum ziko kila Mwanachama  aweze kwenda mapumziko ili anaporudi 
tuweze kuanza kazi salama bila kuwa na vikwazo vyovyote vya executive .  
April 1 1, 2019                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           32 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6  Kwa hivyo nasema ahsant e sana na vile vile ningependa Waheshimiwa waweze 
kuunga hoja ya leo tuanze mapumziko kwa muda ambao nimewe za kuusema ili tutakaporudi 
mahala hapa tuweze kuwa na wakati mwafaka uliosalia. Ahsante . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Any other Member? Yes Hon. Athuman 
Shebe?  
 Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , nasimama hapa bila 
shaka k uunga mkono Hoja ilioletwa mbele yetu hapa na Mheshimiwa mwenza. Nafi kiri 
imefika wakati mwafaka wa Waheshimiwa wenza kuweza kuchukua mapumziko na kuweza 
kutathmini hali halisi za kisheria, ki  Bunge na vile  vile pia kule mashinani  tumekuwa 
hatuonekani Mhesh imiwa Mwenyekiti kwa kipindi takriban cha majuma manne hivi 
mashinani na hizi mbio zote tunashukuru kuwa tulikuwa tunawaendea wananchi wetu na 
tunajukumika kisheria.  
 Kwa  hivyo nawaomba tu Waheshimiwa wenza tuweze kuchukua nafasi hii kwa haya 
mapumziko maf upi tuweze kutathmini na vile  vile pia kujiangalia katika utenda  kazi wetu 
ndiposa tukirudi tuhakikishe kuwa kasi hii tulioanza nayo tuhakikishe pia mpaka tamati 
tutaweza kumaliza na  kasi hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  yote iwe ni kwa manufaa ya 
wananchi wetu wa  Mombasa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
 
(Applause ) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Mheshimiwa 
Mwen yekiti naomba pia kuwakumbusha Waheshimiwa wenzangu katika kipindi hik i cha 
mapumziko sio tu kupumzika bali tuhusishe jamii zetu waweze kuhusika pakubwa katika 
swala zima la mapendekezo ya bajeti ya mwaka 2019/2020 na 2020/2021 ambayo Serikali 
Gatuzi ya Mombasa imeshatangaza na zoezi hili litaanzia tarehe 23.  
 Waheshimiwa m anufaa katika sehemu zetu itategemea uwajibikaji na mapendekezo 
ya wananchi wetu kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa tunajua mfumo mzima wa public participation  
kidogo uko na walakini kwa hivyo tuchuk ue fursa hii kuhamasisha wananchi wetu waweze 
kujitokeza kwa wingi na ku yapendekeza na kuyapea kipao mbele yale ambayo tunayatarajia 
yaweze kutendeka japo tunajua kutakuwa na madukuduku na maswala nyeti kwa sababu 
baadhi ya yale tulioyapendekeza kwa bajeti inayokamilika hayajatekelezwa lakini haidhuru  
tuna imani ya kwamba yata tekelezwa na wakati huo huo kuweza kujitokeza na 
kuyapendekeza yale tunayohitaji katika maendeleo yetu kwa awamu ya mwaka wa kifedha 
unaokuja ili tuweze kuhesabika katika bajeti hii na wananchi wetu waweze kunufaika. 
Shukran Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
(Applaus e) 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members having been passed the Procedural Motion of adjournment the House 
stands adjourn ed until Tuesday 23 of April, 2019 at 2 :30p.m. 
The House rose at 3:05p .m. 