March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 9th March, 2017  
The House met at 2:37pm.  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down. Yes, Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon. Fadhili Makaran i… 
(Silence ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Saad…  
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker thank you for this opportunity. Mr. Speaker am not eve n 
aware of what the Honourable M ember was about to present as a statement or a request for a 
statement. I theref ore request for the M ember to first express himself and what he desires for 
the report so that I c an understand properly and the M embers can be informed.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ok, I thought you wanted to make a 
statement on his behalf that’ s what I thought…  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Faraj: Am actually the one who is supposed to respond to the statement being 
the Chair for Physical Planning, Lands and Housing , I cannot present the statement.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Amir Thoya … 
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa 
Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ameweza kufanya mawasiliano kwamba ameshikika na akaomba 
niweze kumsemea taarifa  yake kwa ruhusa yake . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ok, you can go a head…  
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker Sir I present;  
Statement on Grabbing Of the Public Land in Mombasa County  
 Mr. Speaker Sir I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee of Physical 
Planning, Lands and Housing whether he is aware of the alleged grabbing of p ublic open 
space plot adjacent to Plot No.MN/1378 in Port Reitz Ward and the specific  measures the 
aforesaid County g overnment is taking to reinstate the land back to public use.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Thoya and Hon Saad as a 
Committee Chair can you respond to that please…  
Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity once again. Mr. Speaker this 
is a new development ; the Committee does not know and it is important that we conduct a 
meeting if you allow us tomorrow so that we can have more information on this particular 
matter and we will be very glad if we ar e going to have the Honourable M ember representing 
Port Reitz  to be amongst those Committee M embers so that he can furnish us with more  
information that is needed so that when we embark on dealing with this matter with the 
department in charge we be able to understand fully on how we are going to address this 
issue, thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ok, Hon Saad I think one  week is enough, 
yes within a week…  
Hon. Faraj:  Thank you . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Clerk . 
(Interruption ) 
Yes, Hon Hatimy what is it?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika niko na taarifa … 
March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Wait, if y ou can wait for your turn its ok, 
wait for your turn. Clerk…  
STATEMENT  
Yes, Hon Amur what is it?  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker there is a statement from my brother Omar Meti  who is on his 
way, he wan ted me to read it on his behalf, so if you allow me .  
Hon. Amur : Allow me.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay . 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker my learned friend Hon Omar Ebrahim (Meti) had a statement  
request  from the  Committee on Environment and Natural Resources.  
Poor drainage system and inadequate g arbage collecti on equipment at K ongowe a 
Market  
 Whether the C hairperson is aware of the condition on poor drainage system and lack of 
adequate garbage collection equipment at Kongowea Market and what measures the 
Department is taking to r emedy the situations . 
Mr. Speaker , there is garbage lying in the market and he wish to know if he is aware.  
Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Saad.  
Hon. Faraj : I think it’s becoming a trend that we are setting on this Honorable House 
that statements are sponsored b y different people and they are brought into this Honorable 
House by different Hon. Members and it is not good in terms ... 
If you l ook at the performance of this H ouse if every day we are going to have other 
Members representing others I do not think we are giving good picture to the M embers of the 
public and I feel it’s important t hat whoever has a Statement or M otion must come himself 
persona lly to present that particular Motion or S tatement because he is going vast with what 
infor mation is needed to carr y that M otion or statement.  Thank y ou. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amir Thoya?  
Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nashangazwa na 
ndugu yangu ambaye aliyezungumza sasa kwa sababu haiwezeka ni ya kwamba umeweza 
kutay arisha Mswa da alafu uwe hautaweza kusoma isipokuwa mara nyingi ikitendeka vile 
huwa ni dharura ya kibinadamu ambayo imempata y ule Mheshimiwa akaweza kukosa kufika . 
Kwa hiyo masaa ina hitajika , hata hivyo kisheria hakuna Mheshimiwa Spika, hata 
huyo Mheshimiwa  Saad Faraj si mara moja si mbili tumeweza kumsomea misw ada yake 
akiwa hayuko.  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Madundo what is it?  
Hon. Mohamed  Madundo: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika mimi yangu pia ni  
kuzungumzia swal a la Mheshimiwa Saad ingekuwa vyema ikiwa kwenye Wanachama  ikiwa 
labda yeye hakufika na Kamati  iko hapo basi Mwanachama  mmoja anaweza ku wakilisha  
hiyo taarifa  ama notisi ya Mswada .  Ahsante . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Wangudi?  
Hon Wangudi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi 
ningependa kuzungumzia swala hilo ambalo nahisi ya kwamba  Mhesh imiwa Saad anajaribu 
kupotosha N yumba hii.   
Mheshimiwa Spika siku zote na mara nyingi amb apo mswa da, mjadala ama hoja 
yeyote u mebuniwa n a Mheshimiwa yeyote k isha ikawasilish a katika ratba ya B unge hili ni 
biashara ya Nyumba hii na wala tena si ya y ule aliyebuni kutokana na Standing order  mtu 
yeyote anaweza kupewa ma mlaka awe ni mwenye kubuni ama Kamati ya kuwasilisha 
mswa da huu na hivyo nd ivyo tunavyojua wala tusije tukapotoshwa.  Ahsante  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon of  Tudor?  
March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3 Hon Siminyu : Thank you Mr. Speaker, House Business has to be tr ansacted whether 
the Honorable M ember who brought it is around or not . Mr. Speaker as y ou know us as 
Members we have a duty to serve the public sometimes someone can be held and yet he had 
brough t a matter into the House Business C ommittee and it is not wrong for a M ember  to 
stand on behalf of another M ember an d there is no law that stops a Member from standing for 
another M ember . 
Hon. Saad Faraj wants to introduce something that is not procedural and each an d 
everything is in the Standing Order which directs how the House run its business ; Mr. 
Speaker he must respect the Standing O rder and i f an issue is not in the Standing Order it 
should not be entertained in this House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Saad, what is it?  
Hon. Faraj : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker my argument is that we are setting 
a very  bad precedence in this House;  personal statements must be read by the individual 
himself who ..., personal statements and most of these  statements are personal statements . 
These  statements have not been sponsored by any C ommittee and therefore Mr. 
Speaker it is up on that particular individual to come up clearly and support his or her 
statement because he himself personally is aware of what he wants in this pa rticular statement 
so personal s tatements should be read by the people who brought them. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Now I think this is generating into a 
debate, I think the Clerk 's will ..., no it 's generating into a debate and this is not a debate so 
Honorable  just have a s eat; if its concerning the same issue the Clerk 's will adv ise us in the 
future, just have a s eat. Yes Clerk can you continue with the business. .. 
STATEMENT  
(Loud c onsultations )  
(Laughter ) 
Hon Fadhili Makarani? Yes Hon Amir Thoya what is it?  
Hon Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa S pika nataka tena 
kushukuru N yumba hii na kwa ruhsa yako kwa sababu Mheshimiwa alikuwa ameniomba 
nimsomee taarifa yake ya kwanza na naomba nimsomee na  hii ya pili . 
(Laughter ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You can continue.  
Hon. Thoya: Thank you Mr. Speaker on behal f of Hon. Fadhili Makarani I would 
like to give t he following statement in this H onorable House.  
County government to take data of youth that collect garbage and give incentives  
 That the C ounty government to take data of youth that collect garbage and giv e 
incentives , 
 Mr. Speak er Sir I seek to know from the C hairper son on E nvironment whether the 
County government has records of youth groups t hat collect garbage within the County and i f 
its giving incentives on the same.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Committee on Environment C hairlady ? 
(Silence ) 
Deputy Assistant C hair, Member? Do you have an answer to that? Any Hon Member 
from the Committee? Yes Honorable ?  
Hon.( Mrs) Prischilla h Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I think I wil l have to 
consult with the Chair because this is a statement that was brought today in the House I will 
give the information to my Chair and c ommunicate to the House on this . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Two weeks I think is  enough not more 
than t wo weeks . Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4 Hon Mohamed Hatimy .  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa S pika nasimama ndani ya N yumba hii 
kuzungumzia mambo ya uhaba wa maji , Mheshimiwa Spika nimefanya u tafiti kutaka kujua 
ni shida gani linalofanya Mombasa kuwa na shida ya maji n a kila unapokwenda unasikia maji 
kila mahali.  
Mheshimiwa S pika na kama tunavyojua kuna kampuni ya maji inayosimamia mambo 
ya maji na ile kampuni ndio inayofanya biashara ya maji, nimegutuka sana kuona ripoti 
ambayo  ukiniruhusu niwasomee Wanachama wapate ku jua jambo y a maji mambo 
yanavyoendelea . 
Mwanzo kwenye ripoti hii inasema utility  ambapo Mombasa ni moja ya Kaunti 
kubwa zen ye kutumia  maji na hii ripoti M heshimiwa S pika imeonyesha  sisi tuko na mbari 
nane wameangalia asilimia ya maji ya kunywa quality  inaonekana sisi tuko chini tuko 
nambari nane  tumepewa asilimia 68 . 
Kwa upande wa kunywa maji asilimia  ambapo wenzetu wengine wote wako juu ya 
asilimia  95 kwenda juu, kwa hivyo M heshimiwa  Spika hii hapa inaonyesha hatari kuonyesha 
kuwa yale madawa ambayo yanan unuliwa kwa yale maji sijui yaenda wapi , ndipo hapo ile 
quality  ikapatiwa  asilimia  68 wenzetu wako kwenye 96,  97, 98 halafu tukiangalia  jambo la 
pili kwenye non –revenue water  Mombasa tumepatiwa asilimia 54 yaonyesha tunakusanya 
asilimia  46 pekee,  hizi zin gine sijui zaenda wapi ama maji haya sijui yaenda wapi . 
Mheshimiwa S pika tukiangalia katika usambazaji wa maji  wenzetu K aunti zingine 
ziko asilimia 90 na zaidi  sisi twa sambaza asilimia  54 pekee;  jambo la kusikitisha  masaa ya 
kusambaza maji  ambao sisi Momba sa maji yanapatikana wanapata masaa matano pekee yak e 
ambapo ukiangalia K aunti zingine ziko na masaa 2 4, ukiangalia K aunti kama ya Kisumu  ina 
masaa 24 wengine si chini ya masaa 18 sisi tuna  sambaza masaa matano.  
Mheshi miwa Spika ni jambo la kusikitisha sana  unadhani Mombasa kuwa ndio  yenye 
kampuni kubwa yenye kus ambaza  maji lakini inaon ekana kwa zaidi ya miaka mitano  badala 
ya kufanya kazi inakuwa kila mwaka inafanya hasara . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba N yumba hii ama kupitia kiti chako ni lazima 
kufan ywe upelel ezi wa kisawasawa kwa nini Kaunti ya Mombasa huduma ya usambazaji wa 
maji um ezorota namna hii sisi tumechaguliwa tukasema kuwa sisi tutawapa watu maji leo 
shida ya maji ni hii iliyoko . 
Mheshimiwa S pika hata  hujui useme nini ukiona itakusikitisha sana kuona sisi tuko 
nambari nane chini  ya nane twashindw a na kina Wajir, Tharaka Nithi na Meru ; ni jambo la 
kusikitisha sana .  
Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika hii kampuni iangaliwe vizuri, ukiangalia sisi twahitaji 
yale mahitaji ambayo twahitaji maji kuja Momb asa, hata robo kwenye tangi yao hamna  kwa 
hivyo naomba Nyumba hii iangalie twataka kujua Mombasa total registered connection  
zilizoko ndani ya Mombasa hii, twataka kujua total metres connection s Mombasa hii, maji 
yetu disconnection s kwa mwezi  zinafanywa ni ni, operational metres  zinafanya nini na ni 
ngapi ziko? Kwa sababu Mheshimiw a Spika jambo hili haliwezekani; k una water kiosk , kuna 
cartel s ya watu pengine  sisi tumekaa hapa lakini hatujui ni mambo gani ya naendelea.  
Hata siku moja hatuja pata kuona ripoti ya kutoka kwa idara ya maji  kusema kuwa ina 
perform  namna gani, ile kampuni ni kampuni ya Kaunti twataka kujua kunaendelea nini 
Mheshimiwa Spika. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you M embers . This is a statement ; 
is a pe rsonal statement and I have to give a ruling on this statement. Members the issu e of 
water  has come many times, j ust have your seats, the issue of shortage of water has come 
several times in this House and no satisfactory answer has been given, up to now no 
satisfactory answer has been given . 
March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 So i order this matter to be taken to an investigative committee of PAC, so Chairman 
of PAC take this matter and investigate and bring it here before, for two weeks you bring the 
report back, a statement will not be d ebated , this is a statement and it will not be debated. A 
statement will not be debated no double standard s, no double standard s. Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Yes Zainab Ali . 
Hon. (Mrs) Zainab  Said Ali: Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kunipa nafasi hii ya kutoa 
taarifa  yangu. Taarifa  hii naitoa moja kwa moja kwa  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni , 
Mwenyekiti wa Bodi ya Bunge la Kaunti .  
Hii taarifa nimeileta kuhusu sij ui kama yuajua kuwa hizi sehemu za kuegesha magari  
zilijengwa hapa nje za waheshimiwa na wafanyi  kazi ambao n i staff wa hapa Kaunti  lakini 
sehemu zile  ziliwekwa mpaka vibao, pesa zilitumika vibao vikatengezwa vya alama za 
kuonyesha sehemu zile za kuegesha magari , lakini sehemu  zile ukija huwezi kupata.  
Sehemu za kuegesha magari  zinachukuliwa na watu wa nje, wana egesha ma gari 
wanafanya kazi ofisi nyengine lakini wamepata sehemu za kuegesha  wana egesha  kuanzia 
asubuhi mpaka jioni utakuta gari liko pale na akimaliza kazi zake anakuja kuchukua gari lake 
na hiyo ni kwa sababu wa nakimbia kulipia sehemu za kuegesha magar i yao waki egesha  kule 
wanalipa hapa wana egesha  bure.  
Sasa nilikuwa nataka kujua kama Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  anaielewa ama 
ajua kama haya mambo yanafanyika, nilikuwa nataka majibu , ahsante.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Majority Leader . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Hon Member for that assignment 
but I think now we are going to put somebody to charge the owners of the cars who are 
parking in our parking. Thank you.  
(Laughter ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Honorable  what is it?  
Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker that answer is not satisfactory, it was a complain t that 
was brought by the Honorable Member, the matter need s to be investigated so that we can  
have a solution because even  M embers that  park can be charged...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes you can continue Hon Siminyu, you 
will be given time he is in the floor . 
Hon. Siminyu : We have security officer s that can be assigned, we can have a very 
good solution, we don’t need a quick answer, b ut investigation whether the matter is 
happening, who is doing it, we don't need the Honorable to give a quick answer for that very 
important question that has been brought up. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes I agree with you, I totall y agree with 
you Hon Mwidani you need to investigate the matter, maybe there is a cartel or so ever, may 
be there  is someone who is collecting parking fees there and you don't know . 
So if you can  investigate the matter and bring it back you never know may be there is 
a cartel  selling those spaces just bring it back in a week's time. Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon Ibrahim Kondo, I think he is not around.  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker am not here on behalf of Hon Kondo but my concern is that 
I’m the person who brought th is statement in this Assembly, several times I had been waiting 
for that reply last week it was deferred to this week but it seems there is no reply coming, and 
am so shocked that the department that is giving the mandate of investigating the issu e which 
is a very serious issue as  people are being conned money and the cartel are still moving from 
one place to another Place . 
March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6 Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that this Assembly doesn’t  take this issue serious ly, 
with the seriousness it need s; I need to be given a final answer because these cartel s are 
shifting from one road to  another road unless people cannot touch them, or what a M embe r or 
the Chairman himself is a M ember of the cartel crew. Why he jump these  issues Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : And the vendors are still there?  
Hon. Amur : They skip from one road to another ; when you bring statement s from 
this road tomo rrow they shift to another road, s o it is an issue that goes on from one road to 
another road . Mr. Speaker, i t is a serious issue but it seems people; may be am not sure 
maybe people have b een receiving from this cartels . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay, the C hair is not in…  
(Interruption ) 
 Yes Honorable  what is it Hon Amir Thoya.  
Hon. Thoya : Ahs ante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika J umba hili ni Jumba la 
sheria na ninahisi ni makosa kwa msemaji kusema kwamba Mwenyekiti wa Kamati hiyo ni 
miongoni mwa wale ambao wanahusika kukusanya pesa kwa njia ya ufisadi.  
Kwa hivyo sioni kama ni bora kumtuhum u Mwenyekiti wakati hayupo pengine 
angekuwepo ingekuwa ni bora utoe hayo matamshi ambayo mheshimiwa amesema. Ahsante.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Patrick.  
Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker, this matter has been brought in this House many times 
and may be you can form an Ad  hoc Committee to investigate that matter . 
I have visited sever al cities even in Nairobi and if these  people are being licensed th en 
this matter can have Ad  hoc C ommittee or something so that it can look at this matter 
because it ’s a still an accusation. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Again I agree with  you, I will form Ad  
hoc committee since the committee on Tra de has no answer to this matter, s o I will form Ad  
hoc committee, I will name it later on to investiga te the same. Yes Hon Saad Faraj.  
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker thank you f or this opportunity once again. Mr. Speaker this 
issue directly concern s the C ommittee of Energy,  Trade and investments  in the event that 
there is no committee then an Ad  hoc committee is formed…  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No, I have the powers to form Ad  hoc 
committee. This matter has been  coming and coming and coming. I gave the committee to 
PIC a matter concerning water just a while ago , it is because they could  not get a sati sfactory 
answers from the same c ommittee, from the Committee concerned but now I will make an Ad  
hoc Committee to investigate the matter. Is that okay Saad Faraj?  
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker.   
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You should have complained from the 
previous one Honorable . 
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker the opportunity  was not given to us, if it was, then I 
wouldn’t have complained as well but am a M ember of this particular committee and am  
requesting your office as the C hair to give us a chance…  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Last week I called the Chair in my office 
and he did not come and nobody came. I remember I ordered the Chair to see me, to see the 
Chair of Liaison regarding this matter so we will make an Ad  hoc committee to investigate 
this matter, Yes Hon Siminyu what is it?  
Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker you have already given your ruling and Members should 
respect the C hair when the Speaker has given direction, the direction should be respected.  
March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7 (Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk.  
MOTION  
Hon Hatimy.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I seek leave 
and permission from this House to move th is Motion next week. If you may allow me, 
am  not ready to table i t today.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes it’s okay till next week. Yes Clerk, 
Yes Madam Maimuna w hat is it? Hon Maimuna Mwamassa.  
Hon. (Mrs) Maimuna  Mwamassa:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, nasimama mbele ya 
Nyumba hii kutoa taarifa  kuhusu Naibu wa Ga vana wetu Bi Hazel Katana.  
Bi Hazel Katana kuna shutma ambayo anaendelea nayo ya kutumia ofisi yake kama 
nyumba ya kuabudu ambapo kama tun avyofahamu hiyo ni kinyume cha s heria na hata  gazeti  
la Kenya  The Star  pia imetoa habari hizo sasa hatujui ni sheria gani ambayo anayoitunia 
kiongozi huyo ama mama huyo kutumia ofisi za serikali ama ofisi ya umma kugeuza kuwa ni 
nyumba ya kuabudu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Kwa hivyo mimi nasimama hapa kupinga vikali na kulaani vikali mamlaka yake vile 
anavyoendesha na anavyoyape leka; wananchi wanaona na umma wanaona kwa jumla , kwa 
hivyo mama yule aache kutumia kama ofisi ile kama nyumba ya kuabudu, nyumba za 
kuabudu zinajulikaniwa mahali zilipo na kila mtu ana uhuru wa kuabudu lakini kwa mahali 
panapostahili.  
Kwa hayo Mheshimiwa  Spika ahsante na napinga vikali.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you, Clerk.  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
Leader of M ajority.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giv ing me this 
chance to table my M otion;  
(Leader of Majority ( Hon Mwidani ) moved Procedural Motion on a doption of the County 
Assembly Calendar 2017 ) 
 Pursuant to S tanding orders 24 and 25, this Assembly  resolves that the following 
County Assembly Calendar for 2017 be adopted:  
 Mr. Speaker S ir, the period is the 5th session first part,  
 A: Sitting days, Tuesday 17th January to 6th Thursday April 2017 which will be 11 
weeks, and then we come on B. long recess which it will be resumed on Friday 7th April to 
Monday 24th April 2017.  
 Mr. Speaker we shall move to F ifth sessi on, second part which is;  
  C: Sitting days, Tuesday 25th April to Thursday 15th of June 2017 which it will come 
to 7 weeks in D Mr. Speaker Sine die Recess Period which will start from Friday 16th June to 
7th August, 2017 , 7 weeks that will be the Sine die recess period e nd of term First Assembly, 
7th August, 2017 at Midnight.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You are moving a M otion? This is a 
Motion you have to move and the seconder is needed.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwi dani): Thank you Mr. Speaker I call upon Hon 
Murfad to second .  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Amur .  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I need to second but the House is not in favor  with this we 
need more consultation ... 
(Applause ) 
March 9, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       32 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Ms wabah Rashid) : Members just a minute , Members Hon 
Mwidani can you withdraw the Motion if you think ..., just Members Order ! Hon Mwidani if 
you think your Motion will be defeated you can as well withdraw the Motion. Yes Hon 
Hatimy what is it?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Standing Order 50 is very clear a Motion 
without a seconder there's nothing Mr. Speaker ….. 
(Laughter ) 
 …..It dies a natural death so this Motion has die d sorry my leader but a Motion 
without a seconder we can withdraw under Standing Orde r 50... 
(Laughter ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Honorable you are still o n the floor .  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  So I think Mr. Speaker this has die d a natural death ... 
(Laughter ) 
 We come back with a new Motion because nobody was invited and we ar e suppose d 
to sit together and agree so there's no agreement, they must be a consent , so Mr. Speaker we 
can withdraw under Standing Order 48 and come back again ...  
(Laughter ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Honorable Members Order!  Order 
Members !  
(Loud c onsultation ) 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Under Standing Order 48 Mr. Speaker and we can 
come back again and table this Motion .  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Mwidani . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker .  
(Laughter ) 
 I kno w the Honorable Member's position okay I will request under Standing Order 48 
that this Motion be withdrawn and be moved again next week Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you, yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members  there being no other business this House is adjourned until Tuesday next 
week in the afternoon.  
The House rose at 3:19 pm. 
  
 
 
 
 