March 15 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official  Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 15th March, 2016  
The House met at 2: 28p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Have your seats Hon.  Members.  Yes C lerk. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
       Well ladies and gentlemen there's a R eport that has just been forwarded to us the Assembly 
by the Executive ; actually ladies and gentlemen I was impressed to work in the County 
Assembly, Mombasa County . The subject here is C ouncil of Governors ; actually it is the  annual 
report of 2014/ 2015 . 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) read ) 
       The above matter refers . 
       The C ouncil of Governors that is COG  is a non -partisan  body that draws its mandate from 
the Inter Governmental Relations Act (IGRA). The IGRA requires that COG submit an annual 
statutory report to the summit, S enate, National Assembly and County Assemblies.   
       This second annual report reflect s the activities for the period of the year 2014/ 2015  and 
provides a comprehensive asses sment  of the progress made by COG  towards achieving  its 
mandate. The report also highlights successes , challenges , lessons learnt  and opportunities f or 
the COG for the coming years. Enclosed please find for your record and perusal the A nnual 
report  for 2014 /2015.  
       First I would like to highlight on this Inter C ounty governmental issues ; the first paragraph 
in this ladies and gentlemen is  talking about submitting but the A ct is actually talking about 
transmitting . So those are two diffe rent words with a distinct …, so as a result of that it i s for our 
own consumption as a H ouse, so whoever would want to get more information  you contact the 
office of the C lerk. Yes Clerk . 
PAPER  
       Hon.  Zainab  Omar, am seeing Hon.  Kithinzi is up .  
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Zainab  Kithinzi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa S pika 
Mwenyekiti  hajis ikii vizuri, na n ikiwa kama Naibu  wa Kamati  ya Mazingira  ningeomba kup itia 
kiti chako niweze kusoma R ipoti ilioko mbele yetu .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You c ontinue Hon.  Kithinzi . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Zainab  Kithinzi : Thank you Mr. Speaker, R ipoti niliyoletewa ilikuwa inasoma 
kama inavyofuata;  
(Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Kithinzi read Report ) 
COUNTY P UBLIC TOILETS MAINTENANCE  
       1. Before devolution the Municipa l Council  of Mombasa managed the public toilets through 
Private -Public Partnership  arrangement.  
       The arrangement included renovation and  refurbishment of the existing t oilets, cleaning and 
charging a fee for services among others.  
       2. When dev olution was initiated, the function of sanitation servic es was devolved and the 
County g overnment of Mombasa placed the function upon the department of Water and natural 
resources.  
March 15 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official  Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        The department repossessed 21 public toilets from the private manage rs due to expiry of 
contract period or poor  management of the facilities or changed use.  
       3. The department decided that the toilets should be managed through an approach of 
empowering the youth by involving them in the management of public toilets. 48.6 per cent  of 
the County Population is youth , the department negotiated with Maji na Ufanisi, an NGO which 
already was using the successful youth e mpowerment approach at Kongowea Market under the 
County department of Trade to  manage the repossessed Coun ty toilets using youth s. Maji na 
Ufanisi accepted the task and the toilets were handed over to M aji na Ufanisi  on February 2015 
for operation and maintenance using youth s for a period of 1 month as pilot project. M aji na 
Ufanisi  pledged to renovate the toi lets. 
       4. M aji na Ufanisi  took more than one month as agreed and never renovated even single a 
toilet outside the Kongowea Market. This was a breach of the arrangement.  
       5. On January 2016 the department learned that M aji na Ufanisi  was facing some challenges 
and the operation of the toilets was given to the County Inspectorate while an investigation was 
being conducted.  
       6. The County is in the process of diges ting for the best approach the t oilets can be managed 
through the Youth Empower ment.  Thank you , Mr. Speaker.    
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Enock Mwinga,  are you up on something? Are you 
a Member of this particular C ommittee?  
       Hon. Mwinga : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I am not after anything  but I r ise here 
to support the R eport.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well  Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo . 
       Hon.  Ibrahim  Kondo : Ahsante Bwana Spika n imesimama mwanzo kabisa kupongeza 
juhudi za M wenyekiti wetu  kwa ripoti aliyoitoa mbele ya N yumba hii. Nikiendelea kusema 
Mheshimiwa Spika  Ripoti hii ni muhimu kwa uongozi wetu katika Mombasa Kaunti, na ikiwa 
Ripoti hii itazidi kutekelezwa vijana wetu wa mashinani watapata ajira kutokana na vyeo 
ambavyo vilikuwa vikimilikiwa na wanao jiita Maji na Ufanisi katika Mombasa K aunti. Ama 
kwa kweli Mheshimiwa S pika shughuli hizi zilikuwa zimewashinda hata baadhi ya mwe zi wa 
kwanza vyoo katika maeneo ya Pirates  vilikuwa vimekuwa katika hali mbaya zaidi hata wizara 
husika ya Kaunti ilirekebisha katika miradi  zaidi.  Kwa hio nau nga mkono swal a hili  na 
lishughulikiwe kwa haraka zaidi.  Ahsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : As much as you al so want to own this particular Paper or 
Report, it is i mportant that the C ommittee should first work on it and  you agree with me that 
something somewhere has been done which ..., yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker, thank you  for the point because I have already specified that 
there is something that is missing. Mr. Speaker I don’t know where this R eport is coming from 
because  it doesn’t have a signature; i t is even from the department itself.  Mr. Speaker we don’t  
have minutes to show that the C ommittee have sat and  debated on the Report we don’t have 
recommendation from the C ommittee .  Mr. Speaker this is a r aw material it has not been  digested 
at the beginning, we need each to go back to the C ommittee so that w e can digest and we have a 
way forward from the Committee . Mr. Speaker  I pray the mover of this R eport to retrieve it back 
so that we can have a very good R eport in this H ouse so that when ado pted it can be  deliberated 
becaus e it cannot be passed like this, thank you.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Kizito.  
       Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also supp ort Hon.  Siminyu  about this particular  
Report;  In fact at the 2nd paragraph they  had told us that there were 21 toilets . They should have 
March 15 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official  Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 given us a breakdown of where the toilets would be in town or which area, a t least we could have 
a general  idea now th ey are telling us the 21 public toilets, we do not know the location. So 
maybe the R eport should  be returned to the Committee and give us an actual Report so that when 
the Chair brings it back to the H ouse it can be accepted . Thank you.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri su ala 
lilioko hapa  ni swala ambalo halina utata kwa sababu M wenyekiti wetu amejitahidi ijapokuwa  
hakuwa akijis ikia vizuri na kwa  sababu ya pilka  pilka ny ingi zilizokuwa wiki ya jana  kutokana 
na uchaguzi wa Malindi pamoja na misukosuko ya Gavana wetu maana aliamu a kuandika R ipoti 
hii akijua kwamba m ambo mengine yatarekebishwa na K amati . Kwa hivyo mimi ningependa 
kuambia Nyumba hii k wamba K amati itachukua jukumu lak e haraka iwezekanavyo. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Riziki Fundi.  
       Hon. Fundi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, kwa kweli nimesimama kwa masikitiko 
sana,  hivi sasa nafikir ia tuna elekea mwisho wa muhula wa B unge letu hili am balo lilichaguliwa 
mwaka wa 2013 lakini mpaka leo Kamati ya M azingira haijajua kusimama ama vile ambavyo 
inatakikana itumike ili walete Ripoti katika B unge hii . Kwa hiyo  ni mas ikitiko makubwa sana 
lakini kwa sab abu ya hek ima na ujuzi wa S pika wetu amelielewa swala hilo . Kwa hio nataka 
atoe mwelekeo hawa watu warejee na hili swala lisi regelewe t ena kabisa mbinu hii ya kuleta 
Ripoti katika B unge kwa sababu mnatuonyesha kwamba sisi tumesoma lakini hatushiki n a mimi 
sidhani kwamba huo ni ukweli kwa sababu m imi na amini kwamba wabunge wa M ombasa ndio 
wamekomaa wanajua sheria , hivyo hivi inatuonyesha kwamba baadhi …kidogo labda pengine  
wameteleza uwaregeshee katika K amati ili wailete katika il e njia inayostahili. Ahsante  Bwana 
Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari.  
       Hon. Odari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa S pika hili swala la  vyoo ni 
swala muhimu sana kwa Kaunti yetu ya M ombasa ukizingatia ya kwamba sehemu nyingi za mji  
huu kama inavyojulikana zamani kulikuwa na vyoo am bavyo vilikuwa vikiendeshwa na 
Manispaa ya Mombasa ikishirikiana na wafadhili . Lakini kwa kipindi kiref u kumekua hakuna 
vyoo katika mj i huu na kwa kweli hili dhana ama hili wazo la kijitokeza kwa shirika l a 
kusaidiana na serikali kuboresha hivi vyoo kuwapatia vijana fursa ya kujiendesha . Ni jamb o la 
busara sana isipokua sasa Mheshimiwa S pika hii R ipoti ikiwa ingetengenezwa kwa njia ambayo 
inastahili , ingekuwa vizuri zaidi maombi yangu licha ya kwamba ni Mwa nakamati ningeomba 
Ripoti hii iangaliwe vizuri tena upya ili iwe nzuri zaidi kwa manufaa ya watu wa Mombasa.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ahmed Saad Faraj.   
       Hon. Faraj : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika.  Nafikiri Mheshimiwa Spika kulingan a na 
Ripoti ambayo i metoka hii leo mimi pia nikiwa Mwanakamati wa K amati hii naiunga mkono na 
kiukweli kuna shid a ndogo ndogo ambazo sisi kama K amati pengine zime tupita kibinadamu 
lakini ikiwa Mheshimiwa S pika kwa heshima yako mtaturegeshea  tutaweza kuirek ebisha vilivyo 
Ripoti hii tuilete kama inavyostahili kwa Ripoti yeyote ambayo imepita katika Nyumba tukufu  
hili la Kaunti ya M ombasa . Kwa hi o M heshimiwa  Spika  yale maswala ambayo 
yamezungumziwa pale ndani ni maswala ya hakika na ukweli na ndivyo il ivyo kule chini 
mashinani walakin kuna hitilafu ndogo  ndogo  ambazo zimetokea kuhusiana na M wenyekiti wetu 
na ile hali ambayo amekuwa . Kwa hio twaomba mtuwie  radhi ili tuweze kurekebisha Ri poti yetu 
hii ili ije katika ile hali a mbayo inastahili. Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Ladies and g entlemen having listened very carefully to your 
submissions and your opinions it is also important that i highlight th e following on this particular 
March 15 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official  Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Report ; one if you go through t he conten ts of this particular R eport there are not actually a P aper 
it is something that have just been cla mped together as was being put by Hon.  Kizito Opeya .        
We want to know what is there in M wakirunge, Bamburi so that we can also try to align the 
same wi th plans that actually passed the CIDP , actually passed through this same H ouse so it is 
important to have an over sight  of the same.  
       Secondly am just seeing that it is Mombasa County government Department of Water, 
Environment and N atural resources , so it means that it’s something that belongs to t he Executive 
not anywhere in the A ssembly . For that matter this it ou ght to be an attachment of our Report as 
a Committee that’s the second point , the third point is that even the M embers w ho considered 
these particular R eport are not mentioned anywhere . You know it is important that you mention 
the Hon.  Members who actually sat down and worked on these particular issue s.  
       The third thing is that there are no signatures on th is particular matter so i t is important that 
this particular R eport ... then again apart from the executive just communicating to you that we 
have the same . It is important to find your way to the site and confirm whether those particular 
projects are there and are ongoing or they have been actually finalized so out of that we can say 
even though they are communicated to us . They are 21 public toilets but the ones that we found 
are actually ten, eleven,  two are in this type of conditions and something like that so they become  
something like that Zainab Kithin zi this particular R eport will not be given a date for next tabling 
for debate . So that you actually have more time to look in to it and make sure that it becomes as 
more inclusive as possible small….as possible ... 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ahmed.  
       Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed  Ibrahim) : Thank you Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker this is a M otion on 
the adoption of the F iscal Strategy Paper.  Mr Speaker sir the Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy 
Paper is prepared in accordance to Section 127 of the Public Finance Management A ct 2012.  
       Mr S peaker the County T reasury prepared to submit to the County Assembly Committee the 
County F iscal Strategy Paper for approval and  the County T reasury shall s ubmit the approved 
Fiscal Strategy Paper to the County A ssembly each year . Mr S peaker Sir the County T reasury 
aligned  the C ounty strategy paper with the budget Policy Statement and in preparing the County 
Fiscal Strategy P aper the County T reasury sp ecified the broad strategic priority and policy that 
will guide the C ounty government to prepare the budget for the coming financial year and over 
the medium term.  Thank you Sir.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Clerk?  
MOTION  
       What is it Hon.  Amur?  
       Hon. Amur : Bwana S pika nimesimama kwa nidhamu nikiwa na wasiwasi kwa maana 
ilikuwa ni taarifa.  Mheshimiwa S pika leo hii Waziri wa U salama wa  ndani ametoa tahadhari 
kwamba Gavana wa K aunti ya Mombasa 001 Ali Hassan Joho ikiwa hatakuwa ame surrender 
bunduki yake atachukuliwa hatua ya kushikwa na kupelekwa korokoroni . Pia M heshimiwa 
habari hizi zimefadhaisha mji wa M ombasa ; watu wa M ombasa wamejaa wasiwasi mmoja wapo 
akiwa mimi Mheshimiwa wa Mji wa K ale. Nimejaribu kumpigia Gavana  simu zaidi ya kumi 
lakini sipati majibu sijui tayari hicho kitendo kimefanyika au ha kijafanyika lakini nimejaribu 
kumpigia Gavana  na simu yake simpati . Kumeletea wasi wasi katika roho zetu kama viongozi 
katika jiji letu la Mombasa na kuna wasiwasi kwa sababu mambo ya Kenya ya navyoenda 
tunataka tuangalie kimsingi kiongozi yoyote anayekuwa shupavu mara tu akishikwa namna hii 
inakua ana weza kupotezwa na kupotea . Nataka nitoe mfano wa marehemu JM Kariuki ; alikua 
mtu moja wa kutetea raia ilip ofika hatamu ya kuwatetea raia B wana huy o alipotezwa na mpaka 
March 15 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official  Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 hii leo imebakia historia yake . Kariuki marehemu Robert Ouko alipotea vivyo hivyo,  marehemu 
Ngala alipotea vivyo hivyo marehemu…alipotea hivyo hivyo alishikwa na serikali baadae ikawa 
ni kizungumkuti wasiwasi wetu ni M heshimiwa Spika  ni kwamba je Gavana  wetu akiwa 
ameshikwa na ba adae kutoke tata  zingine zozote je sisi tutaelek eza kidole cha lawama kwa mtu 
gani?  Ni kwa W aziri wa usalama wa ndani ama kwa serikali kuu kwa sababu hii inaleta taharuki 
na mtafaruku katika Kaunti  ya Mombasa.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika si hao tu M bunge pia alikuwa mmoja katika kutetea wananchi 
alipoambiwa asiende kule pande ya N akuru alipatwa na ajali ya barabarani aliambiwa if you go 
there you won’t come back . Je sisi kama M ombasa hali hii imetutia katika hali ya wasiwasi , huyu  
ni ki ongozi ambaye aliyechaguliwa na watu , ni kiongozi ambaye kikatiba anatakikana alindwe 
ulinzi wake umeondolewa je bunduki yake apokonywe ? Kuna njama gani katika serikali ya 
Kenya katika Gavana wa Mo mbasa ; wasi wasi ni kwa mba kuna njama labda  serikali inataka 
kummaliza au kumuondoa G avana katika mamlaka aliyopewa ambayo si rahisi wewe 
kuchaguliwa kikatiba . 
       Katiba 2010 ilikubali wananchi wawe  wakichagua ; Mheshimiwa sisi tuna wasi wasi 
kwamba huenda wanataka kummaliza Gavana wa Mom basa kwa njia ambayo si ya haki.         
Sisi tumekuwa na wasi wasi , Mombasa imekuwa na wasi wasi , Kenya nzima imekuwa na wasi 
wasi.  Mheshimiwa S pika kitendo hichi kikiwa itakuwa ame wekwa ndani basi sisi wa Mombasa 
tutakuwa hatuna budi na hatuna lengine il a kuandamana na litakalo mkuta G avana wetu basi 
itakuja kuleta mambo makubwa katika nchi yetu ya Kenya . 
       Kwa sababu huyu ni kiongozi wa chama cha ODM , ni Naibu R ais wa chama cha ODM na 
iko Kenya nzima haiko Mombasa peke  yake, ina wafu asi Kenya nzima na haita kubali ODM 
kama kiongozi wake aangamizwe au apotezwe kiholela na sisi wanachama wa ODM tukae chini .        
Hivyo tunasema kwam ba sisi ikiwa lolote litampata G avana wa K aunti ya Mombasa 001 kidole 
chetu tutakinyosha mo ja kwa moj a kwanza kwa Nkaissery, pili Rais wa J amhuri ya Kenya kwa 
sababu yeye nd io Raisi wa J amhuri ya Kenya na ni baba wa taifa hili anaweza kuingilia jambo 
hili kati na akaleta muelekeo . Lakini kunyamaza kwake kama Rais wa Jam huri ya Kenya 
inaonyesha hata  yeye pia anaunga mkono kum maliza G avana wetu wa Mombasa na tunasema 
Mungu asijalie lolote litakalo mpata G avana wa Mombasa litaleta tabu nchi nzima na hilo ni 
jambo ambalo sisi tunalikashifu na tunalikemea  Mheshimiwa S pika.  Ningeomba J umba hili  
lipewe naf asi lijadili hoja hii kwa sababu hi i ni hoja inayomkabili G avana si mtu tu wa kawaida, 
mtu wa kaw aida ana haki ya ulinzi katika nchi hii ya kikat iba kulindwa yeye na mali yake 
Gavana ali yechaguliwa na wananchi wa eneo Bunge  sita ama constituency  sita alipi giwa kura 
kihalali, alichaguliwa kihalali akaapishwa  kihalali leo dhul ma kinachofanyika si cha kisheria 
wala kikatiba . Huyu ni mtu ambaye amelengwa na wasi wasi wetu ni kwamba huenda kwamba 
wana njama serikali kuu kupitia kwa mashina yak e ya Mheshimiwa Ma rwa, Nkaissery  na 
wengine sisi tunasema lolote litakalo mpata Mheshimiwa Hassan Joho Ali mtu wa kwanza 
tutamuangalia kwa jicho baya ni Bwana Marwa , wa pili Nkaissery, wa tatu itakuwa ni Rais wa 
Jamhuri ya nchi ya Kenya . Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
       Mr. Spea ker (Hon. Rajwayi) :Yes Hon. Ibrahim . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, nimesimama pia kuunga mkono taarifa  
iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Murfad  Amur . Kwa kweli Mheshimiwa S pika mambo yalianza 
kidogo kidogo na yamefikia mahali amb apo sisi vion gozi tulishikilia K aunti ya Mombasa 
hatuungi mkono kabisa kitendo ambacho kinaendelea kwa Gavana wetu wa Mombasa Hassan 
Ali Joho. Mheshimiwa S pika Kenya nzima kuna  Magavana 47  lakini mp aka sasa zaidi ya wiki 
tatu ni G avana mmoja Kenya nzima anayefatwa kila  leo masaibu yanamuandama na hatujui 
sababu yake ni nini.  
March 15 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official  Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6        Mheshimiwa S pika swal a la kwanza kabisa kupitia kwa Gavana wetu  kila anacho kimiliki 
kiko katika sheria ya Kenya, bunduki anazo miliki ziko katika sheria ya Kenya, walinzi 
anaopewa wako kati ka sheria ya Kenya na hatuoni haja ya walinzi kutolewa bunduki zake 
kurudisha wakati hakuna swala lolote baya limetokea kupitia kwa uongozi wake.      
Mheshimiwa Spika G avana amechaguliwa na wana nchi kama vile Rais alivyo chaguliwa , kama 
vile S eneta alivyoc haguliwa, kama vile ma MCA walivyo chaguliwa. Mheshimiwa S pika 
itakuwa ni jambo la kuta mausha  MCA k uruhusiwa kubeba bunduki alafu Gavana ambaye ni 
Rais wa jimbo la Mombasa apokonywe silaha yake. Mheshimiwa S pika hatuna imani na mambo 
yanayoen delea na sisi kama viongozi wa K aunti ya Mombasa tunalaani kitendo hichi na 
tunamwambia anaesimamia uongozi wa nchi y etu ya Kenya pamoja na Nkaissery kwamba 
jambo linalo tendeka halistahili kabisa . Ikiwa kuna njia nyengi ne wanataka kufanya Mheshimiwa 
Spika kumhujumu G avana wetu, wajue wananchi wa  Mombasa wamesimama kidete  na Gavana 
wao.  Kwa hivyo mimi ningalipenda N yumba hii ijue k wamba mambo yatakayo mfanyikia 
Gavana wetu hayapo kikatiba na hay astahili kuwa katika katiba ya nchi yetu asante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Patrick Simi nyu. 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Hon. Speaker it is sad that Kenya instead of going forward we 
are turning on days where people could not speak, where people should not stand on matters 
pertaining  to the r ights of the Mombasa people. Mr. Speaker beca use of the firm stand that our 
Governor had for the CORD fraternity of Mombasa, they are lot of things undermining his ways 
of working towards achieving the goals that Mombasa people are aiming. Mr. Speaker having a 
stand in the party line it is not a matter where somebody has to be frustrated  in such a n inhumane 
manner. Mr. Speaker the G overnor is not a personal thing but it’s an institution that is pl aced 
there by the C onstitution of Ken ya and each should be respected by both governments . We 
understand we have 47 C ounties ; one national government and C ounty governments they are all 
governments Mr. Speaker Sir and G overnors have the right to be protected and as you 
understand the other tim e because of the  firm stand the people of Mombasa the re was a terror 
threat for the G overnor, and we are subjecting to have no safety measure s for his life.  Mr. 
Speaker S ir, something bad can happen and  somebody can just claim it’s a terror attack ; our 
Governor must be protected by the government due to those terror attacks because of the terror 
threats that were there they were not jokes.  Mr. Speaker we have to stand for our G overnor as 
MCAs for Mombasa because if we keep quiet it will be t errible when we hear  something bad 
happened to the G overnor.   Mr. Speaker we as leaders of Mombasa we are saying the national 
government through its ministry should sto p intimidating our G overnor, should stop intimidating 
Mombasa  government headed by our a ble Governor Ali Hassan Joho . Mr. Speaker as you 
understand this is not the first tool that the national governm ent is using to intimidate our 
Governor ; the other time they closed the family company just to intimidate the G overnor .  
I know the other day aga in they took the bodyguard ; the protection that is supposed to be 
given to our G overnor then they took the guns. Mr. Speaker this matter should be stopped and 
we as Mombasa leaders say no to whatever they are planning to do to our G overnor ; every time a 
leader is raising from Mombasa they try to bring him down . Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir.   
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well ladies and gentlemen, whatever you are trying to 
communicate across but I wouldn't want to imagine that time has come for any on e of us to start 
thinking that there is anything unlawful or unconstit utional that can happen to the G overnor of 
Mombasa . It is not yet time for us to think that anything unconstitutional can happen to him, and 
why am I saying that because all of us partic ipated in coming up of this constitution ; we know 
March 15 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official  Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 what the law says even on how to make the statements fro m whatever is happening to the 
Governor at the moment . 
       We know what the law says and once the law has not been followed then I doubt whether 
there is any…… on Hon. Amur’s concern that he has been making phone calls yes that one can 
worry you I know that should worry any one following the history that we have in this country 
and again it is important that I also inform this Hon.  House as far as my  knowledge is concer ned 
is that his Excellency the G overnor of Mombasa Ali Hassan Joho has engaged his legal coun sels 
who are actually handling this matter and we want to believe that as far as it is now within the 
stated officers and we must not worry too  much again . Following the pronouncement by Hon. 
Amur that there is an ultimatum the headline put  to that effect that not later than 2, I want to 
believe it is now on I want to believe that, let us wait until then and see how best we are going to 
handle that matter, but just to say if they did wrong we must also let the laws do their own things 
as we know two wrongs will never make a right, that is the second aspect that I want to highlight 
on about his presence . 
       I want to believe that all of  us those who are following keenly actually he made a press 
release  yesterday that is at least an assurance that  he is alive and unshaken as well . I would have 
loved to allow you to debate this particular matter but remember Hon. Amur you did not ta ble 
that same statement in written form so I would love to have a chance for this particular statement 
those who want to debate on the same the time is there for y ou to do that tomorrow but not now. 
Otherwise as it is that was just a concern  to this and I may not ask the Leader of M ajority of the  
government to state where the G overnor is until at such a time that we follow legal proc edures 
Hon. Amur and the whole H ouse, so Hon. Amur be advised. Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen this H ouse stand s adjourned until tom orrow Wednesday at exactly 
9:00a.m. 
The House rose at 3 :08p.m. 