August 25 , 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 2 5th August 2020  
The House met at 10:37a .m. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may have seated . 
Yes, Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
BUDGET CIRCULAR FOR F INANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022  
 
Hon. Member s, before I communicate I take this opportunity on behalf of the Assem bly 
and to the people of Likoni  tunawapa pol e kwa kuondokewa na Mzee wenu aliyekuwa  Mayor wa 
Jiji la  Mombasa na vile vile alikuwa Mbunge katika sehemu ile ya Likoni . Hon. Members  the 
County  Assembly is in receipt of the Budget C ircular 2021/2022, file memo dated 14th August , 
2020 from  the CEC  Finance and Economic Planning . The Budget C ircular has been forward to 
the C lerk pursuant to Section (128) of the PFM Act , 2012 which states tha t; 
 
The County Executive Member for Finance shall manage the Budget process  for the 
County, not late r than 30th August in each year the CEC Finance shall issue  a circular 
setting out guidelines to be forwarded by all County Government entities on the Budget 
Process. The circular shall include:  
a) Schedule for preparation of the budget specifying key date s by which the vari ous 
process are to be completed,  
b) The mythology for the review and projection of the revenues and expenditures ,  
c) Key policy areas and issues to be taken into consider ation when preparing the budget,  
d) Procedures to be followed by members of the public who wish to participate in the 
budget  process , 
e) The format in which the information and documents relating to the budget are to be 
submitted , 
f) The information should be in  conformity with the standard budget facilitation systems 
as prescribed by regulations and ,  
g) Any other information  relevant to the budget process,  

August 25 , 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 4).  A county government entity shall comply to the guide lines and in particular shall 
adhere to key dates specified in the schedule referred to in Sub section three (a) . 
 
I shall hand over th e document to the C ommittee on Finance , Budget and A ppropriation, 
the C ommittee must adhere to the timelines and guidelines which are contained in the budget 
circular 2021/2022.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
ELECTION OF HON . MILKA AREBA AS CHAIRP ERSON OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLIES FORUM (CAF) 
WOMEN CHAPTER  
 
Hon. Members , we have  received a lette r from County Assemblies Forum (CAF) on the 
election of Hon. Milka Areb a as C hairperson of the CAF women C hapter . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Dear Hon. Aharub Ebrahim, the Speaker of Mombasa County Assembly,  the above 
subject refers . Reference is made t o Article 10 of the Assemblies F orum  constitution 
which recognizes Women C aucus among the 10th Chapter of County Assemblies Forum 
(CAF), the forum conveyed a meeting of the Chairpersons of the 47 County Assemblies 
women C hapter on Thurs day 4th June, 20 20 in which they elected their national o fficials. 
Hon. Milka Areba Ngare was unanimously elected as the Chairperson  of the Women 
Chapter ; her roles will include among others coordin ating the annual work plan for 
Women Chapter with the CAF Secretariat and representing the Women C hapter in the 
CAF governing Council.  The purpose of this letter therefore is to inform you of this 
election and further request that your County Assembly accords her your support in 
executi ng the functions of this of fice, we appreciate your con tinued support and 
cooperation. Thanking  you. Yours Faithfully, Judy Ajuma, Chief Executive Officer CAF. 
Thank you.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Thank you Clerk for reminding me , on behalf of the County Assembly of  Mombasa I 
take this opportunity to congratulate you Hon. Milka Areba and your successful election as 
Chairperson of the County Assemblies Forum (CAF) Women Chapter . You have made us proud 
and my office assures you that it will accord you the necessary sup port to enable you carry your 
mandate.  
Hon. Members let us acknowledge her achievement by applauding in a P arliamentary 
manner.  Hon. Me mbers please applaud Hon. Milka.  
 
[Applause]  
 
Yes Clerk.  
 
August 25 , 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 PAPER  
REPORT OF THE VETTING  OF M R. LIBAN HIRSI HASSAN  
 NOMINEE  FOR THE POSITION OF MEMBER , COUNTY PUBLIC SERVIC E BOARD  
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani , the Lea der of Majority please lay the P aper.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
chance to lay a P aper on Report on the Vet ting of Mr. Liban Hirsi Hassan, n ominee for the 
Position of Member, County Public Service Board.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF THE REPOR T ON THE VETTING OF MR. LIBAN HIRSI HASSAN  
NOMINEE FOR THE POSIT ION OF MEM BER, COUNTY PUBLIC SERVIC E BOARD  
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Vice Chairperson on Committee of App ointments, 
Rules and Procedures.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : I move a Motion that this House adopts the 
Report on the Vett ing of Mr. Liban Hirsi  Hassan, n ominee for the Position of Member, County 
Public Service Board laid on the T able on Tuesday 25th August, 2020 at 10.00am and I request 
Hon. Amur to second the Motion.  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  I rise  [Off microphone] . 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amur use your mic rophone.  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  I rise to second Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a question 
that the Motion by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani on adoption of th e Report of vett ing of Mr. 
Liban Hirsi Hassan, nominee for the p osition of Member, County Public Service Board be 
considered in this House with the same terms as moved.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
Yes Hon. Vice Chai rperson Hon. Leader of Majority.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker nachukua fursa hii ya kuwaomba 
Waheshimiwa kwamba tuweze kumpitisha Bwana Liban Hirsi Hassan kwenye B odi kwa sababu 
kielimu yuko sawa na tulimchunguza tukapata hana dosari yoyote k ama vile inavyosema 
Chapter 6 . Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika ningeomba kwa wakati huu ijapokuwa ni wakati mgumu 
kwa Bunge letu kama ulivyotangulia kusema kama mimi ninaetoka uwakilishi Bunge wa Likoni 
tumeweza kupata msiba wa Mzee aliyekuwa Mbunge wetu . 
August 25 , 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Lakini hayo yote tunaju a ni kwa sa babu ya Mwenyezi Mungu, In Shaa Allah  tukimaliza 
tutaweza kwenda kuzika saa saba mchana. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ningewaomba 
Waheshim iwa wenzangu tuweze kumpitisha huyu kijana ndio ile Bodi iweze kutimia kutekeleza 
kazi zake. Hivyo basi Bwana Spika naom ba Bunge liweze kumpitisha Liban Hirsi Hassan kwa 
kauli moja. Ahsante sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. I do not have my microphone here, so if it was 
taken kindly it should be ta ken back , am one of the most frequent debater s; so I do not feel good 
when I miss my microphone because we have so many here all Members are in the House, I do 
not think this is a good time to share microphones. So Hon. Speaker kindly whoever took my 
micro phone should g ive it back.  
 Thank you Hon. Speaker, l et me contribute to the Motion of adoption of Mr. Hirsi. Mr. 
Hirsi is a person I have known physically and on a personal le vel for a longer period of time;  
when it comes to credibility, he is credible e nough, when it comes to discharging his duties, he 
was once a Director of [Inaudible ]…Freighters and I happen to work for 
[Inaudible ]…Freighters a nd whenever it reached a time to make critical decisions, we relied so 
much on his wisdom and knowledge. So Mr . Speaker amongst the Committee Members this is a 
person even when am debating, I have worked with him on a personal level and I have known 
him also on a friendly level. But Mr. Speaker I would also wish to advocate for performance , you 
see we have this Mo tion to be ad opted by Hon. Members bu t Hon. Speaker after some period of 
time we will have to look and to check on their performance so that at least whenever we are 
adopting people at the first time  we should have follow ups to ascertain whether they are doing 
their duties accordingly. So Mr. Speaker I beg to support the adoption of the Motion. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Lucy?  
 Hon. Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Kwanza ningependa kump ongeza 
Mheshimiwa Milka;  pongezi  sana.  Mheshimiwa Milka kusema kweli Bwana Spika ni mama 
mchapa kazi … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Kwa hivyo yule mama vile alivyo basi ndivyo hiv yo hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika , mama 
mwenye nguvu , mama mkakamavu . Tukitembea na ye hua tunahisi tuna mama M heshimiwa 
amba ye sasa ametunukiwa vilivyo Mheshimiwa Spika , ni pongezi sana kwa mama na 
Waheshimiwa wote . 
Nikiregea kwa hii hoja yetu ya leo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga mkono moja kwa 
moja kwa sababu kazi zimelemaa ndani ya Bodi,  ingekuwa tumelifikisha hili jambo tangu hap o 
awali hakungekuwa na matatizo lakini matatizo yamefika vijana wetu wanataka kuandikwa Bodi  
hakuna matatizo chungu nzima . Mheshimiwa Spika tusichelewe tuweze kupitisha hawa watu 
tuangalie kazi ambavyo watajipanga, ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhil i Mwalimu ): Yes, the mover of the M otion , reply.  
August 25 , 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            33 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 The Leader of M ajority  (Hon . Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nashukuru 
kwa m uda tuliopata kwa kuweza kuchangia kwa hii hoja na pia ningesema kw amba ni nidhamu 
ambayo imechuku a mkono mzuri katika Bunge letu na pia Bwana Spika tunashukuru kwa 
ukakamavu ul ioweza kuchuku a siku kama ya leo yenye matatizo mengi kwa sababu hata kama 
kwenye Taarifa  ilikuwepo inajulikana kwamba Boss wetu G avana amepata pigo la familia yake 
ambayo imepata ajali . Kwa hivyo pia tunasema twawaombea Mungu InshaAllah  awawezeshe 
kuweza kupata nafuu waweze kuendesha mambo yao, hivyo basi nawashukuru sana W abunge 
wenzangu kuweza kupitisha Hoja hii kwa manufaa ya B odi yetu ya Kaunti ya Mombasa . 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members I now rise to put a 
question that the M otion by Hon . Hamis i Musa Mwidani on the adoption of the report on vetting 
of Mr. Liban Hirsi Hassan , nominee for the position of M ember of County Public Service B oard 
be approved in this H ouse in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
Yes C lerk? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
There being no other business the House stands adjourned until Tuesday 25th August, 
2020 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10:56 a.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 