May 10, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       33 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 10th May, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Thirty Third  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  2:40p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Abdulrahman Ab dulkadir ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members , please 
take your seats . Yes Clerk.  
  
STATEMENT S 
FIRE OUTBREAKING KONGOWEA MARKET  
 
[Interruption]  
 
Honourable  Katana, please take your seat ! Please take your seat!  
 
 [Honourable  Katana complied]  
 
I can see Hon ourable  Hassan Mohammed ; Chairperson Committee on Transport  is not 
around . May I ask if ther e is any member of  that Transport Committee to respond on his behalf . 
Honourable  Manuari , please respond?  
 
Hon. Juma Ma nuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Manuari , please 
before you respond dress  appropriate ly, you can go out and dress then come back.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari : After responding or before responding?  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Before you do that.  
 
[Honourable  Manuari exited  while Hon ourable  Frankline rose] 
[Interruption]  
May 10, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       33 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 Honourable  Frankline , are y ou a Member of the Committee?  
 
Hon. Makanga : Point of or der Mr. Speaker ! 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, please proceed?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa heshima na taadhima na kwa kuliheshimu pia 
Bunge hil i na kuheshimu Kanuni za Kudumu ambazo tulizitengeneza sisi kama Waheshimiwa 
isije ikafika wakati tuka weka historia mbaya ya kuliendesha Bunge  hili licha ya kwamba hatu ja 
afikia idadi ya kisheria.  Mheshimiwa Spika , Bunge hili inaonekana Waheshimiwa ba do aidh a 
wako njiani wanakuja ama kuna mahali muhimu zaidi ya hapa a mbapo wameshikika . Kwa hivyo 
hatuna idadi ya kutosha ya kuendesha biashara za jumba hili leo Mheshimiwa Spika unless you 
advise otherwise . Thank you . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulka dir): Honourable  Frankline, which 
Standing Order is that?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
As you ref er to the Standing Order , now m ay I ask Honourable  Manuari to respond to the 
Statement?  Honourable  Madialo , please take you seat .  
 
[Hon. Madialo complied ] 
 
Honourable  Juma Manuari , kindly respond.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Kutoka na na taarifa iliyoletwa n a 
ndugu yangu mimi ningeomba kupitia Kamati husika tupewe muda pamoja na Mwenyekiti wetu 
tuweze kuichakachua halafu tu rudi tupeane jibu kwa Nyumba hii. Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Manuari , I think 
this is turning into  the joke and I can see the Committee is taking us round  and round  it has been 
two months since this statement was so ught by Hon ourable  Samuel Mwaura and I think this 
issue  will be referr ed to Committee  on Liaison so that they advise f urther . Thank you.  Yes 
Clerk?  
 
STATUS OF PARTNERSHIPS BETWEEN THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT AND UNIVERSITY OF 
SUDAN ON THE SCHOLARSHIP AS PORTRAYED IN THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT SOCIAL 
MEDIA PLATFORM  
 
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana , please respond to the statement . 
  
 Hon. Katana: Nashukuru Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipa nafasi hii na ningeomba muda 
zaidi kushughulikia swala hili maana nimeliona tu leo na hata sikujuzwa kama k ulikuwa kuna  
taarifa imepeanwa na ninapo  endelea kukaa ili uendelee ku…  
 
[Interruption ] 
May 10, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       33 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Please just respond to the 
statement . 
 
Hon. Katana:  Ili uendelee kupata heshima ya Nyumba hi i Mhe shimi wa Spika ni  vizuri…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): It is okay just respond to the 
statement Hon ourable  Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana : Kwa hayo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba n ikae lakini ninaomba  nipewe kama 
siku 14 halafu nilete majibu.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Hon ourable  
Katana is very unfortunate that you  are saying you are not aware of this statement , your Vice 
Chair Hon ourable  Bomoa  (Hon. Ibrahim Omo ndi) was here and most of your Members were  
here so perhaps I think there wa s a communication break down between you and your Vice 
Chair. Please next time I will not accept such excuses , so I think by next week on Wednesday 
you should be able to respond to this statement.  
 
[Hon. Frankline Ma kanga  stood] 
 
Honourable  Frankline?  
 
Hon. Makanga : Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwa muongozo wako wa kwamba leo 
lazima tuthibitishe kwamba iko katika Kanuni za Kudumu za Bunge  zetu. Mheshimiwa Spika 
katika kanuni zetu za k udumu  31(1), (2) na pia 32(1), (2), (3) na tukiendelea mpaka sehemu ya  
34 ama yanaongelelea maswala ya ni  wakati gani kisheria unaruhusiwa kuliongoza Bunge  hili na 
mimi nimesimama ili  iingie kat ika rekodi ya Bunge hili kwamba hili tuli lileta kulingana na 
sheria hatuna idadi ya waheshimiwa wa  kutoisha katika Bunge  hili kuendelea.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Well,  noted. Honourable  
Madialo , were you up on a point of order?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Honourable  Speaker , I just wanted to buttress  the point of Hon ourable 
from Chaani that we are House of rules and we must be defenders of the rules that are set . Please 
I would like to beg you Mr. Speak er Sir that we must be seen to be serious in this Assem bly so if 
there is no quorum  let people go home unti l such a time that the Hon ourable  Members will take 
the business of this House seriously because some of the Members that might be  active … 
 
[Interrupt ion] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulk adir): Honourable  Katana , just have 
a seat there are no movements. Please ha ve a seat.  
 
Hon. Madialo : Okay thank you . I was just supporting my brother.  
 
May 10, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       33 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you . Honourable  
Madialo , just for the record  I respec t the rules and I was  insisting on him to quote ; I respect the 
rules and it is just I was insisting  on him to quote the exact  point of order . Now may I ask the 
Sergeant -At-Arms or rather before I ask him , May I ask the Majority Chief Whip to confirm  if 
we have attained the quorum.  Please co nfirm do  we have quorum .  
 
[Silenc e] 
Is there any issue?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba ): Honourable  Speaker , there is no qu orum.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): There is no quorum , 
Sergeant -At-Arms please  ring the bell  for ten minutes  and m ay I request the members not to 
leave the precincts . Thank you . 
[Sergeant -At-Arms rung the q uorum Bell] 
Honourable  Fatma just take y our seat,  you are n ot going anywhere , they are coming the 
bell has been rung! Honourable  Benard Ogutu just go dress prope rly before you enter this H ouse, 
just go put o n your coat. The House is in  session , just take a seat.  Let us b e serious Members . 
Yes…  
  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba ): Mr. Speaker there is quorum ! 
 
 The Tem porary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): There is quorum. 
Honourable  Frankline Makanga,  I hope you are sat isfied with the quorum?  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Makanga:  One more Hon ourable  Speaker ! 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): One m ore. How many are 
we? 
 
 Hon. Makanga:  A third of 42 is 14 not 13 ! 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): A third of 42 is…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Makanga:  14! 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): One more pe rson,  it is ok 
we can wait. Are we 14?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumb a): Yes, there is quorum.  
 
May 10, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       33 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 The Te mporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Makanga , are 
you satisfied?  
[Background consultation s] 
 
 Members Order! Order! The House is in se ssion  Members. Now we can proceed, yes 
Clerk?  
 
STATUS OF DIGIRIKANI EC DE IN MWAKIRUNGE WARD  
 
Honourable  Hamisi Mwinyi Mtoto, MCA Mwakirunge Ward  please make your 
statement.  
 
 Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Honourable  Spea ker, pursuant to 
Standing order 41 2(c), I wish to request for a statement from the Chairperson Committee on 
Education and Digital Transformation on whether he is aw are o f the current state of Digirikani 
ECD E in Mwakiru nge Ward,  particularly after the heavy rain  that have been experienced 
recently.  Honourable  Speaker , the completion of this ECD E has been long overdue and it is 
alarming that it remains unfinished. The heavy rains  have  resulted in devastating effects on the 
site which is not yet complete. The situation has raised concerns among and the parents who are 
looking forward to having their children start attending class soon. Honourable  Speaker , the 
situation has also  left th e chi ldren in a precarious  situation especially during this back -to-school  
period. The Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Digital Transformation in his 
response, should inquire on the current status of the Digirikani ECD E and the plans the Coun ty 
government has in place to address the situat ion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Tempora ry Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Well,  noted. Hon ourable  
Katana,  I will give you  three  minutes to digest so that you may respond , am sure you have 
something to say, I will give you three  minutes to digest that. You are re ady? Please respond . 
 
 Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka nikushukuru kwa nafasi hii na pia nimshukuru 
Mheshimiwa Mtoto amba ye ana umri kidogo uliovuta vuta kwa kuleta hoja hii. Hii hoja 
imekuwa kwa  muda  sasa aliponipatia kabla ailete Bunge na tayar i nishamjulisha Waziri hii shule 
kwa sababu nimeagizwa pia niseme hali ilivyo kule sasa  ile shule imekuwa kama ziwa la maji, 
mvua imenyesha na maji yote yamejikinga katika madarasa pale na  hivyo basi maji yametapak aa 
katika madarasa na seh emu pia za kuingilia. Ninavyo  kwambia Mheshim iwa Spika siku ya 
Ijumaa Kamati na wawakilishi wake wakiongozwa na Waziri tutaitembelea shule hio na Waziri  
kwa sababu nilimtumia video  na kwa sababu nilitumiwa k wa mt andao na nikamtumia video hio 
na ameahidi sik u ya Ijumaa  tutakapofika hapo tutat athmini ha li halisi na nataka Bunge hili lipe 
nafasi Kamati ya Elimu siku ya Ijumaa wiki ijao kwa kuto a Ripoti  zaidi kuhusiana na swala hili. 
Ahsante Mhes himiw a Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you very much 
Honourable  Katana,  I hope you are satisfied with that?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mtoto:  Sawa nimeridhika nasubiri jibu kutoka kwa Kamati.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadi r): Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
May 10, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       33 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 ADJOURNMENT  
 
 This House stands  adjourned  until Tuesday 16th May, 2023 at 10:00 a.m. Thank you.  
 
The House rose at 3:05p.m. 
    
 
 