May 10, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          34  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
     COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 10th May, 2018  
The House met at 2:39p.m.  
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
            The Speaker:  Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes Clerk?   
 
STATEMENTS  
RELOCATION OF PERSONS UNDER METHADONE PRESCRIPTION AT KISAUNI DISPENSARY  
 
Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?   
Majority Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I take this 
opportunity to present a Statement on Relocation of Persons under Methadon e Prescription at 
Kisauni Dispensary which is in my area of representation Frere Town Ward. Mr. Speaker Sir, I 
seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Health on whether he is aware of deteriorating 
conditions around Kisauni Dispensary, brought about  by recovering addicts who are under 
methadone prescription at the dispensary. Some of the recovering addicts still use drugs around 
the dispensary which is also close to primary and secondary schools. Therefore what are the 
measures that the County govern ment will take to remedy the situation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula, yes do we have the Chairperson for 
Committee on Health Hon. Kibwana, is he around, or any Member of the Committee of Health? 
Yes Hon. Nzai please reply to the request for Statement and when will the response be ready?  
Hon. N zai: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi kuweza kumjibu 
Mheshimiwa Charles Kitula, ningeomba mtupe muda wa wiki moja kusudi tuweze kujibu suala 
hili. 
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Nzai so next week on Thursday, thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
CONSTRUCTION OF BARSHEBA - MISHOMORONI ROAD 
 
Yes Hon. Ali Shomari?  
Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari moved the Statement)  

May 10, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          34  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Construction of Barsheba -Mishomoroni Road; I seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee on Transport, I nfrastructure and Public Works on whether he is aware of the poor 
state of Barsheba -Mishomoroni Road brought about by heavy rains, and if the County 
government has any plans to remedy the situation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Membe r. Yes Hon. Chairperson Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works Hon. Fahad Kassim can you please reply for the request of 
Statement and when will the response be ready?   
Hon. Fahad Kassim Abdallah:  Good afternoon. Yes Mr. Speaker Sir I wou ld like to 
reply to the Statement from Hon. Ali Mohammed Shomari that as a Committee we are aware of 
the condition of the road and we are soon going to invite the Chief Officer to give us the way 
forward. So I will request for one week so that we can have a consolidated report and we will 
work on all the other areas that are affected not only Barsheba. Thank you very much.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Member, yes Clerk?  
 
MOGOKA MENACE IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu?  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwal imu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I stand 
under Standing Order 41 (c). I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Health on 
whether he is aware of the Mogoka  menace in the County which has left a trail of decadence 
especially among the youths,  and whether the County government has any plans to curb the 
situation. Mr. Speaker just to give an example the market of Mogoka  is situated around 
Tononoka grounds and Tononoka ground is a centre whereby many schools are around that area 
and the situation  as per now if the County government has no interest then it is as if we are losing 
the youth. Thank you.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Fadhili Makarani. Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa japo tuko pamoja kwenye suala hili 
lakini tayari tulikuwa tunalishughulikia na tayari tuko kwa utafiti kwa sababu tumetumana wale 
watu wa maabara watufanyie utafiti ili madhara halisi ya Mogoka  yajulikane. Kwa hivyo nafikiri 
Mungu akipenda InshaAllah  wiki ijayo kutakuwa na jawabu. Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika leo twaona vioja mahakamani; hawa wote 
wanaozungumza wawili ni wanakamati wa Kamati ya Afya na Mheshimiwa Fadhili analeta 
taarifa hapa na wao wako na nafasi ya kuzungumza kw enye Kamati yao ya Afya.  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai:  Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante tena kwa kunipa nafasi hii am a very strong 
Member for Health Committee  na Naibu Spika naona ni mwanachama wa Kamati zote na 
itanishangaza sana kama Mwenyekiti wetu tuna muhenza  ndio atauliza suala kama hilo kwa 
sababu ninavyojua vyeo kama hivyo vinaingia kila mahali kama mchuzi wa nazi. Ahsante sana.  
The Speaker:  I think Hon . Fadhili is supposed to answer that question Hon. Hatimy.  
Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ni Mwanakamati wa Kamati ya Afya ; na vile vile mimi nimeuliza  
swali hili kama Mwenyeki ti wa Kamati ya Liaison  kutaka kujua Mwenyekiti kutoka katika 
Kamati ya Afya ama serikali ya Kaunti inachukua jukumu gani kuhusu suala hili?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika...  
May 10, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          34  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 (Interruption)  
 
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshim iwa anaezungumza anapotosha Nyumba hili 
tukiangalia hii stakabadhi tulio nayo imesema taarifa kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa Fadhili Mwalimu 
MCA Wodi ya Port Reitz na sio Mwenyekiti wa Liaison . Kwa hivyo atuambie kama kuna 
makosa yeyote sababu hapa tunaona kama MCA  Wodi ya Port Reitz na sio Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya Liaison Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Fadhili Makarani can you clarify; are you a Member of 
this Committee or Liaison, I think you are a Member if am not wrong?  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
nimenakiliwa vizuri nikisema mimi ni Mwanakamati wa Kamati ya Afya lakini vile vile 
nikaongezea na nakujipa kofia na bali sio kujipa lakini ni kofia ambayo nimevishwa kama 
Mwenyekiti wa Kamati zote. Ndio pale am bapo nikajitoa kama Mwanakamati na kuweza 
kuuliza swali hili ambalo linatuhusu sote na linahusu vijana wetu na si kuuliza kama 
Mwanakamati wa Kamati ya Afya lakini kama alivyozungumza Mwanakamati wa Kamati hii. 
Kuna mambo ambayo walikuwa wanaendelea nayo m imi swali langu haswa lilikuwa nalenga 
wale watoto wetu tunawafikiria nini? Lau ikiwa tutawacha waendelee kuuzwa kama 
wanavyouzwa basi kuna hatari, nakubali nanakiliwa tena kuwa mimi ni Mwanakamati wa hii 
Kamati. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker: Sasa vile Mheshimiwa Nzai nimekusikia ukisema kuwa hili ni jambo 
ambalo mlikuwa mkilizungumza kwa hiyo inamaanisha kuwa Mheshimiwa Fadhili hakai kwa 
hiyo Kamati manake ni kama ambaye haelewi yale mambo mkiongea...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Spika huenda akawa siku hiyo alikosa kikao na 
jambo hili tulilizungumza katika kikao na siku hiyo tulikuwa na Mswada mwengine wa 
marijuana  kwa vijana wanaotumia mambo hayo na tulikuwa na mjadala mrefu kwa hiyo nafikiri 
mwenzangu hakuwa katika hicho kikao . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  
Hon. (Ms.) Boniface:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika naona hapa tunafanyiana mzaha; 
kama mimi nitakuwa ni Mwanakamati wa Kamati fulani kabla sijaleta hoja hapa Bungeni yafaa 
tulijadili katika hi yo Kamati na hiyo ni dhahiri kwamba hiyo Kamati ya afya hakuna maelewano 
ama watu hawahudhurii ndiposa Mheshimiwa Fadhili akaleta hoja hiyo lakini ningemuomba 
kama angetafuta mtu mwengine ailete kwa vile hiyo ni kutoa nguo Kamati yake kuonekana 
haitendi ka zi. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Kitula.  
Majority Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili hajaleta hoja katika Bunge hili bali ameweza kuleta maoni kuhusiana na 
kutaka maoni zaidi mashinani kuh usu suala hilo kwa hivyo si hoja. Ahsante.  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Samba?  
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I think you will be at the best position to give 
us directions because the matter that has been raised is a matter of great concern but the  issue 
here is the person who has brought the statement but mean while they know where we are going 
to get the answers? Mr. Speaker Sir...  
May 10, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          34  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Mheshimiwa Spika katika suala ambalo 
laendelea kujadiliwa nafikiri taarifa yangu ilikuwa wazi mimi nimeuliza Kamati ya Afya na vile 
vile nimeuliza serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa iko wazi na najua anayehitajika kuleta majibu ya 
serikali yetu Mheshimiwa si m wengine isipokuwa Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi. Mheshimiwa 
Spika mimi sioni kama kuna kosa lolote ambalo limetokea hapa kwa sababu ni majibu ambayo 
tutayapata kutoka kwa Kamati na vile vile ni majibu ambayo tutayapata pia kutoka kwa 
Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi maan a katika taarifa yangu iko wazi na ni dhahiri kuwa nauliza 
serikali ya Kaunti ina mipangilio gani? Ahsante.  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir maybe  I just wanted to reiterate on this 
statement. I think this one is actually how we are opposed and I think my able Chairman would 
have maybe quoted actually an Article or the Standing Order which bans the Member even if he 
belonged to a certain Committee i f he is not allowed or banned I think that one could be the issue 
but I think it is very casual it stands because I think apart from Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu being a 
Member...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Oindo:  I want to make a Point of Information?  
The Speaker:  Yes Hon. Aran?  
Hon. Oindo:  Mr. Speaker Sir this is House of rules and we should really consider the 
mode of language; a Hon. Member said interrect,  I don't know what he means by interrect  ? 
 
(Laughter)  
 
...also Mr. Speaker we should consider our mode of dress ing so I don't know if he has an 
invisible tie or what? I think he is informed.  
The Speaker:  Thank you yes can you answer the questions that you have been asked.  
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir the Hon. Member is not understanding me when I say I 
want to inte ract not the other way round...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker:  But the main issue is about dressing and i think Hon. Member you have to 
leave the House and go and dress up properly and come back...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I think Mr. Speaker...  
 
(Interrup tion)  
 
The Speaker:  I think you need to get out immediately and go and dress up, you are out 
of order just leave. Thank you.  
 
May 10, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          34  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 (Hon. Omondi exited the House)  
 
...Next time dress up properly; you are wearing sports shoes in the House. Yes I think 
Hon. Members I think Hon. Fadhili Makarani you should next time consult with your other 
Members in your Committee before bringing the statement, there's no harm in bringing the 
matter here in the House I don't see the harm because the issue is affecting all of us here and we 
are here to serve the people of Mombasa and all the other Members even need to know such 
issues. So I don't see any harm in bringing that matter here but it is important we follow the 
procedures you guys as Committees you have the powers to summon the relevant authority to 
come and give you the answers and maybe you can come and advise us so Hon. Nzai you said 
after one week you will bring for us the answer.  
Hon. Nzai:  Yes Mr. Speaker Sir.  
The Speaker:  So we will wait for that one week, thank  you. Yes Clerk?  
 
ANNUAL MOMBASA INTERNATIONAL CULTURAL FESTIVAL  
 
Yes Hon. Feddis Mbura.  
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura:  Mr. Speaker Sir I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on 
Youth, Gender. Sports and Cultural Affairs on whether the County government is going  to host 
the annual Mombasa International Cultural Festival, and if so, what are their plans for this year's 
festival. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Feddis Mbura, yes Hon. Moses Aran please reply to the 
request for statement and wh en will the response be ready?  
Hon. Oindo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir am humbly requesting this Hon. House if it can 
give me together with my Committee one week and then I will get back to this House with the 
full detail report on regards to what Hon. Membe r is requesting. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Aran, yes Clerk?  
 
REMUNERATION OF CASUAL /TEMPORARY WORKERS BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 
Yes Hon. Shebe Athuman?  
Hon. Shebe Athuman Salim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, in regards to 
remuneration of Casual/Temporary Workers by the County government, I seek to know from the 
Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations when the casual/temporary 
workers will be paid gi ven that it is now over three months they have not received their monthly 
wages. Thank you.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Shebe Athuman, yes the Chairperson for Finance, Budget 
and Appropriation, Hon. Mohammed Hatimy please reply to the request of the statem ent and 
when will the response be ready?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I request for one week.  
The Speaker:  One week? Okay thank you. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika naomba Kamati ya fedha, 
Makadirio na mipangilio kuwa...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
May 10, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          34  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Sir this is a statement...  
 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker:  Hon. Hatimy please just switch on your microphone. Hon. Mwamwiri are 
you rising on a Point of Order or Point of Information?  
Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  Point of information.  
The Speaker:  Yes please.  
Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  Katika hiyo taarifa ningependa kujua Mwenyekiti 
atupe sababu zilizopelekea miezi mitatu kupita bila ya mishahara yao...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker:  Point of information regarding on what, that's a question, point of 
Information under which Standing Order are you rising first of all, if we may start.  
Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  Point of information.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker:  So you have to tell me under which Standing Order?  
Hon.  Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  It is a Point of Information informing the Chair 
Finance that we want also to know when will they paid?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker:  That's not a Point of Information, you are asking a question but you are 
saying you want to know fr om Hon. Hatimy? What is the meaning of the Point of Information? 
You are giving him the information I think we need to go back to school then...  
  
(Applause)  
 
...Sorry  
Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  I need answers Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker: So you are not asking questions; you are giving him more information on 
what you are saying so you can continue if you are giving him information. You can repeat so 
that we can hear you clearly if you are giving a Point of Information or what?  
Hon. Athman Rama Mwamwiri:  I am informing Chair on Finance the reasons as to 
why the payments have delayed for three months for the casuals so this is the information.  
The Speaker: Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
(Resumption of business interrupted on 11th April, 2018)  
 
Yes Hon. Milka Moraa can you kindly move the amendments?  
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir Pursuant to Standing 
Order 51, I wish to move an amendment on a Motion moved on Wednesday 11th April, 2018 at 
2:30p.m.  
May 10, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          34  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 The amendment is on the addition of a third  resolution or prayer to the Motion which 
states that;  
3. The County government to approach other institutions/organizations to assist in the 
installation of litter bins. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Member. Hon. Members I now pro pose the question that 
the amendment..., who is seconding it?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I second Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Hatimy. Members I now propose the question that the 
amendment by Hon. Milka Moraa be considered by this House in the same terms as moved.  
 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 
...Yes Hon. Members you may debate.  
 
(Silence)  
 
No one wants to debate so Hon. Members I now put the question again that the 
amendment by Hon. Milka Moraa be approved by this House in the same terms as moved.  
 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
 
Hon. Members I now put the question as put and amended be approved by this House in 
the same terms as moved and amended.  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
...Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members this House stands adjour ned until Tuesday 15th of May, 2018 at 2:30p.m.  
The House rose at 3:09p.m.  
 