August 25 , 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 2 5th August 2020  
The House met at 2:43p.m. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have yours seats. Yes Clerk.  
 
PAP ER 
REPORT OF THE VETTING  OF M s. RUTH YANA MUMBUA NGUNDO  
 NOMINEE FOR THE POSI TION OF MEMBER , COUNTY PUBLIC SERVIC E BOARD  
 
Yes, Vice Chairperson Committee on Appointments, Rules and  Procedures Hon. Hamisi 
Mwidani.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Than k you Mr. Speaker . May I take this 
opportunity to lay a P aper Re port of the vetting of Ms. Ruth yana Mumbua Ngundo , Nominee for 
the Position of Member, County Public Service Board.   
 
[Paper laid ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk?  
 
MOTI ON 
ADOPTION OF  THE REPORT ON THE VE TTING OF MS . RUTH YANA MUMBUA NGUNDO  
NOMINEE FOR THE POSIT ION OF MEMBER , COUNTY PUBLIC SERVIC E BOARD  
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kuwakilisha 
hoja ya Ripoti ya ukaguzi  iliofanyika ya Ms. Ruth yana Mumb ua Ngundo, Nominee for the 
Position of Member , County Public Service Board . Bwana Spi ka ningependekeza na ningeomba 
Waheshimiwa wa Bunge hili ni kwamba wachukue nafasi hii na ningewasihi na kuwaomba kwa 
nidha mu tuweze kumpitisha huyu Madam . 

August 25 , 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Kwa sababu hapo ndio itak uwa imekamilika hesabu yetu ya B odi na itakapokuwa 
imeweza kukamilika na ndio zile kazi zilizobaki zitaweza kufuatiliziwa na kufanyika . Kwa hivyo 
langu saa hii , saa nane hii ni kuomba Bunge hili tuw eze kumpitisha huyu Madam awe mmoja 
katika wale Wanachama sita wa B odi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na ningeomba 
Mheshimiwa Amriya Juma  Boy a unge mkono  hii Hoja . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya Boy.  
Hon. Amriya Juma:  I second  [Off microphone].  
[Interruption]  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya, use your mic rophone.  
Hon. Amriya Juma Boy:  I rise to second Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a question 
that the Motion by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani on the adoption of the Report of vetting of Ms. 
Ruthyana Mumbua Ngundo, the Nominee for the Position of Member of County Public Service 
Board  be considered in the same term s as moved.  
[Question proposed ] 
Yes Hon. Amriya? Yes, there is a Member who is up on a Point of Order.  
Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker we all aware of the rules and regulations of this House 
especially d uring this time of the pandemic, i s it in order for Hon. Ogutu to come in without a 
mask? Hon. Speaker can yo u guide us please.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Ogutu please 
adhere to the health regulations , you are supposed to have a mask. Hon. Ogutu as you have been 
mentioned please go and look for a mask. Yes Hon. Tobias?  
Hon. Sa mba:  On the same note, I think Mr. Speaker gave out a directive , rather I do  not 
know whether it was  a directive that there should be masks to be provided at the entrance. So I 
think it is upon the responsible d epartme nt to issue us with the masks , I think  that is not too 
much for us as an Assembly . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you  Hon. Samba and I think the 
Serjeant-At-Arms are the ones who are looking for the mask for Hon. Ogutu . Yes, Hon. Kitula.  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa  Spika pia kuongezea katika hoja hio hio ni kwamba wa kati 
tunasambaziwa maji ni bora kama ilivyo katika Bunge la Kitaifa , boxi ya maji ikiwa hapo kila 
Mheshimiwa aweze kujichukulia mwenyewe , kuliko kugawanyiwa na kila mtu . Ahsante.  
 
August 25 , 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Kitula . I think the 
House leadership will take upon whatever you have raised  and deliberate on it and see the way 
forward . Yes, Hon. Amriya?  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Hon. Speaker for according me the op portunity to 
contribute to the Motion Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Spe aker I am part of the C ommittee on  Appointment s 
and on e Ms. Ruthyana came for the vetting and I can testify that she  is a well versed and well 
educated  person. S he has a Masters D egree  from Sophia Unive rsity, a Bachelor in C ommerce 
and she also exhibited exemplary knowledge  on accounts , has working experience clearly as a 
Director of Finance and you know when you are undergraduate Mr . Speaker and doing your 
Bachelor of C ommerce , those who choose accounti ng option are those who are brilliant students 
that have no jokes.  I was at the vetting Mr . Speaker and for sure Ms.  Ruthyana is well conversant 
with matters on finance,  also on human resource , she exhibited a wealth of working experience 
at different capa cities that we wish tha t she will replicate in our County Public Service Board 
that we get value for the amount  that we are allocating to the B oard and I am hoping to s ee more 
input from h er. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank yo u Hon. Amriya . Hon. Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kuweza kunipa fur sa hii na mimi 
niweze kuchangia. Mheshimiwa S pika kusema la ukweli mimi nimesimama pia kuunga hoja hii 
ya uteuzi wa huyu mama Ruthyana Mumbua Ngundo kuwa  Mwanachama  wa Kamati ya County 
Public Service B oard. Mimi kwanza kivyangu nimefurahi kama mama ; ni mara ya pili sasa 
mama katika Bodi hiyo ameteuliwa na G avana , pongezi kwa  Gavana wetu pia kwa kuweza 
kutambua kina mama . Mheshimiwa S pika mimi nik iangalia hapa huyu ma ma katika elimu 
amehitimu na ana vigezo vyake vya elimu vya kisawasawa , hata W aheshimiwa wakipitia hizi 
karatasi zake ukiangalia  ni mama amehitimu . Kwa hivyo mim i napongeza pia K amati iliyo piga 
msasa ; nawapongeza sana na naomba tuunge mkono tumalizane na  hii mambo ya Public Service 
Board Coun ty serikali  iweze kuonekana inafanya kazi.  Ahsanteni, ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon.  Hamisi Musa , I mean 
Leila . Hon. Members I now call upon the mover to respond.  
 
The Leader of M ajority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kama 
nilivyotangulia kusema nimeomba B unge hili kwa nidhamu na heshima liweze kupitisha huyu 
nominee  na nawashukuru wote walioweza kufika sa a hii saa nane kuweza kuzungumza kwa 
kauli moj a kuweza kumpitisha huyu mama kuwa Mwanachama wa Bodi  hii. Kwa hivyo sina la 
ziada Bwana Spika langu ni kushukuru B unge hili na kukushukuru pia wewe kutupatia nafasi ya 
kuweza kutekeleza majukumu yetu . Kwa hayo mengi na machache , ahsante sana Bwana Spika 
shukran.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members , I now put a question that 
the M otion by Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani on the adopti on of the report on vetting of M s. 
Ruthyana Mumbua Ngundo , nominee for the position of M ember of County Public S ervice 
Board be approved in this House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
August 25 , 2020                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  
Yes C lerk. 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members there being no other busi ness the House stands adjourned until 
Wednesday 26th August , 2020 at 10 :00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 2:55p.m.  