April 2 4, 2019                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednes day, 2 4th April, 2019  
The House met at 9:30a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated, yes Clerk.  
 
PAPER  
REPORT ON THE RENOVATION AN D SUPPLY OF LEARNING  EQUIPMENT /TOOLS IN THE EARLY 
CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMEN T EDUCATION CENTERS  (ECDES ) AND  THE ST ATUS OF SCHOOL 
MILK PROGRAM IN MOMB ASA COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Ibra him Omondi please lay down the Paper.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to lay the fol lowing 
Paper on the Report on renovation and supply of learning equipment/tools in the Early 
Childhood Development Education Centers (ECDEs) and the status of school milk program in 
Mombasa County with your permission Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Paper laid)  
  
 The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Ibrahim Omondi. Yes Clerk , next order 
please?  
STATEMENT S 
 
 Yes Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho?  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to make the f ollowing 
Statement regarding the above mentioned subject.  Mr. Spe aker Sir, Mikindani Ward receive 
water from Mzizima Spring s in Taita Taveta County which is over 200km away from Mombasa. 
Mr. Speaker the spring water is shared competitively between Kwale, Ta ita Taveta, Mombasa 
and Kilifi Counties . 

April 2 4, 2019                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Mombasa is disadvantaged by being at the downstream receiving only  10000 cubic meter 
per day instead of the expected 18000  cubic metres per day  out of the total production of 40,000  
cubic metre per day from the spring.  
 Mr. Speaker t he current drought is also affecting levels of water supply to the County.  
The Mzizima Pipeline which was installed during the colonial days, hence the concrete pipeline 
is aged and do experience frequent burst/leakage s. Mr. Speaker t he recent shortage of water 
experienced in Mikindani Ward was as a result of:  
 a) A major burst that occurred on 8th April , 2019, the repair works were compl eted on 11th             
April , 2019 and the supply resumed the very day.  
b) Mr. Speaker t he road construct ion works within the Mikindani Ward (Mariakani A109 
Highway Lot 1 Project) which require the existing p ipeline supplying water to the Ward and 
other places to be relocated by the main Contractor.  
 Mr. Speaker a  dispute initially emerged between the main Contractor and the sub -
Contractor over the relocation activity and this delayed the relocation work which contributed to 
the water shortage at areas such as Bangladesh, Mikindani estate etc.  Mr. Speaker t he dispute so 
far has been resolved and the relocation works are progressing on well and the supply zones 
affected by the works will be fully relieved immediately this works will be complicated.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir t he department of Water and Mombasa Water Supply and Sanitation 
Compa ny Limited  have been aggressively pursuing the above two issues which have been 
affecting the supply to Mikindani Ward and other places within the County to ensure the 
situation is reversed to normal.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you very much Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho . Yes  Hon. 
Renson Juma ? 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker . Well I appreciate the good work of the 
Hon. Chairman who was on air just now,  I want to bring to notice that  it is becoming a very big 
issue and it has been all over social media and mainstream  media the issue of Mikindani 
especially Bangladesh and Ga nahola at large and as much as w e appreciate the good work the 
Department is doing  I had requested for mitigation  factors and I would urge your atten tion to the 
same that if there are trucks of water that could supply the residen ts of Mikindani  especially 
Bangladesh and Ganahola  then... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon Khatri) : Hon. Renson are you standing on a Statement or on Point of 
Information ? 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  I am the person  that requested this Statement and therefore after the 
response, it  is the tradition of this House that I do appreciate or whatsoever, so am trying to ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So you are giving out another Statement  or? 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  I am not giving . 
April 2 4, 2019                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 (Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes. 
  
 Hon. Thoya:  He has responded  and the tradition of t his House is after the response  then 
the person who requested the Statement should say if he  is satisfie d or not.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  So am saying I  have appr eciated the good work that the Department  is 
doing and because this work  there is no clear deadline when they are goi ng to be through with 
this work,  am requesting the Hon.  Chair and even you  the Speaker , if we could get tr ucks of 
water that could supply  because we were used to be supplied  with Mombasa Cement but again 
there has been politics that the trucks of Mombasa Cement have been held up by police . That is 
the recent i nformation and therefore am requesting this House if there  is the Chairman or  through 
your better position , they can be instruct ed, we can get water trucks this thing is eat ing us 
politically as a County . 
 
(Silence ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you may c ontinue Hon. Member.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  This thing is eating us politically Hon. Speaker and therefore I would 
require the intelligence of  the leadership of this House  so that we can get water trucks to supply 
there because today in the morning it has been a cen tre of media coverage, even today they were 
media people covering the same and they are s aying failure is by the County government so we 
need to get out of this . Thank you  Mr. Speaker . 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Renson. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ningependa Naibu 
Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Maji aweze kueleza Bunge hili kwanza Idara yao  ina magari mangapi 
ambayo yana otoa huduma ya kusambaza maji katika mji wa Mombasa ili tuweze kujua 
tutams aidia vipi Mheshimiwa Thoya? Ahsante sana.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ):  Hon. Kitula I think now that is a Statement again you 
asking from the Honourable  Member , so when it comes to a Statement hour you will ask that. So 
Hon. Renson I think you have explain ed and the Hon . Members for the Committee of Water they 
are here so they have heard what you have said so I am sure they will look into that. Yes  Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAI RPERSON COMMITTEE ON TRADE , TOURISM AND 
INVESTMENT HON. OPEYA ON THE MAMA NGINA  WATERFRONT DEVELOPME NT 
 Yes Hon. Kizito?  
April 2 4, 2019                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           34 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . This is in response to a Statement which was 
asked by Hon. Moses Aran on the report of Mama Ngina waterfront development. Mr. Speaker 
as part of the strategy to revamp tourism articulated in the National Tourism Blu e print , 2030...  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I was requesting as you are a Chair and your direction 
that Chair who is responding instead of reading this whole report because I think Membe rs have 
been supplied with the same so I thought it could be good that he just leave Members to go 
through the report instead of reading line by line it will take a lot of time. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Yes Hon. Kiz ito? 
 Hon. Opeya:  Yes I think that would be ok . 
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): You may just touch on the basis of the report and then the 
Members will go through the report.  
 Hon. Opeya:  Ok, I just wanted to highlight like the first page where the Contractor h as 
engaged services of more tha n 228 people majority being casual labourers that were sourced 
within the County. A number of current traders in the Park have been inco rporated  as casual s to 
cushion  them against business interruptio ns caused by construction works. Then also on the  
second  page, the Department of Trade, Tourism and Investment has maintained a data base of all 
the registered traders operating in the Park currently. All of these traders will be allocated spaces 
for conduct ing their businesses on completion of the project.  
 And also lastly there is a graph of the people who are employed in the last page which 
has been provided so we can read through the graph otherwise this is the report and if any 
Member has a query  then he  is free to ask any question. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Kizito. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Thank you Hon. Members this House stands adjourned u ntil Wednesday, 24th April 
2019 at 2 :30p.m. 
The House rose at 9 :45a.m. 