May 16, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       34 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 16th May, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Thirty Fourth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  12:13p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Have your seats  Honourable  Members. 
Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
NOMINATION OF TWO BOARD MEMBERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 12(3)( D) OF THE 
COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT , 2012  
 
Honourable  Members, Nomina tion of two Board Members in Accordance with section 
12(3)(d) of the County governments Act, 2012. Hon ourable  Members , the nomin ation of the two 
external Board M embers ; reference is made on the County Assembly Service Board resolutions 
of 5th May, 2023  which adopted the interview Report of the following two external Board 
Members who were successful during the interviews ; 
 
1. Miss Linet Kamadi ID No. 10312885  
2. Mr. Swabir Abdallah ID No. 20113877  
 
As per the County Assembly Service Act , 2017 the Service Board su bmits the names to the 
County Assembly for approval in accordance with the Mombasa County  Assembly Standing 
orders from the Clerk of the County Assembly of Mombasa . Honourable  Members , having read 
the communication , the two nominee s stand  committed to the Committee on Appointments for 
considerations and be brought back to this Hon ourable  House for the House to approve . Thank  
you. Yes Clerk ? 
  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
MEASURES TO ERADICATE CHILD LABOUR WITHIN MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Jacktone Madialo.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  
May 16, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       34 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to give notice of the following Motion:  
 
AWARE THAT  the National Policy on Eliminating Child Labour  provides a framework 
for eradicating child labour in Kenya and that its implementation is crucial to achieving 
this goal;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT  raising awareness among parents, employers, and the 
community about the harmful effects of child labour is critica l to reducing its prevalence;   
 
NOTING THAT  effective strategies to eliminate child labour have been implemented in 
developed countries, including increased education and vocational training access, 
economic incentives to discourage child labour, and social protection services for at -risk 
children;  
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT  children under the age of 18 years o ld are entitled to their 
rights and freedoms as stipulated in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the 
Child , including the right to education, heal th, and protection from harm;  
 
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT  child labour is a serious problem in Mombasa Cou nty, with 
children being exploited economically through street hawking, street begging, domestic 
work, sexual exploitation, boda boda riding, child trafficking , and children working in 
quarries;  
 
CONCERNED THAT  child labour deprives children of their child hood, education, and 
future opportunities, and that it is a violation of their rights;  
 
RECOGNIZING THAT  the County government has a responsibility to protect ch ildren 
from exploitation and abuse and promote their welfare and development under Article 43 
of the  Constitution of Kenya , and the ILO Convention No. 182 , which calls for the 
elimination of the worst forms of child labour, including slavery, forced labour , trafficking, 
and work that is harmful to a child's health or development;  
 
I, therefore, urge  this Assembly to RESOLVE : 
 
1. THAT , the County government work with the national government to, strengthen 
laws and policies to protect children, enforce them, and p rovide social services to eradicate 
child labour, in compliance with international best pract ices; 
 
2. THAT,  the County government to raise awareness among parents, employers, and 
the community about the harmful effects of child labour, and promote alternative solutions ; 
 
3. THAT,  the County government to collaborate with government agencies and civil 
society to imp lement effective strategies and allocate resources to increase access to 
education and vocational training in a bid to eliminate child labour ; 
May 16, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       34 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 4. THAT,  the County government to monitor and report on child labour prevalence 
and take appropriate ac tion to preve nt and respond to cases, in compliance with 
international best practices ; 
  
5. THAT,  the County government to partner with international organizations to 
leverage resources in fighting child labour, in compliance with international best practices .  
 
6. Thank you, M r. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Thank you Honourable  Jacktone Madialo . 
Yes Clerk ? 
  
STATEMENT  
BLOCKAGE OF PUBLIC ACCESS ROAD NEAR KIEMBENI BAPTIST CHURCH  
 
Yes, Honourable  Morgan Matsaki , Minority Leader .  
 
Hon. Matsaki : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Honourable  Speaker,  I stand pursuant to standing 
order 41 (2) (c)   to request for a statement from the   Chairperson, Committee on Lands, 
Housing and Urban Planning.  
 
Honourable  Speaker,  the County governments are responsible  for regulating and 
overseeing construction activities within their boundaries. This may involve issuing 
permits, inspecting construction sites and enforcing building codes and other regul ations . 
 
Honourable  Speaker, the responsibility for maintaining publ ic access roads in the County 
typically falls under the County governments. They are responsible for ensuring that roads 
are constructed, repaired and maintained to meet safety and accessible st andards.  
  
Honourable  Speaker, I’m deeply concerned about the recent construction of a wall that has 
blocked access to a public access road. I believe that this action has resulted in an 
unacceptable obstruction of the residents’ rights to free and safe movements, and is 
contrary to the principles of accessibility an d inclusivity that are essential to a healthy and 
vibrant community.  
 
Honourable  Speaker, in his response, the Chairperson should inquire and respond on the 
following;  
 
1. Whether the County governme nt has grated authority for the construction of the 
wall nea r Kiembeni Baptist Church in Mtopanga Ward?  
 
2. What steps the County government has to rectify this situation by removing the 
obstruction and restoring public access to the road near Kiembeni Bapt ist Church in 
Mtopanga Ward?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadh ili M akarani ): Thank you . Honourable  Morgan  Matsaki  
Minority Leader . Yes, any Member from Transport Committee ? Okay thank you Clerk for 
the rectification . 
May 16, 202 3                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       34 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 Yes, any Member from Lands Committee to respond on the statement from Hon ourable  
Matsaki, yes Hon ourable Ibrahim are you a Member of Lands?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Any response?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker , I would like the Member t o give us time for at least two 
week s, those are enough because those are m atters involving lands and are very secretive . 
Mr. Speaker , we request  you to give us two weeks so that we as a Committee we will be 
able to exhaust tha t matter,  we shall respon d comprehensively Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi, I 
think two weeks is enough , so permission granted . Yes Clerk.   
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Honourable  Members , the House stands adjourned until Tuesday 16th May, 2023 at 2:30 
p.m. 
 
The House rose at  12:27p.m.  