August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 26th August 2020  
The House met at 10:55 a.m.  
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members you may be seated . 
Yes, Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
NOTIFICATION OF DISCH ARGE OF FOUR ODM  MEMBERS FROM ALL COUNTY ASSEMBLY 
COMMITTEES  
 
 Hon. Members I have received a letter from the  Chief Whip , Majority Party Mombasa 
County ; notification of discharge of four ODM  Members from all County Assembly 
committees . The above title refers.  I am in receipt of  a letter dated Thursday  23rd July, 2020 
from the County A ssembly of Mombasa , majority  party Orange Democratic  Movement  
(ODM)  on the discharge of four M embers of the Cou nty Assembly of Mombasa , pursuant to 
Standing order 157(1) of the County Assembly of Mombasa Standing Orders. T he Members 
to be discharged from all the County Assembly Committees  are; 
 
1. Hon. Abrari Moha med    Kongowea W ard 
2. Hon. Charles Kitula Juma    Frere Town W ard 
3. Hon Fahad  Kassim Abdallah    Mjambere W ard 
4. Hon. Shebe Athman     Jomvu Kuu W ard 
 
 This is therefore to notify you of the decision  of the party , attachment  letter and 
request  you to convey the same to the M embers concerned and the County Assembly.  
Thanking you in advance.  Hon. Junior Wambua, Majority Whip.  Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPER  
LIST OF APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO THE SE LECT AND SECTORAL CO MMI TTEES  
 
 Yes, the Leader of M ajority ? 
 

August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  The Leader of M ajority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . May i tak e 
this opportunity to l ay the P aper, list of appointment of M embers to the Select and S ectoral 
Commit tees. 
 
[Paper laid] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk ? 
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
APPROVAL OF LIST OF APPOINTMENT OF MEMBE RS TO SELECT AND SEC TORAL COMMITTEES  
 
 Yes Hon . Hamis i Musa Mwidani, Chairperson Commit tee on Selection and the 
Leader of M ajority . 
  
 The Leader of M ajority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker Sir i move a M otion , 
approval of list of appointment  of M embers to S elect and Sectoral Committee s. That pursuant 
to Standing O rders 152,  153, 185, 186, 187, 188 and 191 , this House r esolves to approve the 
list of M embers nominated by County Assembly Parties and recommended by the Committee 
on S election to the County Assembly Select and Sectoral  Committees . Mr. Speaker I would 
like to call Hon . Amriya to second the M otion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon . Amriya , use your 
microphone . 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  I arise to second Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalim u): Hon. Members I now propose a 
question that.. . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Point of order Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Let me propose a question first.  I 
now propose a question that the M otion by Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani on appointment of 
Select and S ectoral Committees  be considered in  this Honourable  House in the same terms as 
moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Hon. Kitula , what was the point of order?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni B unge ambalo lina lindwa na sheria . 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza ningependa kutoa shukrani kwa Taarifa  ambayo amefanya 
Mheshimiwa Kiranja wa Bunge  kwamba  sisi tumeweza kutolewa katika Kamati mbalimbali 
pamoja na W aheshimiwa wanne ambao tumekuwa na jukumu letu la kutenda kikatiba  
kuhakikisha kwamba wananchi wa Mombasa wanapata huduma ilio haki lakin i kwa kuwa 
Chama k imeona jukumu tunalofanya h alistahili ndio hatua wamechuku a tunasema ya 
kwamba Mwenyezi Mungu ndio a tatuelekeza pale twaf aa kuelekea.   
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Lengine Mheshimiwa Spika sheria  yetu ya Kanuni za Bunge; Kiongozi wa Wengi 
Bungeni  ameweza ku lay P aper hapa na leo hii hi i ameleta Procedural M otion  ambayo 
inasema , approval  of list of appointment of Members to Select and Sectoral C ommit tees. 
Mheshimiwa Spika  Kanuni za Bunge nambari  153 na nitakusomea Mheshimiwa Spika , 
‘There shall be a S elect Committee  to be designated  Selection Committee  consisting the 
Leader of M ajority party who shall be the Chairperson, the Leader of Minority P arty not les s 
than 11 and not more than 19 M embers who shall b e nominated by County Assembly P arties 
and approved by the County Assembly’ .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika kinachostahili kwanza ilikuwa ni barua kutoka Chama cha ODM , 
Paper  ambayo iko hapo katika M eza yetu iwe ni barua kutoka vyama  alafu baadae sisi kama 
wana chama tuweze kupitisha  ile hoja ya kuweza kuunda ile K amati ya Uteuzi  alafu baadae 
Kamati ya Uteuzi  waend e wakae alafu watuletee katika Bunge wale W anakamati wameweza 
kuchagua kuweza kuhudumia katika K amati mbalimbali , lakini leo hii K amati ya Uteuzi 
haija kaa tayari Procedural M otion , yaani tunapitisha kitu leo  leo... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Kitula the M otion in place has 
been forwarded by the C hairperson , Selection Committee  so it means the S election 
Committee  is there and they have sat  and that  is why the M otion has seen the doors of the 
County Assembly, whatever you have said in my opinion ... all the steps have been fo llowed . 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika itakuwa ni kinyume na sheria, sa a hii ndio Paper 
imekuwa laid hapa utaniambia kwamba Selection C ommi ttee wamekaa hapa wakachagua 
Wanakamati  saa hii, saa hii Mheshimiwa Spika?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Kitula it is no t just something 
of today, the S election Committee  sat, they know when th ey sat and they proposed this list 
that is before this Honourable  House.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika sasa nafikiri hujaniskia vizuri , watakaa v ipi kabla 
haijapitishwa kwenye B unge ! Mheshimiwa  Spika lazima ipitishwe kwenye B unge alafu 
baadae waje  kuamua  vipi wameweza kuchagua Kamati, Paper leo ndio wanapitisha Select 
Commit tee alafu wao wamekaa kabla kuwapi tisha katika B unge hili ilikuw a inastahili 
kwamba wamepitishwa katika B unge alafu wakae wachague Wanakamati . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalim u):  Hon. Kitula…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Just a minute Hon.  Samba you will talk ! I think you know we had Committees  in 
place and  the Selection Committee  was in place and it was the one that brought the names of 
these Committees  that we had and it is the same S election Committee  that has brought 
forward the nam es that are to be debated today in this Honourable  House . Let Hon. Samba 
speak first then you will.  
 
 Hon. Samba: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  The Honourable  concerned let me take you 
through this book ; you see w hen it comes to Committees  it lies within the party and the party 
decisions  are always final.   
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Honourable , my Colleague  if you go to the Society of Clerks at T able Kenya  
(SOCCAT)  model County Assembly Committee M anual this is a core Committee manual 
2018,  (34) it indicates discharge of a Member from a Committee  and states that , 'the 
Assembly nominated a Member to a Select Committee may give notice in writing to the 
Speaker that the Member is to be discharged from a Select Committee, the discharge of a 
Memb er takes an effect upon the receipt of the Speaker of the Notice, any vacancy occasioned 
by resignation or removal for a Member in a Select Committee should be filled in 14 days of 
the vacancy ' , that is C ommittee manual document. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri Mheshimiwa Samba 
hajanielewa ; nimesema nimekubali kutolewa katika Kamati kulingana na uamuzi wa Kiranja 
wa Bunge,  hiyo iwe wazi nimekubali utaratibu umefuatwa vilivyo lakini langu ni kuhusu zile  
Kamati zimewezwa kupangwa hapa.  Mheshimiwa Spika umesema Kamati ya Uteuzi  imekaa , 
mimi ni M wanachama wa Kamati  ya Uteuzi , Mheshimiwa Fait h yuko hapa ni M wanachama 
wa Kamati ya Uteuzi  hatujawahi kukaa kama  Kamati ya Uteuzi. B arua imetumwa leo hapo ni  
kwamba sisi t umetolewa katika C hama iko kuanzia leo lakini kit ambo ina maana mimi 
nilikuwa na hudumu katika  Kamati ya Uteuzi na  sijaitwa…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula you were sitting in the 
Selection Committee as a Chief Whip  and the moment you were dischar ged as a Chief Whip 
in this Honourable  House Hon. Junior Wambua replaced you in that Committee . Hon. 
Members the Motion is on the floor and it is you to debate and Hon. Kitula as I said earlier 
the Committees were in place a nd the Motion to approve Membership was brought to this 
House more than six months and hence a Motion can be brought on the same issue Pursuant 
to Standing Order 46 (1).  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri hili ni Bunge la sheria ; itakuwa ni vibaya 
kwanza Kamati ya Uteuzi  sio jukumu lao kuunda Sectoral Committee  chini ya Kanuni za 
Bunge  191 tuko na Makatibu  hapo wataweza kukusaidia  Kamati ya Uteuzi  haiwezi kuunda 
Kamati ya Sectoral Committee . Mheshimiwa Spika tuna sheria zinazolinda Bunge hili…  
 
[Inter ruption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Hon. Kitula Sectoral Committee , 
these are the names brought by the Party; the Asse mbly Parties proposed the names.  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Yes. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  So what is the argum ent? 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  The argument is Sectoral Committees inaundwa na Kamati ya  House 
Business ikiwa imeweza ku wasiliana  na Chama cha kisiasa  lakini haikufanyika  hivyo . Sasa 
leo barua inaletwa na  Kamati ya Uteuzi  ambapo leo ndio tunapit isha hao Memba ambapo 
leo hata M emba wengine hatuna hizo orodha  kujua kama mimi haki yangu kuhudumu kwa 
hizo Sectoral C ommittees  kama M wanachama lakini vile vile lazima tufuate sheria 
Mheshimiwa Mweny ekiti, Kanuni ya Bunge  191 hata Katibu  anaweza kutusomea iko wazi...  
 
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 [Interru ption]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula are you arguing on the 
Party’s discharge letter or what are you arguing on?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimesema si na tetesi  kuhusiana na discharge  
yetu katika Chama,  mimi na teta na sheria vile zinafuatwa kuunda hizi Kamati, sheria 
haijafuatwa vilivyo na hili ni Bung e la sheria tufua te sheria kama Kanuni za Bunge  hata hapa 
Kiongozi wa Wengi Bungeni amenukuu Kanuni za Bunge  lakini je akizisoma hizi Kanuni za 
Bunge  amezifuata vile zilivy o na uko na  Makatibu  ambao wanaweza kukusaidia … 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Ibrahim? Hon. Ibrahim is 
up. 
 
[Laughter]  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  I do not understand Mr. Speaker ; this debate is turning to be the 
Speaker and Hon. Kitula, is it a conver sation taking place in this Honourable  House or? Mr. 
Speaker there are rules  that are supposed to be guiding us because am seeing it is just a 
conversation between the Speaker and one Hon. Kitula…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula you are out of order! Let 
Hon. Ibrahim...  Hon. Kitula let  Hon. Ibrahim finish first,  let Hon. Ibrahim finish first then 
Hon…let Hon. Ibrahim proceed. Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Hon. K itula is becoming too much argumentative  in this 
Honourable  House , and I do  not feel it is good for this House. Mr. Speaker Hon. Kitula stood 
on a Point of Order and indeed you have stated clearly  and informed him but what I fail to 
understand it is becomi ng a conversation between the Speaker and Hon. Kitula! W e are 
missing out, they are issues that we are su pposed to deal with Mr. Speaker, so can you rule on 
that so that we can continue. Thank you.  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Hili ni Bunge sasa , ikiwa Memba wa 
Wodi ya Airport hafahamu kitu gani kinaendelea katika Bunge hili hasa atakuwa ana maana 
gani kuwa hapa? Mheshimiwa Spika wakati anajua Order ambayo iko hapa ni Order namba  
nane anasema yeye hajui kitu gani kinaendelea sas a ina maana gani kuwakilisha watu wa 
Airport ikiwa wewe mwenyewe ni Mwakilishi lakini hujui ni kitu gani kinaendelea ! Kwa 
hivyo unapoingia kwenye Bunge soma Order Paper  ujue unaongea nini…  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . Hon. Member s the 
Motion is before the floor of the House so let the Hon. Leader Chairperson Select to read out 
the names for the Members to make their contributions . 
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker let 
me start with the Spea kers’ Panel.  
 
SPEAKERS ' PANEL  
  
1. Hon. Ebrahim Aharub Khatri    Chairman  
2. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani   Member   
3. Hon. Musumba Bwire     Member   
4. Hon, Murfad Abdallah Amur     Member  
5. Hon. Amriya Boy Juma    Member  
 
 Okay Mr. Speaker that was Speakers’ Panel , so I hope I will be getting a seconder for 
that. 
  
[Silence]  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : I rise to second . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Okay Mr. Speaker , now I move the 
Motion Pursuant to provisions Standing Order Number 152…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Just a minute Hon. Hamisi.  Hon. 
Members now that the Speakers’ Panel has a seconder I now stand to put a question that the 
Motion on th e Committee on Speakers’ Panel as moved by Hon. Hamisi Mwidani be 
approved in this Honoura ble House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Okay Mr. Speaker Pursuant to the 
provisions of Standing Orders Number 152 this Assembly approves the Appointment of the 
following Members nominated by the County Assembly Par ty and Selection Committee to be 
the Members of the County Assembly Business Committee.  
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY BUSIN ESS COMMITTEE   
 
1. Hon. Ebrahim Aharub Khatri       Chairman   
2. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani       Vice Chairman   
3. Hon. Junior Wambua Kyaka       Member  
4. Hon. R amla Sa id Omar       Member  
5. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy      Member   
6. Hon. Moses Aran Oindo       Member   
7. Hon. Ahmed Khamis Salim       Member  
8. Hon. Faith Mwende Boniface      Member   
9. Hon. Feddis Salame Mbura       Member  
10. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya       Member  
11. Hon. Amriya B oy Juma       Member  
12. Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai      Member   
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 13. Hon. Robert Nyiro Mwaega      Member  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?         
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : I hope Hon.  Lucy Chizi will second that  
Motion.  
 Hon. Chireri:  I second .  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members I now rise to put a 
question that the Motion on the Committee on  House B usiness be approved in this 
Honourable  House ?  
[Question put and agreed to]  
 Yes?  
 The Leader of Majo rity (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let me  move a 
Motion, Pursuant to the provision of Standing Order No.153 , this Assembly approves the 
appointment s of the following  Members nominated by the County Assembly Party and 
Selection Committee to be the Members of the County Assembly Committee on Selection.  
COMMITTEE ON SELECTIO N 
1. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani    Chairman  
2. Hon. Rosemary Mueni Mukavi   Vice Chairlady  
3. Hon. Kizito Okoth Opeya    Member  
4. Hon. Junior Wambua Kyaka    Member  
5. Hon. Feddis Salame  Mbura    Member  
6. Hon. Murfad Abdallah Amur    Member  
7. Hon. Ahmed Khamis Salim Khamis   Member  
8. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani   Member  
9. Hon. Maimuna Salim Mwawasi   Member  
10. Hon. Ahmed Salama Omari    Member  
11. Hon. Mwaka Bakari Mwaludonda   Member  
12. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya    Member  
13. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy    Member  
 
 I would like Hon. Mwaka to second the Motion.  
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  I second . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): I now rise to put a question on 
Committee on Selection as moved by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani ? 
[Ques tion put and agreed to]  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I  would like to  move another 
Motion.  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  That Pursuant to provision of Standing Order No., Second Schedule , this Assembly 
approves the appointment of the following Members nominated b y the County Assembly 
Party and Selection Committee to be the Members of Justice, Legal Affairs and Devolution 
Committee.  
COMMITTEE OF JUSTICE , LEGAL AFFAIRS AND DE VOLUTION  
1. Hon. Amriya Boy Juma   Chairlady  
2. Hon. Ali Shomari    Vice Chair  
3. Hon. Kizito Okoth Opeya   Member  
4. Hon. Musumba Raphael Bwire   Member  
5. Hon. Feddis Salame Mbura   Member  
6. Hon. Ali Omar Shariff    Member  
7. Hon. Tobias Otieno Samba    Member  
8. Hon. Bernard Ochieng Ogutu  Member  
9. Hon Ahmed Salama Omari   Member  
10. Hon. Ramla Said Omar   Member  
11. Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy    Member  
12. Hon. Milka Moraa Nga re   Member  
13. Hon. Mwaka Zahoro Juma    Member  
   
 This one I request Hon. Mwalimu  Mgwisho  to second.  
 Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi:  I second .  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  I now stand to put a question that the 
Motion on the Committee on Justice, Legal Affairs and Devolution  Committee be approved 
in this Honourable  House ? 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Hon. Speaker let me move to the 
Committee  on Agriculture, Fisheries, Livesto ck and Cooperatives.  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULT URE, FISHERIES , LIVESTOCK AND COOPER ATIVES  
 
1. Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai    Chairman  
2. Hon. Murfad Abdallah Amur    Vice Chairman  
3. Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri    Member  
4. Hon. Maimuna Salim Mwawasi   Member  
5. Hon. Mary Onsongo     Member  
6. Hon. Ibrahim Omondi    Member  
7. Hon. Athman Ramadhan Mwamwiri   Member  
8. Hon. Wambua Kyaka     Member  
9. Hon. Moses Aran Oind o   Member  
10. Hon. Mary Naliaka Wafula    Member  
11. Hon. Mwaka Zahoro  Juma    Member  
12. Hon Mary Naliaka     Member   
13. Hon. Robert Nyiro     Mem ber 
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 [Consultations]  
 Now Mr. Speaker, yes Mr. Sp eaker there is a bit of mistake.  Hon.  Mary  Naliaka 
appeared twice then we request to pass  the Committee  with amendment s. Now Mr. Speaker 
let me move to Comm ittee on Education, Information. .. 
[Interruption ] 
 Sorry, ok Mr. Speaker I will request Hon. Hatimy to second the amendment of that 
Committee.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I rise to second . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa proceed with 
the Committees.  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. M widani) : Let me move on Comm ittee on Education, 
Information  Technology and MV2035 .  
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATIO N, INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY AND MV 2035  
1. Hon. Ibrahim Omondi    Chairman  
2. Hon. Ali Omar Sharif f   Vice Chairman  
3. Hon. Robert Nyiro Mwaega    Member  
4. Hon. Faith  Boniface Mwende   Member  
5. Hon. Murfad Abdallah Amur    Member  
6. Hon. Athman Ramadhan Mwamwiri   Member  
7. Hon. Mwaka Bakari Mwaludonda   Member  
8. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya    Member  
9. Hon. Mary Evelyne Onsongo    Member  
10. Hon. Rosemary Mueni Mukavi   Member  
11. Hon. Milka Mora a Ngare    Member  
 
 Now Mr. Speaker m ay I take this opportunity to move on Committee on Youth, 
Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs.  
 
COMMITTEE ON YOUTH , GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS  
 
1. Hon. Tobias Otieno Samba    Chairman  
2. Hon. Mwaka Zahoro Juma    Vice Chairl ady 
3. Hon. Lei la Mughazo Nyanje    Member  
4. Hon. Musumba Raphael Bwire   Member  
5. Hon. Ahmed Khamis Salim    Member  
6. Hon. Faith Boniface Mwende   Member  
7. Hon. Bernard Ochieng Ogutu    Member  
8. Hon. Moses Aran Oindo    Member  
 
[Interruption ] 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Oindo . 
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Hon. Oindo, Oindo, thank you.  
 
9.  Hon. Rosemary Mueni Mukavi    Member  
10.  Hon. Hamida Noor Sheikh Ali    Member  
11.  Hon. Mary Everlyne Onsongo    Member   
 
COMMITTEE ON TRADE , TOURISM AND INVESTMENT  
 
1. Hon. Kizito Okoth Opeya     Chairman  
2. Hon. Ahmed Hamisi Mohamed    Vice Chairman  
3. Hon. Salim Da vid Kalume     Member  
4. Hon.  Lucy Chizi Chireri     Member  
5. Hon. Murfad Abdalla Amur     Member  
6. Hon. Maimuna Salim Mwawasi    Member  
7. Hon. Tobias Otieno Samba     Member  
8. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani     Member  
9. Hon. Hamadi Musa Mgwisho     Member  
10. Hon. Mohammed Hatimy     Member  
11. Hon. Fatuma Swaleh Mote     Member  
12. Hon. Fadhili Mwa limu    Member  
13. Hon. Junior Wambua      Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC WORK S 
 
1. Hon. Pricilla Mema Mumba     Chair  Lady  
2. Hon. Mwaka Bakari Mwalud onda    Vice Chairlady  
3. Hon. Ali Mohammed Shomari    Member  
4. Hon. Ali Omar Shariff     Member  
5. Hon. Moses Aaron Oindo                                       Member  
6. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Maka rani                           Member  
7. Hon. Ibrahim Omondi                                              Member  
8. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani                                    Member  
9. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya                                     Member  
10. Hon. Amriya  Boy Juma     Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON LANDS PLANNING AND HOUSING  
 
1. Hon. Ahmed Salama Omari     Chairman  
2. Hon. Moses A ran Oind o    Vice Chairman  
3. Hon. Ali Shomari      Member  
4. Hon. Ahmed Salim Hamisi     Member  
5. Hon. Fadhili Mw alimu Mak arani    Member  
6. Hon. Junio r Wambua Kyaka     Member  
7. Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi M gwisho    Member  
8. Hon. Juma Ren son Thoya     Member  
9. Hon. Moha mmed Hatimy     Member  
10. Hon. Fatuma Swaleh Mote     Member  
11. Hon. Leila Mug hazo Nyach e    Member  
 ...Nyache not N yachae  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT WASTE MANAGEMENT AND ENERGY  
 
1. Hon. Athman Rama Mwam wiri   Chairman  
2. Hon. Feddis Mbura Salame     Vice Chairlady  
3. Hon. Franci s Kombe Nzai     Member  
4. Hon. Musumba Bwire      Memb er 
5. Hon. Mohammed Shomari     Member  
6. Hon. Pricilla Mema Mumba     Member  
7. Hon. Faith Mwende Bon iface    Member  
8. Hon. Maimuna Salim      Member  
9. Hon. Ramla Said Omar     Member  
10. Hon. Leila Mug hazo Nyache     Member  
11. Hon. Mary Na liaka Waf ula    Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH  
 
1. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Bay a    Chairman  
2. Hon. Fatuma Swaleh Mote     Vice Chairlady  
3. Hon. Fr ancis Kombe Nzai     Member  
4. Hon. Lucy Chizi Ch ireri    Member  
5. Hon. Murfad Abdalla Amur     Member  
6. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani    Member  
7. Hon. Hamida Sheikh Ali    Member  
8. Hon. Hamisi Musa  Mwidan i                               Member  
9. Hon. Milka Moraa                                              Member  
10. Hon. Okoth Opeya      Member  
11. Hon. Ahmed  Khamis Salim    Member  
 
COMMI TTEE ON WATER , SANITATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES  
 
1. Hon. Hamida Noor Sheikh                                 Chairlady   
 
[Applause ] 
 
2. Hon. Mwalimu Hama di Mgwisho                      Vice Chairman  
3. Hon. Robert Nyiro Mwaega                               Member  
4. Hon. Moses Aran                                               Member  
5. Hon. Ali Mohammed Sh omari                           Member  
6. Hon. Feddis Salame Mbu ra                              Member  
7. Hon. Pri scilla Mema Mumba                             Member  
8. Hon. Jun ior Wambua Kyaka                            Member  
9. Hon. Juma Renson Thoya                                 Member  
10. Hon. Ramla Said Omar                                    Member  
11. Hon. Leila Mug hazo Nyac he                              Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON LABO UR AND SOCIAL WELFARE  
 
1. Hon. Juma Renson Thoy a    Chairman  
2. Hon. Bernard Ochie ng Ogutu     Vice Chairman  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 3. Hon. Salim David Kalum e    Member  
4. Hon. Murfad Amur      Member  
5. Hon.  Musumba Raphae l Bwi re   Member  
6. Hon. Maimuna Sali m Mwawasi    Member  
7. Hon. Ahmed Salama Om ari    Member  
8. Hon. Mwaka Ba kari Mwaludonda    Member  
9. Hon. Mary Evelyn Osong o    Member  
10. Hon. Hamida Noor She ikh Ali    Member  
11. Hon. Amriya  Boy Juma     Member  
 
 Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members , as it was stated by 
the mover of this Motion on  Sectoral  Committees, that there is an a mendment to  be made on 
a certain Committee. So I de fer putting the question until the afternoon se ssion  on these 
Sectoral  Committees as proposed by the Leader of M ajority. So in the afte rnoon session  then 
you bring your amendment, I  will proceed to put a question yes, proceed the Leader of 
Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker let me move the M otion . 
  
 THAT pursuant to the provisio n of Standing Order 154, that th is Assembly approves 
the appointment of the following Members, nominated  by the County Assembly Party 
on Selection Committee, to be the Member of r espective Select Committee as follows;  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Committee on Implementation.  
 
COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMEN TATION  
  
1. Hon. Salim  David Kalume    Chairman  
2. Hon. Musumba Bwire     Vice Chair man 
3. Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai    Member  
4. Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri    Member  
5. Hon. Maimuna Salim Mwawasi   Member  
6. Hon. Tobias Otieno S amba   Member  
7. Hon. Ibrahim Omond i    Member  
8. Hon. Benard Ochieng Ogutu    Member  
9. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani    Member   
10. Hon. Mwalimu Hamad Mgwisho   Member  
11. Hon. Juma Renson Thoya    Member  
12. Hon. Mary Everlyne  Osongo    Member  
13. Hon. Mary Naliaka W afula    Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
  
1. Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri    Chairlady   
2. Hon. Milka Moraa Ngare    Vice Chairlady  
3. Hon. Okoth Opeya     Member  
4. Hon. Musumba Bwire     Member  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 5. Hon. Ali Moha med Shomari    Member  
6. Hon. Ali Omar Shariff    Member  
7. Hon. Robert Nyiro Mwaega    Member  
8. Hon. Junior Wambua     Mem ber 
9. Hon. Feddis Salame Mbura    Member  
10. Hon. Moh amed Hatimy    Member  
11. Hon. Moses Aran     Member  
12. Hon. Leila Mghazo Nyache    Member  
13. Hon. Hamida Noor Sheikh Ali   Member  
 
COUNTY PUBLIC INVESTMENTS AND ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (PAC) 
 
1. Hon. Fadhi li Mwalimu Makarani   Chairperson   
2. Hon. Amriya Boy Juma    Vice C hairperson   
3. Hon. Mwaka Zahoro Juma    Member  
4. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya    Member  
5. Hon. Moha med Hatimy    Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : There is a Member up on a P oint of 
order. Yes?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa mara nyengine ni vizuri kufuata 
sheria ; County Investments and Accounts Committee  sheria iko wazi kwamba ikiwa  
Wanakamati  wameweza ku hudumu miaka mitatu inastahil i Wanakamati  wengine waweze 
kuingia katika  Kamati  hiyo, iweje leo hii Wanakamati  ni wale wa le wanaingia katika Kamati 
hiyo?  Ahsante , naomba utoe uamuzi  kwa hilo.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Kitula ; under which 
Article or law ? 
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Standing Order 186 (4) .  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Hon. Kitula in your calculation since 
inauguration of this Assembly has three  years…  
 
[Silence]  
 
 Thank you Hon. Kitula , first I would like to shed light because I am c oncern ed or I 
declare interest in that C ommittee as my name ha s been mentioned as the Chair. Un der the 
same issue I think we are not yet or three years have not finish ed since we commence d the  
[??]  of sitting in this Honourable  House since inauguration of  this Assembly . I think three 
years have not yet elapse d and on the same note there  is nowhere t hat is indicated that the 
same M embers are not supposed to serve in that Committee . Even if it has stated the ter ms or 
limit of serving in that C ommittee but it  has not stated the same M ember s cannot continue 
serving that C ommittee.  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14 Yes Hon. Hamisi , proceed.  Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
hii ni Nyumba ya sheria na taarifa  ambayo nataka kutoa ni kusema  kuwa mtu asije aka anza  
kupotosha watu , sisi tunaangalia Bunge kuu  vile wanavyokwenda na sisi ndio 
tunavyokwenda hata kwenye sheria ya Ugatuzi  ukisoma kuhusu Kanuni za Bunge  
inatakikana iende sambamba na Bunge kuu katika  kufanya marekebisho fulani.  
Prof. Ongeri ame hudumu  the first part  ya miaka mitatu anayosema ni Mwanakamati wa  PAC  
Senate , Fatuma Dulo ame hudumu  the first three years she is back as a M ember of  PAC, Ole 
Kina  amehudumu the first three ye ars and he is back in the same C ommittee , so what is t his 
Mheshimiwa Spika kuja kuambiwa sheria ambazo s isi hatuzijui sijui zatoka wapi!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Faith Mwende.  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika , yangu naona vyenye hiyo K amati  
imeundwa si sawa vyenye kuna vyama v yengine ambavyo ni vidogo viko katika hii Nyumba 
haitakuwa sawa kama ODM ndio watakuwa watupu katika hiyo K amati  na hakuna hata 
Mwanachama  mmoja wa vyama vya kisiasa vyengine  wata husishwa katika Kamati hiyo . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Athman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Nataka kumuelezea 
Mwenyekiti wa Sarafu amesema inafuata precedence  na K anuni ya Bunge Kuu kule 
wanavyofanya lakini swali hapa akaangalie je katika yale mabadiliko wa ile Kamati ya 
Bunge ambayo anatoa mfano wake M wanachama  ikiwa wale wale je wameongezeka ama 
wamebaki a wale wale ? Kwa sababu ukiangalia composition  ya Public Accounts ya Senate 
ndio kina Prof . Ongeri wali hudumu  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na wakaend elea ku hudumu  
tena hakuna shida na hilo lakini mbona Wanachama  ni wale wale kidogo , kwa nini hakuna 
Wanachama  wengine ambao wanaweza kukaa kati ka hii Kam ati? Nafikiri hapo ni sw ala pia 
Mwenyekiti wa Sarafu anapofaa kupaangalia. Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay thank you for the information. 
Yes Hon. Leader of Majority , proceed. Let the Leader of Majority, the Members were 
informing the House, the House is informed.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker let  me move to ..., 
Committee on Fin ance, Budget and Appropriations.  
 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND APPROPRIA TIONS   
 
1. Hon. Moha med Hatimy    Chair man 
2. Hon.  Hamisi Musa Mwidani    Vice Chair man 
3. Hon. Salim D avid Kalume    Member  
4. Hon. Mwaka Bakari Mulundonda   Membe r 
5. Hon. Prischillah Mema Mumba   Member  
6. Hon. Ahmed Salim Khamis    Member  
7. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani   Member  
8. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya    Member  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15 9. Hon. Fatuma Mote Swaleh    Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON POWERS AND PRIVILEGES  
  
1. Hon.  Ebrahim Aharub Khatri    Chairman   
2. Hon. Ham isi Musa Mwidani    Vice Chairman  
3. Hon. Murfad Abdallah    Member  
4. Hon. F adhili Mwalimu Makarani   Member  
5. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya    Member  
6. Hon. Mohammed Hatimy    Member  
7. Hon. Amriya Boy Juma    Member       
8. Hon. Evelyn Osongo     Member  
9. Hon. Hamida Noor Shei kh Ali   Member   
10. Hon. Bernard Ochieng Ogutu    Member  
11. Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri    Member  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Now Mr. Speaker…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Hamisi, Hon. Members…okay , 
Hon. Hamisi who is your seconder o n the S elect Committees?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): I request Hon. Aran Moses to second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Aran.  
 
 Hon. Oindo : I rise to second , Hon. Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I no w rise to  put a 
question that the M otion on Select C ommi ttees as moved by the Majority L eader, Hon. 
Hamisi Musa Mwidani be approved in this Honourable  House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Spea ker I want to move a M otion that 
pursuant to the provision s of S tanding Order 185 and 188 this A ssembly approves th e 
appointment of the following Members nominated by the C ounty Assembly parties and 
Selection Committee to be the Members of the County Assem bly on Committee on 
Appointments , Rules and P rocedures . 
 
COMMITTEE ON APPOINTM ENTS , RULES AND PROCEDURES  
  
1. Hon. Ah arub E brahim Khatri    Chairman  
2. Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani    Vice C hairman  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16 3. Hon. Murfad Abdallah Amur    Member  
4. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani   Member  
5. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya    Member   
6. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy    Member  
7. Hon. Amriya Boy Juma    Member   
8. Hon. Fe ddies Salame Mbura    Member  
9. Hon. Laila Mughazo Nyache    Member  
 
 Mr. Speaker , on Liaison Committee;  
 
LIAISON COMMITTEE  
 
1. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Mak arani    Chairman  
2. All Chairpersons of all C ommittees   Members  
 
 Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  I call on Hon. Amriya Boy Juma to second.  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  I rise to second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members…  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Mr. Speake r, I rise to second . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you.  Hon. Members I now 
stand to put a question that the Motion moved on Committee on A ppointment , Rules and 
Procedures be approved in this Hon ourable  House ... 
 
[Consultations ] 
 
 Commi ttee on A ppointments , Rules and P rocedures and Committee L iaison be 
approved in this House.  
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 So Hon. Members we are left with the Sectoral Committee to bring the amendment so 
that to put a question  in the afternoon.  
Yes Hon.  Athman Shebe what is it?  
 
 Hon. Athma n Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Kupitia himaya yako 
nilikuwa naomba unipatie dakika ya  kuweza kutoa mkono wangu wa  shukran i na buriani kwa 
baadhi ya W aheshimiwa ambao nimeshirikiana nao , ikiwa utaniruhusu Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti, ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ): Proceed? A minute as you said.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa , dakika moja utakuwa hujanitendea 
haki kwa sababu nina wengi wa kuwashukuru katika mpango mzima wa kipi ndi ambacho 
nimekuwa Mwenyekiti wa K amati ya mazingira na Mwanakamati  wa Kamati mbali m bali.  
 
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17 Kwa hivyo dakika moja M heshimiwa na ndio leo mumetupiga msumari wa mwish o 
katika jeneza itakuwa si haki ungenipa tatu Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ningeshukuru laki ni 
ikiwa ni moja nitajaribu kad ri ya uwezo wangu kulingana na vile tumebanwa mpaka 
tunabanwa na masaa na ma  dakika , nitajaribu M heshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Kwanza kabisa 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nashukuru M ungu ambaye amenijaalia kupata nafasi hii , 
nimehudumu kama Mwen yekiti wa Kamati ya Mazingira na Kamati mbali mbali za B unge , 
narudisha shukran zangu za d hati kwa M wenyezi  Mungu ambaye alinijaalia nafasi hiyo 
kuhudumu katika kipindi ch a miaka mitatu.  Kwanza kabisa nimej ifunza nini kuwa 
Mwenyekiti wa M azingira, alama za ngu, ta jriba niliyoipata katika hicho kiti Mheshimiwa. 
Nawashukuru C hama kwa sababu waliweza kuni patia nafasi hii Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti 
kwa muda wa miaka mitatu, napenda kuwashukuru Wanakamati wenza wangu wa M azingira 
ambao tumeshirikiana na wao katika juk umu hili la  kuweza kuhakikisha kuwa Kamati yetu 
ya M azingira  inawajibika. Nawashukuru sana W ahesh imiwa mu meweza kunipatia sapoti 
yenu nikiwa na Naibu M heshimiwa Fe ddies pamoja na W anachama wote wa M azingira kwa 
mchango wenu na sapoti  yenu ambayo mumeweza k unipatia na M ungu atawabariki , 
nawatakia kila la kheir . 
Nafasi ya pili Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi kama M wenyekiti wa M azingira 
singeweza kufaulisha jukumu hili kama si M akarani a mbao nilishirikiana nao katika Kamati 
yangu ya Mazingira na Kamati mbali mbali . Wengi huwa hawawata mbui M akarani wetu wa 
Bunge lakini wana mchango mkubwa wa  kuhakikisha kuwa W ahesh imiwa wanaweza 
kuwajibikia na kuweza  kujua mikakati na michango ya K amati inaenda namna gani. Kwa 
hivyo napenda kurudi sha shukran zangu za dhati kwa Karan i wangu M heshimiwa , samahani  
kwa Karani wangu Dorothy , Leila, Mwaka  na H ansard wote ambao nimeshirikiana nao 
Mheshimiwa katika juhudi ya kutekeleza majukumu yangu kama M wenyekiti.  
Mwisho nasema hakuna kitu muhimu Mheshimiwa kama msimamo na mimi nafurahi 
kuwa nimeondolewa katika Kamati za Bunge lakini nafurahi kuwa hakuna mtu anaweza  
kuniondoa kama Mheshimiwa ninaye  wakilisha Kata ndogo ya Jomvu K uu. Watu wangu wa 
Jomvu nawaambia nitaendelea ku tekeleza  majukumu yangu ambayo yameni weka katika njia 
panda leo. Nimeweza kusulubiwa katika kusimama na utaratibu wangu na misimamo yangu 
ya kikazi n a ya kisiasa, hivyo basi  nashukuru nitaendelea kutekeleza majukumu ya ngu kwa 
wakaazi wangu wa Jomvu K uu bila uoga , bila ubaguzi na naomba waweze kunipatia sapoti  
hii kuteke leza maj ukumu haya.  
Mwisho nikimalizia Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti nasema kuwa siasa ni  misimamo na 
msimamo nilio  uchukua mimi  kama M heshimiwa wa Jomvu K uu siujutii , kwa sababu 
naamini kuwa ikiwa utasimama na haki na ukweli na kutekelez a majukumu yako 
yanayotak ikana . Mungu leo M heshimiwa amenifung ia mlango mmoja lakini naamini M ungu 
huyo huyo atanifu ngulia mlango mwengine mkubwa, k wa hivyo nashukuru sana 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kunipatia fursa hii n a kutoa mchango nasema ah santeni sana tuzidi 
kushirikiana kuhudumi a wananchi wetu . Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwende?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Bwana Spika mchango wangu ni  kuhusu 
Kamati ambazo zimepangwa,  ukiangalia katika katika K amati ya L iaison…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The D eputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Faith we are through with 
Motion or debating on C ommittees.  
August 26 , 2020                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18 Hon. Mwende:  Ni maoni naomba uniruhusu, k wa heshima.  
 
[Con sultation s] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Faith I have been advised that 
the issue has already passed so opening a debate to an issue t hat have been approved by the 
Assembly will be going against procedures of this Honourable House.  
 
Hon. Mw ende:  Nashukuru sana Bwana Spika , nitapata nafasi  nyengine ya kuweza 
kusem a kutoridhika kwa ngu. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nasimama na taarifa kama vile 
Mheshimiwa wangu Mwenyekiti wa zamani wa Maz ingira alivyosimama kuongea , nami  pia 
sina budi kuweza kuwashukuru W aheshimi wa wote ambao tuliofanya nao kazi pamoja kama 
Kamati ya V ijana , Kamati ya Leba, K amati ya House Business  na vile  vile kama Kiranja wa 
Bunge la K aunti ya  Mombasa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ama kweli utenda  kazi wangu uko 
wazi na kumbukumbu za Bunge ziko wazi na  nina imani kubwa katika wale W aheshimiwa 
wanne walioweza kubanduliwa nje za K amati mbali mbali ndani ya mioyo ya kila mmoja 
hapa hawajaridhia. Hiyo iko wazi n dani ya mioyo yao hawajaridhia lakini katika uso wao  pia 
hawajaashiria lakini  katika matendo ya w ale waliopatiwa mamlaka ya chama na mengineyo 
wameamuru kuweza ku weka kama vile walivyopatiwa na chama kuhakikisha kwamba haki 
haiwezi  tendeka katika Kaunti hii.  
Kwa hivyo sisi tutazidi kuwaambia wananchi wetu wa Kaunti ya Mombasa 
tutasimama kwa haki na m uda usiokuwa mrefu haki itatendeka na sisi sisi wa nne am bao 
tumesimama na haki na ukweli tutazidi kuja hapa katika B unge na  kuambaia wananchi y ale 
yaliokuwa  yanatendeka na  yale yanaendelea katika B unge hili si yale wanatazamia, A hsante 
sana.  
 
 The Deputy S peaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members , having concluded the business for today the House stands adjourn ed 
until Wednesday 2 6th August , 2020 at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 12: 00p.m. 
 
  
 
 