March 15 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedn esday, 15th March, 2017  
The House met at 2: 42pm. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You may sit down. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
Yes Hon Saad Faraj?  
Hon. Faraj : Thank you a lot Mr. Speaker for this opportunity on behalf of Hon. 
Mohamed Hatimy who is the  mover of the Motion on Formal d elegation of duties by Chief 
and Senior Officers.  
 I would like to take this opportunity to move this Motion on his behalf.  
(Hon. Faraj moved  the Motion on behalf of H on. Mohamed Hatimy)  
FORMAL DELEGATION OF DUTI ES BY CHIEF AND SENIOR OFFICERS  
Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion;  
THAT AWARE that it is the right of every employee to proceed on annual leave or 
any other  leave recognised by Law ... 
 (Interruption)  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Mary what is it?  
            Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, Mr. Speaker Sir before he proceeds 
may he please tell us where the Mover of the mo tion is...  
(Interruption)  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yeah that is why....  
(Interruption)  
            Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  But he has just said that…..  
(Interruption)  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : That is why, I know about it that is why 
when we reached business number 8 I did not say Hon. Hatimy, I said Hon Saad Faraj.  
            Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the protection, Mr. Speaker if I may start 
again this Motion.  
(Hon Faraj resumed)  
            THAT AWARE that it is a right of every employee to proceed ... 
(Interruption)  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Caroline what is it?  
            Hon. (Ms) Auma:  Mr. Speaker  I have Order paper from 9th March 2017 this was on 
Thursday and the Motion was discussed in the sa me House and as I know according to our 
Standing Order the Motion should come back to the plenary after six good months and now 
we have the same Motion today on 15th March 2017 , the same time...  
(Interruption)  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M swabah Rashid) : When did you say it was moved first?  
            Hon. (Ms) Auma:  It was moved, I have the two of them....  
(Interruption)  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes when, when was it?  
            Hon. (Ms) Auma:  It was moved on Th ursday, 9th March 2017, the same month...  
(Interruption)  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : This year? 
            Hon. (Ms) Auma : Yes this year 2017.  
March 15 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Then  I think it should have been a Notice 
of Motion. 
Hon. (Ms)  Auma:  No Mr. Speaker I  have the Motion itself here...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Clerk can you ascertain that, okay let’s 
just see.  Clerk, okay he s ought  leave, but he did not move the Motion but he s ought  leave for 
the Motion to be deferred to that date. Yes can you continue.  
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker, thank you once again after the interactions if you allow me , 
I will move this Motion once again ... 
(Hon Faraj resumed)  
Mr. Speaker sir,  
THAT AWARE that it is the right of every emplo yee to proceed on annual leave 
recognized by Law;  
FURTHER AWARE that Chief and Senior officers working in the County 
government normally e njoy this right as required by law; 
CONCERNED that the aforementioned officers do not delegate the duties  in writing 
and hence the officers who are supposed to stand in for them are not clearly informed in 
writing of the duties that they are required to partake in the absence of officers proceeding for 
leave;  
NOTING that the lack of effective delegation stalls the work o utput in the affecte d 
department(s) and the County  government at large thus undermines transparency, 
accountability and also results to unnecessary delays in service delivery;  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
1. The County Secretary and the Cou nty Assembly clerk to develop a system that will 
ensure that all the Chief and Senior Officer proceeding for annual leave hand over 
their duties, to those in office in writing;  
2. The County Secretary/ County Assembly Clerk to ensure adherence to the requirem ent 
that staff proceeding for leave prepare an itemized hand over note, with a copy to be 
issued to the County Secretary/ Clerk, as the case may be, and other Head  of 
Departments.  
I beg to move this Motion and call upon Hon Murfad Amur to second.  
Hon. Amu r:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, with  all the pleasure I second the Motion.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I will propose the question on 
the Motion, Formal delegation of duties by Chief and Seniors Officers. Yes Hon Saad Faraj.  
Hon. Faraj: Thank you once again Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I have always been 
stressing the point that we need to develop something which is called succession planning in 
our systems and this is one issue that is practised internationally in governance.  
Mr. Speaker we have been having problems all along whenever a senior officer has 
gone for leave then the position they remain as if there is nobody to act on their behalf 
because we don’t have that plan whereby there is an official handing over for that parti cular 
period.  
Mr. Speaker we are in the 21st century we have been going for training some  of us 
have gone for cooperate government training to make sure that we align to the international 
standards and it is high time that we adopt to these in ternational standards so that we can be 
at par with the standards that are required.  
Mr. Speaker we cannot create a vacuum in any position ; we cannot afford to do that at 
this particular moment and therefore am c alling upon al l the Honourable Members in this 
House to support this Motion so that it will be for the good of us all and the general public 
that whenever an individual is not in office then there is a proper plan that is in place so that 
March 15 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 those people who are coming in to request for t he services that are needed will be able to be 
given those services, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Amur…  
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker just to add on this several times 
we have  been hearing in this Assembly when we request such information we are been told 
the Executive is out of the country and I have been several time s repeatedly said if an officer 
or an Executive who has travelled he does  not travel  with the office, he travell ed with his bag 
and his belongings but the office must be there to perform the duties . 
Mr. Speaker so if we put th ese regulations into reality those issues of he is not there, 
we are not informed, it is not what, this should be put in  a den coffin and the rest of the 
things, people must learn to give others opportunity to do jobs, people should learn to give 
their juniors the opportunity to perform  in their department . 
 Mr. Speaker in case somebody dies will that department stay  as the way it is ; so 
people should learn to delegate duties to others , it is not a decision of someone owning a 
position for himself this is an institution then people should delegate duties to their junior 
officers , even in case of travelling that officer  can perform the duty . 
Unless we agree on this Mr. Speaker we will be dealt with the  eras of long time ago 
without me nobody can work . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Amir Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hoja ambayo imeletwa mbele ya Jumba  hili na Mwakilishi wa Tononoka 
Mheshimiwa Saad Faraj.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ofisi huwa ni taasisi na taasisi hizi huwa kuonekana huwa ni 
binad amu na kama tunavyojua mwanadamu huwa anakumbwa na changamoto mbali mbali 
na suala la likizo ni lazima ndio maana katika sheria mwanadamu hawezi kufanya kazi kwa 
kuendelea kwa miezi kumi na mbili inatakikana mara moja kwa mwaka mwanadamu kama 
huyu aweze ku pata likizo isi opungua siku 30 ili aweze kwenda kupumzika . 
Mheshimiwa Spika kuna masuala ya ugonjwa ; mbali na ugonjwa kuna masuala ya 
safari kwa hivyo ni muhimu afisa mkubwa ama wa chini yake ambapo anaenda likizo ama 
wakati ambapo ni mgonjwa ama wakati amb apo ana  safiri lazima aweze kupatia mamlaka 
yule ambaye atabakia katika afisi ile ili kazi ziende kuendelea . 
Ni makosa Mheshimiwa Spika kwamba afisa mmoja ambaye yuko idara nyengine 
katika idara fulani ati anakosa kuripoti kazi ama anakuwa na dharura basi i dara nzima kazi 
inashindwa kusonga kwa sababu pengine afisa hayuko kazini na vile vile ni muhimu pia wale 
maofisa wakuu wawe k wa ile nafasi wawe na ule moyo wa kuweza kuyak abidhi majukumu 
wale maafisa wa chini ili wahakikishe kazi inaendel ea kwa sababu huwa pia ni tabia ya 
baadhi ya maafisa kuweze kuficha baadhi ya stakabadhi muhimu ambayo zinatumika katika 
afisi kama ile kiasi kwamba wale maafisa wanaowachwa nyuma wakati wale hawako 
wanapata usumbufu mkubwa katika kutekeleza majukumu yao . 
Kwa hivyo ni muhimu Bunge hili liweze kupitisha na vile vile wasisi tize wale 
maofisa wakienda likizo wasiwe na tatizo la kuficha stakabadhi muhimu ambazo zinafanya 
kazi katika zile ofisi ziendelee hata kama wao hawako. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika 
naunga m kono mia chini mia.       
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Odari . 
Hon. Odari : Thank you Hon Speaker . Hon Speaker as much I support this Motion 
100 per cent  I am surprised that we are discussing something that should have been there long 
time ago. 
If it isn’t there Hon Speaker then it's a disappointment ; every organization in the 
world what is taught in every institution should have standing operation procedures, issue of 
March 15 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 handing over duties when you’re on leave or when you are proceed ing on maternity is 
something which is a matter of discussion , this particular time I will not be around in 
particular in regard t hat considering we as a County government we in herited  the system 
from the former Municipal Council of Mombasa this is by assum ption that any organization 
should have such a system in place because institutions normally operate  by systems or 
operations by systems, therefore in every system there is a procedure,  provision to cater for 
such events . 
Normally there is a formal way  to hand over duties to the person who is remaining 
behind so this matter is not something which is new, it is something that should be in place , it 
is not something that we should initiate now, it something  that should be there therefore Hon 
Speaker we need t o look at some of these things if it is not in existence,  if there is no system 
to handing over in this organization or this institution th en it is quite a disappointment . Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Mary Akinyi . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru 
sana kwa yule aliyeleta mjadala huu katika Jumba hili kwa zile juhudi amb azo amefanya 
kuleta mjadala huu  lakini mimi nimesimama hapa nikiwa napinga kwa sab abu amechelewa 
hata hivi sasa kuna Mawaziri wengi sana wa Kaunti hii yetu ya Mombasa ambapo saa hizi 
hawako kazini wameenda kusimama katika viti  tofauti tofauti  lakini mimi sioni mahali 
ambapo kazi imeharibika, kazi inaendelea . 
Kama Waziri wa Vijana, Ji nsia na Michezo ameacha kazi lakini juzi hapa tulikua na 
siku ya kina mama na ilifana sana ; kumaanisha kuwa hata kama hayuko hizo kazi huwa 
zinaendelea.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sioni sababu ya mambo kama haya kuletwa 
katika Jumba hili kuwa kuwe kuna  watu ambao wanaendelea kufanya kazi kama hawa wakuu 
hawako ; natumaini huwa wamejipanga kwa sababu hata mwaka huu pia hata Katibu wa 
Kaunti pia alikuwa ameenda likizo na hakuna mahali kazi za Kaunti hii zilikuwa zimelala ati 
Katibu  wa Kaunti hii hayuko.  
Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika narudi chini nikiwa napinga mjadala huu ikiwa 
nasema umepitwa na wakati na hata kazi pia wakuu wa ofisi ikiwa hawako kazi zinaendelea 
vizuri sana katika Kaunti hii. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashi d): Thank you very much Members, since 
there is no more contributions I will ask Hon the mover of the Motion Saad Faraj to reply to 
the Motion.  
Hon. Faraj : Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii . Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwanza ni  kutoa shukrani kwa wote walioc hangia katika Mswada huu Mswada 
ukitengenezwa hautengenezewi watu walioko hivi sasa kuna mara nyengine huwa 
unatengenezewa watu wale wanaokuja na wale watakaokuwa kwa siku za usoni.  
Kwa hivyo kukiwa na jambo ambalo linatengenezwa hivi s asa haimaanishi ni lazima 
liwe litatunufaisha sisi lakini likiwa litaweza  kufaa wale wengine wanaokuja itakuwa ni 
katika moja wapo ya kutengeneza maslahi ya wananchi na katika kurekebisha mipangilio 
ambayo kwamba imekoseka katika miundo msingi na katika mi pangilio ya kazi 
inavyofanyika katika Kaunti yetu.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ni shukrani zaidi kutoka kwa wote ambao kwamba 
wameweza kuunga mkono na  kupinga Mswa da huu ni haki ya kila mmoja kuweza kutekeleza 
majukumu yake kuelezea fikira zake na kutoa m awazo yake.  
Kwa haya machache Mheshimiwa Spika nawashukuru wot e na naomba hili jambo 
ama Mswa da kama huu uwe ni Mswa da ambao kwamba utaweza kupita uwe utatufaa sisi 
kwa muda kama huu tuko nao na uwafae wale wata kaokuja siku za usoni. A hsante.  
March 15 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      35 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I will now put the question as 
many as are of  the opinion that Chiefs and Seniors Officers to formally delegate duties to 
those while proceeding to leave . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause)  
 ...Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Members there being no other business this House is adjourned till tomorrow 
afternoon.  
The House r ose at  3:01pm.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 