August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 26th August 2020  
The House met at 2:42p.m. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Yes Clerk?  
 
COMM UNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
QUARTERLY REPORTS AND  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  FROM THE COUNTY EXEC UTIVE  
 
Hon. Members , the County Assembly is in receipt of the following three Reports from 
the County Executive Committee Member (CECM) F inance; quarterly R eports and f inancial 
statements for the year ended 31st December, 2019, q uarterly reports and financial statements for 
the year; for the financial year 31st March , 2020  and q uarterly reports and financial statements 
for the financial year ended 30th June, 2020.  The R eports are hereby committed to the C ommitte e 
on Finance , Budget and A ppropriation s. Yes, Clerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
RESUMPTION OF INTERRUPTED BUSINESS ON APPROVAL  OF THE LIST OF MEMBERS NOMINATED 
BY THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY PARTIES AND RECOMMENDED BY THE COMMITTE E OF SELECTION 
TO THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY SELECT AND SECTORAL COMMITTEES  
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Kitula:  Point of Order Mr. Speaker!  
 
The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, there is a P oint of Order, what is it?  
 
Hon. Kitu la: Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri K iti chako kina ngu vu zaidi na jinsi utaratibu 
wa B unge hili unavyolipeleka itakuwa sio sawa kabisa . Mimi nimeuliza Taarifa  namba  saba, 
nane na tisa .  

August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 Hapo moja kwa moj a munastahili munikabidhi mimi R ipoti hizo , haiwezi kuwa R ipoti 
imetoka kutoka kwa CEC F inance ni  Ripoti ambayo  ni Statement . Mimi nime  seek kutoka kwa  
Kamati ya Fedha  inipatie mimi maji bu si kuitisha R ipoti,  Mheshimiwa peleka Bunge 
inavyostahili kutumia K iti chako, tafadhali.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mw alimu) : Hon. Kitula be patient my friend, my 
brother because we are yet to rea ch Statement hour and I am sure  Hon. Kitula whatever that you 
had asked for will be responded by the responsible person but you are aware there i s a business 
that was to resume,  the issue on Procedural Motion on C ommittees so it has to take precedence 
and it has to be prioritized  so that we finish with it then we proceed with our normal businesses.  
  
Hon.  Kitula: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nilikuwa nimeelewa vibaya kwa sababu 
Katibu  nimeona  amesoma tu orodha namba kumi na kuruka  saba, nane na tisa. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika na pole kwa hayo.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Hamisi . 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you . Let me move a Pr ocedural 
Motion ; 
 
THAT  pursuant to Standing Order n umber 191 , this House resolved or approved the list 
of Members nominated by the County A ssembly pa rties and recommended by the 
Committee of Selection to the County Assembly; Select and Sectoral C ommittees . 
 
And I would  like Hon. Amriya to second my M otion . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma : I rise to second Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that the 
Procedural M otion as moved by the Leader of Majority be d ebated and approved by this 
Honourable  House . 
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to ] 
  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I wish to move the amendment 
which says that;  
 
1. To remove Hon. F adhili Mwalimu Mak arani on the C ommittee on Trade , Tourism and 
Investmen t and replace him with Hon. Mar y Naliaka.  
2. Pursuant to Standing order 46 S ub Section (2a)  to remove Hon. Lucy Chizi  Chireri from 
the Committee of I mplementatio n and replace her with Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri.  
 
Thank you. Mr. Speaker now I will like also Hon. Boy to second.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Just a moment.  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 [Consultations ] 
 
Yes Hon. Amriya.  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma:  I rise to second.  
 
The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members , I now st and to put a 
question that the Motion as amended by the Leader of M ajority Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani be 
approved in this Honourable  House.  
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
Yes, Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON FINANC E, BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS HON . MOHAMED HATIMY ON  SUBMISSION OF FOURTH  QUARTER 
IMPLEMENTATION REPOR T FOR THE FINANCIAL YE AR 2019/2020  
 
Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy, Chairperson Committee on Finance , Budget and 
Appropriation respond  to the S tatement.  
 
Hon. Moh amed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and Hon. Members I 
wish to give a Statement in response to issues raised by Hon. Charles Kitula in this House on 11th 
March, 2020 as follows:  
 
The Mombasa County Finance B ill, 2019 was submitted for public p articipation , first by 
the County E xecutive  at Tononoka Hall and by the County A ssembly  on 31st October, 
2019 in the various locations in the six Sub C ounties in Mombasa.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy you are supposed to 
respond o n submission of report of financial year 2019/2020 fourth quarter implementation. Th e 
report that you are reading  is in the next order.  
 
Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker S tatement num ber seven is submission of the 
Report of 2019/2020 of the fourth quarter implementation. Mr. Speaker the  Reports were 
forwarded to the C lerk and I want to say that S ection 166 of PFM A ct is very clear, they still do 
have time to subm it this Report  because they have  15 days to con solidate the R eport and they 
have  one month to su bmit the R eport, but the R eport is already with the C lerk and am sure Mr. 
Speaker you can check with the C lerk and you will get the R eport.  This is the submission of the 
Report 2019/2020 . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay Hon. Hatimy just mo ve to the 
Table Clerks  so that we clarify what you are saying.  
 
[Consultations]  
 
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker quarterly R eport was 
submitted to County Assembly Clerk on 1st December , 2019, then we do have the third was 
submitted on 15th April and the  last one which is in the paper  it is already with us here it was 
submitted on 24th August , 2020.  I do have all  the R eports Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kitula any issue from the 
response?  
 
Hon. Kit ula: Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika , nimeskia maneno ya Mhe shimiwa wa Kamati 
ya Fedha na nashukuru pia Makatibu  waliweza kumpatia mwelekeo kitu gani kinahitajika hapa. 
Hapa ni fourth quarter implementatio n chini ya S ection 166 ya sheria ya PFM Management A ct, 
inaeleza kwamba kila baada ya robo mwaka  inapatiwa mda wa mwezi mmoja, CEC wa F edha 
aweze  kuleta katika Bunge hili  Ripoti  ya jinsi  ya matumizi ya pesa ilivyotumika katika serikali 
yetu ya Mombasa  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti .  
Nashukuru Mhe shimiwa w a Fedha first qu arter  alifanya jukumu lake kikatiba kabisa na 
kuweza kutuletea, niko na copy  mpaka leo, ya first quarter  ililetwa Bunge  ndio hii hapa sasa 
nilitarajia siku ya leo pia niweze kupatiwa fouth quarter  ya copy  kama hii. K wa hivyo nahitaji tu  
stakabadhi kama hii  ya kutoka kwa Executive  niweze kujibu, niweze kuendelea na kuangalia 
jinsi pesa zinavyotumika katika serikali yetu ya Mombasa  sababu ni fourth quarter  tu, first 
quarter  niko nayo tuliipata hapa Mhe shimiwa  Hatimy alituletea kwa hivyo nashukuru, robo ya 
pili na tatu  hakuleta na ya nne  ilikuwa inastahili kuja July 31st, ila mpaka sa a hii haijakuja. Kwa 
hivyo mimi nataka stakabadhi  kama hii tu, niweze kushukuru , ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon. Mohamed Hatimy.  
 
Hon. Moham ed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa quarterl y Reports  zinakuja kwa ofisi ya Katibu 
wa Bunge , haziji kwangu mimi moja kwa moja , hizi Ripoti  zinaonekana zime pokewa ; moja 
imepokelewa  Januar i 2020, ya pili ikawa imepokelewa  April 15th na ya tatu imekuwa 24th 
Agosti. Mheshimiwa  Spika  hizi zimekuwa committed  kwa Kamati hivi sasa  kwa hivyo kama 
atahitaji copy  kupitia K iti chako naomba umwambie aende kwa Katibu wa Bunge  akaulizie copy , 
zote zimekuja … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy now that you hav e the 
document w ith you, can you assure the Honourable House and the Hon. Member when are you 
going to submit whatever that he wants from that document? He has shown that it  is just one 
paper from that document, now that it has been submitted to y ou we und erstand you have to sit  
with it as a C ommittee, but assure this House when are you going to deliver whatever Hon. 
Kitula is asking for?  
 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  God willing by Tuesday next week Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay ye s Hon. Kitula what is it?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa  Spika unajua hii iko na timeline na wiki ya jana  nafikiri  
Katibu wa Bunge at atupatia mwongozo …  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 Alitoa uamuzi  kwamba iweze kuwa tabled  leo na tayari tumekuwa kwa she ria kuwa 
ikuwe tabled  31st  na kama yuko  nayo pale ina ugumu gani yeye kuileta hapa tungeweza kupata 
copies ? Tayari uamuzi u litoka wiki ya jana  Mheshimiwa  Spika , Spika akaweza kusema kwamba 
kufikia  leo Jumatano iweze kuletwa, tena leo tayari tumek euka she ria kufikia  31st Julai, alafu leo 
pia ana omba mda mwengine wakati uamuzi  ilikuwa imeshatoka . Sasa Mheshimiwa  Spika 
nashindwa, kama yuko nayo pale aniambie tu anipatie mimi nitaweza kushukuru tuendele na 
biashara  nyengine.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula I think in my 
commu nication, I communicated in this Hon ourable House  that we have received the same 
document to my office, the office of the Sp eaker and I have committed the Reports to the 
Committee, so as the Hon. Member is asking for some few days and he has promised that by 
Tuesday you  will have that document, so let us give the Hon. Member until Tuesday next week, 
so that he delivers the document to you.  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante  Mheshimiwa  Spika , naheshimu maamuzi yako  lakini ni  kama 
nadanganywa wakati tunaenda mapumzikoni k ulingana na kalenda yetu k wa hivyo tayari 
tumekiuka sh eria, lakini ukiniambia  kufikia Jumanne  utakuwa umenidanganya kwa sababu 
itakuwa hatuko Bunge, kulingana na kalenda yetu.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula the Assembly going to 
recess does not mean that the Assembly is not working or the C ommittees are not going to meet, 
so just wait for next week Tuesday;  if he does not present to you the document, so it  is when we 
come back to this Hon ourable  House then you will have a say in thi s Honourable  House, that the 
Committee went against the directive of the Speaker.  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa  Spika nashukuru kwa maamuzi yako  lakini stakabadhi  hii 
sistahili kuwa nayo mimi kama Kitula , ni stakabadhi  ya Bunge  inastahili kuwa tabled  katika 
Nyumba na deadline  ishapita . Kwa hivyo sijajua kitu gani kinamfanya yeye ashi ndwe ku ileta 
stakabadhi hii  kwa Nyumba? Kwa sababu  rasmi  inastahili ku letwa hapa Bunge. .. 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula it is simple and the  Hon. 
Members we committed  the documents to that Committee today, so it i s not possible for them to 
table the same document before the C ommittee sits, peruse s and bring s back a Report, they have 
to bring a R eport concerning what it entails in that document .  
So now that we committed the document today let us give them time and they present the 
document be it after we come back  or after recess . In fact we have not reach ed the issue of 
recess, maybe also the Leader of Majority might change his mind and we mig ht continue . 
 
Hon. Kitula: Ahsante  Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti naf ikiri kuna j ambo moja ambalo 
hatukuelewana kwa sababu ni jambo rahisi kwamba kisheria haistahili stakabadhi  hii y a Ripoti  
kuletwa katika Nyumba alafu ikakuwa committed katika Kamati tena, hakuna s heria 
Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti , naomba Makatibu wa Bunge  waku elekeze chini ya Section 166 of 
PFM.  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Sheria inasema ni Kau nti Executive  wa Fedha  alete Bunge kufikia  Julai 21st haijasema pia 
sheria baadaye iwe committed to sectrol C ommittee . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i, hapo tu ndio 
naomba unipatie mwelekeo wako.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias Samba.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker it seems my friend  and Honourable c olleague is learning too 
fast and so much Hon. Kitula ; through  the Chair  there is  nothing the House or we as Members 
can do after a Member has requested that he can issue the S tatement by Tuesday and Hon. 
Speaker has also made a ruling. The only thing  we should  be now talking about maybe we are 
going for recess maybe he was not aware t hat we are going for recess, he can request for another 
time. But Hon. Kitula my friend I do  not know whether you want the Hon. Speaker to direct then 
the Chairman to go out and come with the document immediately, I do  not know but to save time 
and it has happened because you a re in agreement that the first q uarterly Report you have and the 
second one he has  not produced. Maybe this is the time and things are now changing, how we are 
doing things, things are now changing b ecause initially most of us were ne w even with the 
procedures,  with the rules and regulations  we are now catching up. So we acknowledge that 
maybe there are some hiccups somewhere but I do  not know whether you want Hon. Speaker to 
subject the Hon. Member to go outside and come with a docume nt and the best thing the 
Chairman has done for the Finance  he has requested for more time. So I think it is prudent or fair 
enough if we give him that time so that at least next time you be served or given the document 
that you have requested for. Thank y ou Hon. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Tobias Samba. Hon. 
Members Committees  are extensions of the Assembly, s o I have directed the Committee to first 
make sure that document that Hon. Kitula is asking for … I saw it is just a one-page  document as 
said by the Chair by Tuesday give that document to the said Member and any other Member who 
will wish to have that document and  as per R eports that we have committed to that Committee 
the House Business will sit and see as to wh en they will be back in this Honourble  House for the 
Members to discuss on them. Yes, Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON FINANCE HO N. MOHAMED HATIMY ON  
MOMBASA COUNTY BUDGET  EXPENDITURE IN FY 2017/2018  AND 2018/2019  AS SHOWN IN REPOR T 
OF THE CONTROLLER OF  BUDGET  
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy, Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker and  Hon. Members I wish to give a S tatement in 
response to issues raised by Hon. Kitula in this House on 11th March , 2020 as follows ;  
Mombasa County Finance Bill , 2019 was submitted for public participation first by the County 
Executive at the Tononoka Hall and by the County Assembly by 31st October , 2019 at various 
locations, the six Sub Counties in Mombasa . 
 The Report on the views collected at the Tononoka public participation forum was 
submitted to the County Assembly and is available on request. The Report by the Sectoral 
Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations on the public participation was ado pted by 
the County Assembly at its 118th Sitting on 4th December , 2019.  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Please refer to the Hansard Report available online at the County Assembly website. 
Article 10 and 196 provide a legal framework for public participation which are reinforced by 
the s tatute which as part 8 of the County Government Act of Section 132 and 133 of the Public 
Finance Management Act , 2012. Cou nty P ublic Participation guidelines , 2016 and Standing 
Order No.121 have stipulated that whatever views given in public participation forum must be 
included in the Bill for Finance for other legislation. What is required is for the views to be taken 
into account when preparing or enacting legislation  and that was done parallel to  other 
consideration.  It should be noted that it is not onl y views of the public that should be considered  
but also the need to fund the annual b udget and raise revenue to provide citizens to the wider 
public that is also taken into consideration h ence a balance must be strived.  
 Mr. Speaker the County Assembly R eport on public participation contains satisfactory 
details on the venues, views and details of reduction and increment made on the Mombasa 
Finance Bill , 2019. Either on the recommendations from the public or Committee which were  
adopted by the County Asse mbly  and inc luded in the Bill was enacted ass ented by His 
Excellency the Governor and is now a law. Mr. Speaker indeed the Mombasa County 
Government has recently won a High Court Petition challenging the said law on the basis that 
there was a no public par ticipation ; it also won against an Order for temporary suspension of the 
Mombasa County Finance Act , 2019 by Hotel industry players.  
Mr. Speaker with regard to the other part of the request for state ment on Development 
Expenditure  and other accompanying d etails for the FY 2017/2018 and 2018/2019 these are 
availa ble in  the Controller of Annual Budget Implementation Report and the Auditor General’s 
Report which are available freely online. The Member may also get hard copies from the Clerks 
Office. For the F Y 2017/2018 the County spent Ks.2.91Billion in development e xpenditure 
which was 76  per cent of the a nnual allocation  of Ks.3.8Billion. The table 3. 8; on page 90 of the 
Controller of Budget , with Annual Budget Implementation Report for FY 20 17/2018 , provid e an 
analysis of d evelop ment p rojects with the highest e xpenditure.  
For the FY 2018/2019 the Coun ty spent Ks.3.11Billion in the d evelo pment e xpenditure 
which was 71.5  per cent  of the Annual allocation of Ks.4.34Billion. Table 3.81 on page 185 of 
the Contr oller of Budget and Annual Implementation Report for FY 2018/201 9 provides the 
analysis of the development p rojects with the highest expenditure. Mr. Speaker, we wish it to be 
noted that since the Controller of Bu dget and the Auditor General have already r eported on these 
expenditure and Assembly adopted County Public Investment and Accounts Report on the 
Expenditure for FY 2017/2018 this matter stands closed.  Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
[Applause]  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Moha med Hatimy. Yes 
Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimemsikiliza tena sana vizuri tena kwa makini 
Mheshimiwa Mohamed Hatimy ana yewakilisha Kamati ya Fedha na kusema kweli sijaridhishwa 
asilimia 100 na zaidi majibu al iotowa, k wa sababu taar ifa yangu iko wazi, lakini yeye anafahamu 
kweli kitu gani kinaulizwa. Taarifa iko wazi, Mombasa County Budget Expenditure FY 
2017/2018, 2018/2019 as shown in the Rep ort of the Controller of Budget;  nafahamu niko na 
Control ler of Budget Report nimeipitia, expenditures  za kiwango  ziko ha po, kitu ilikuwa nasema 
nataka expenditures kama Wizara  yake anayo ongoza Finance and Economic Planning imetumia 
Ksh.5Billion.  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 Ningetaka kujua hiyo Ks h.5Billion i imetumia nini na nini na nini; n a juzi wakati unatoa 
uamuzi  Kiti chako  ilikuwa wazi h apa nilisimama nikasema nataka matumizi  ili iweze kuingia 
kwenye Hansard, sasa leo hii ananiletea ile ile Ripoti ya Controller of Budget yeye anakuja 
ananiletea  Ripoti ile ile . Ilikuwa wazi Mheshimiwa Mwen yekiti kwa sababu hapa sisi n i 
Wawaki lishi wa kata ndogo mbali mbali;  Transport and Infrastructure imetumia Ks hh.3.7Billion i 
lakini sijui Ksh .3.7Billion i hii imetumika kufanya nini? Na ni jukumu langu kama Mwakilishi 
wa Kata ndogo ya Frere Town kuuliza Kamati yake iweze kuniletea yale matumizi  amba yo 
wametumia Ks h.3.7Billion i niweze kujua zimetumika na hii na hii na hii! Na Taarifa  yangu iko 
wazi Mheshimiwa Spika, ki  wazi sasa vile majibu anavyoto a, anavyosema hapa inaonyesha 
kuwa  Controller of Budget ndio hizi amounts ziko hapa. Halaf u yeye pia analeta ile ile; s asa nani 
atakae jua kama sitauuliza Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, k wa hivyo naona kwamba haki yangu 
inakiukwa na Taarifa  inavyo jibiwa, haikujibiwa ipasavyo  na Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  nasubiri 
muongozo wako kulingana na hili kwa  sababu Taarifa  haijajibiwa vile nimeuliza. Ahsante.  
 
The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for according me the opportunity. Mr. 
Speaker i think the request is very clear and the Chairman of F inance ha s given the budget  
expenditure according to the Controller of B udget but you see what Mr. Kitula is saying, is 
asking about a breakdown so when you are talking about budget expenditure and breakdown 
those are two different things. Mr. Speaker we should  not be prone to just appear controversial in 
matters that are very clear on the face value ; If you look at, if you  have read the request for  
Statement of Mr. Kitula he talked about the b udget expenditure and what the Chairman for 
Finance has given is the exp enditure according to the Financial year’s 2017/2018, 2018/2019 Mr. 
Speaker and so we should  not be fond of just appearing controversial while you  have just ask ed 
for one thing and given the answer and then divert to something else . If the intention was a 
breakdown it should have stated clearly that the intention was a breakdown and if it was 
expenditure the n it should be expenditure as  the Chairman has responded Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Kitula as per your written 
Statement was it on break down or expenditure?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na Makatibu wanafahamu hapa imeandikwa 
headline  tu ya Taarifa  yangu lakini Taarifa  yenyewe ilikuwa wazi , nilihitaji location of project s, 
amount incurred on each project  na vile vile amount incurred on each development project , 
location of each development project  niliuliza vizuri katika Taarifa  lakini hii hapa Makarani  
kulingana na wao wanaandika tu headlines hata ukiangalia Ripoti  ya Mheshimiwa Kalume ni 
approval list , mamb o ya autism haijaandikwa  Ripoti  nzima imeandikwa tu headline . Kwa hiyo  
hiyo ni headline  lakini content of my  Statement  ilikuwa iko  wazi kabisa nilitaka allocation of 
each and every project  na amount incurred  kabisa.  
 
The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalim u): Yes Hon. Tobias?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speak er it is quite interesting and i t is good we are advancing, I do not 
think whether what Hon. Kitula is requesti ng can be available even if  Hon. Chair decides  to 
come with the document you will not be able to go th rough them right away because he is 
requesting for the report for the  [Inaudible] .  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 In fact I do not know  how to put it but whatever H on. Kitula is requesting may be if we 
can go as per the department because each and every department has got i ts own budge t and 
whatever the C hairman has given that is w hat is supposed to give us and Controller of B udget 
report also has it there . Now if he needs  the detail ed report as per what he is requesting , I think 
we should do it as per department and number two also whe n you want to know the expenditure 
incurred as per each and every project that one I think it requires not even one  Committee as 
Finance but even I mplementation will also be involved . So I think what Hon. Kitula whatever is 
requesting may be if we can have  a bulk document I think that is what is requesting as at now. 
Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes Honourable,  let Hon. Mwamwiri 
then Hon. Kitula.  
 
Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika  swali la 
Mheshimiwa Wa Frère T own ni swali bayana  ila katika kulijibu kwake linahitaji ufasaha na 
maelekezi barabara . Kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Spika swala hili likienda kwa Kamati ya F edha 
kikubwa  chao katika kujibu watachukua Ripoti ya Controller of Budget ambayo Controller of 
Budget source ya taarifa yake ina toka kwa Treasury . Hakuna tofauti ya taarifa ya T reasury hapa 
kwetu na Controller of B udget kwa  sababu Controller of B udget anatumiwa taarifa kutoka kwa 
hazina yetu, kutokana na taarifa ile ndio anatengeneza Ripoti hii inayotoka kwa muda lakini  
kiufasaha niungame na M heshimiwa Samba alivyosema moja;  ya kwamba  kila idara  ihusishwe 
katika kuitengeneza R ipoti mahsusi ya matumizi ya fedha zao, pili Mheshimiwa iende ama 
ingekuwa swali amelileta kutaka kujua mgao u liokusudiwa katika Wodi yake na yale yalifanyika 
kama njia moja wapo ya ku oversi ght katika ile Wo di mahsusi lakini inapokuja katika utumizi 
generally  ya mabilioni ya pesa tunazozipata kila mwaka Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa taarifa kupitia 
kwa K amati moja itahit aji K amati hii tuipe mda wa zaidi ya mwaka kwenda fanya hilo . Lakini , 
Mheshimiwa Spika aid ha kwa marekebisho  yake binafsi ama kwa maelekezo yako swala hili 
lirudi kwenye Kamati mahsusi, kila Kamati kuchukua jukumu la matumizi ya bajeti ya K amati, 
alafu taarifa zile zije kutokana na kila idara pengine ingemridhisha kidogo katika yale 
aliyoyakusudia kuyap ata kuliko kulitar ajia hili moja kwa moja kutoka kwa K amati ya Fedha  
itakuwa na mushkil na mtihani. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhi li Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimemsikiza Mheshimiwa Samba na Mheshimiwa 
Mwamwiri lakini niwaambie kwamba Kanuni za Bunge nambari  41 iko wazi kabisa, kila mmoja 
ana haki ya kuuliza Taarifa jinsi anavyo taka, mimi nimeuliza Taarifa yangu ninavyotaka mimi na 
nina haki kuweza k ujibiwa ninavyotaka mimi na  Taarifa  yangu iliweza kuwa wazi … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Tafadhali naomba hapa ni Bunge ukiwa una  jambo  kupitia K iti chako simama utaje 
Kanuni ya Bunge  au kama nakosea nitakusikiza kulik o kuguna . Kwa hivyo  Mheshimiwa S pika  
mimi niko na haki ninaposimama kuuliza  Taarifa  na Taarifa  yangu iko wazi na nimesema hata  
tukafanya nini stakabadhi  zote na malipo yote inafanywa na Wizara ya Fedha , bado Fedha  ndio 
wako na file zote za IFMIS, file zote za softcopy  na hardcopy wao ndio wako  nazo pale  na ni 
jukumu lao wao kuweza kunipatia mimi .  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 Kama nasema nataka orodha  of all development project s, amount incurred  na location , ni 
file tu wako nayo , kama Wizara  ya Mazingira  watasema, environment file  ya Environment 
department  yake ni hii hapa 2017/2018 development ni hizi, waje wanipatie hizo stakabadhi  
niweze kuzipitia ziweze kuonekana . Na ni kitu kidogo tu lakini sasa mtu kujanipatia matumizi  
amba yo yako hapa, Mwamwiri ameeleza vizuri Controller of B udget source  yake inatoka County 
Treasu ry lakini hakuna hapa sote ni Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri na Samba ni elected , leo 
nikimwambia Mheshimiwa Samba ambaye ni Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Vijana, Jinsia na 
Michezo Wizara  ya YGS imetumika kwa development imetumika shs190Milioni  aniambie 
imefanya nini atashindwa kunijibu na kama atakuwa anajua basi mimi nimefanya makosa . 
Lakini mimi ni Mwanakamati wa Kamati hio lakini hatuju i Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti pesa 
zinatumika lakini hatuwezi kuelezea wananchi katika  shs 190 Million i ya development 
tumefanya hiki na hili na hiyo . Ndio mimi nahitaji Mheshimiwa Spika ambapo nashangaa 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu ambao wamechaguliwa kwa kura wan astahili kuni unga mkono kwa hili 
kuweza kuju a sehemu wanayotoka na watu wanao waw akilisha pesa zinazotumi ka vipi  katika 
idara zao zinatumika vipi lakini Mheshimiwa Mwen yekiti kusema ukweli nasubiri mwelekeo 
wako kwa sababu Taarifa  yangu iko wazi kwamba ningependa kuju a zile expenditure list of 
development project , location  na amount incurred . 
 
The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ath man Shebe?  
 
Hon. Ath man  Shebe:  Ahsante sana  Mwenyekiti kwa kunipatia fursa.  Mwenyekiti 
nimekuwa makini sana nikisoma mvuto ama kuwasiliana kwa mwi li katika Waheshimiwa wote 
hapa; W azungu wamesema body language  na ni masikitiko makubwa nafikiri Waheshimiwa 
wote  wamemu elewa n a Mheshimiwa pia Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya F edha ameelewa bayana 
Mheshimiwa Kitula malengo ya  Taarifa hii ilikuwa ni nini na ndipo hapa nikasema ik o hatari 
kubwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na mimi pia vile  vile nafunga jamvi kwako Mheshimiwa  
Mwenyekiti  kwa sababu tutahitaji muongozo wako na upeo wako na utumie nafasi ya hicho Kiti 
kuhakikisha kuwa ili W aheshimiwa  na wananchi waweze  kupata baadhi ya maji bu ya matumizi 
ya fedha zinavyotu mika za serikali ya Kaunti basi Mheshimiwa inabidi uweze  kuchukua fursa 
kuhakikisha kuwa swali la yule mlengwa aliyeuliza lijibiwe vile inavyotakikana . Hii ni k wa 
sababu bajeti ya Kaunti ya Mombasa  kila mtu anaju a, bajeti ya Kaunti  huwa inakuja kimpigo, 
inakuja  kifumbo , kwa hivyo fumbo hufumbiwa mjinga tu  Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti lakini  
mwerevu atalivumbua .  
Kwa hivyo K iti chako Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kimejaa hekima kubwa sana, kubwa 
tunakuomba uweze kutufumbulia hili fumbo ili uweze  kumpatia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa 
Sarafu maeleke zo ya vipi Mheshimiwa mlengwa alivyo uliza hili swali atapata haya majibu kwa  
sababu pia mimi ni mmoja wapo ambaye niko na kiu ya kutaka  kujua matumizi vipi ya pesa za 
maendeleo zilivyotumika kwa kila eneo kata Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. A hsante.  
 
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay Hon. Hatimy I think you have 
heard the issues by Hon. Kitula, can  you respond because he is doubting your response . 
 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika s wala hi li nimelipata kutoka kwa House 
Business vile limekuja, mi mi siletewi barua ya kusema kuwa nataka kujua nini ama nini , mimi 
naenda na swala vile limeletwa . Mwenye kuuliza ametaka kujua budget expenditure financial 
year 2017/2018 as shown in t he report of the Controller of B udget  swala nililoletewa mimi ni 
hilo… 
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 [Interruption ] 
[Hon. Kitula  on his feet]  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Just wait a minute ! 
 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Poa! Poa! Poa!  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka hiyo barua al ioileta 
iliopokelewa na Katibu wa Bunge  atuletee  sisi tuione ime pokelewa  lini na swali limeandikwa 
nini kwa sababu sisi hatuendi kwa barua zikishakuja hapa , sisi twaend a kwa swala vile 
imeulizwa kwa B unge , kuwa swala lil iloulizwa ni hili na kwa  nini asijibiwe . Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti  si kampuni ya babangu ama mamangu eti kusema nifich e kitu lakini tunakwenda 
kwa mujibu wa lile swala vi le limekuja ndio sisi tumejibu na Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti hii ni 
Nyumba ya sheria K atiba ya Kenya A rticle 226 iko wazi kila mwak a Auditor General atakuja 
afanye ukaguzi wa v itu na nimesema kwenye Ripoti  yangu vitu vyote viko kwenye mitandao . 
Hii chapter  imefungwa  kwa saba bu sisi tushakuja tukaangaliwa N yumba hi i hii imepitisha Ripoti  
ya PAC na kusema kuwa hii maneno imepitwa na wakati sa a hii kama anataka aende aangalie 
kwenye mitandao aangalie atapata  vile vitu anataka.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes, Hon Charles Kitula can you provide 
the Statemen t that you forwarded to the C lerks?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika nim esema Taarifa  iko hata uzuri  Karani  wake wa 
Fedha  ni Abdallah anaweza ku thibitisha haya maneno n inayo ongea . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Abdallah can not speak in this Assembly.  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Nasema ni Karani wake anaweza kut hibitisha kwa sababu ye ye ndio 
anapeleka stakabadhi  katika Kamati . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Clerk of the Commit tee? 
 
Hon. Kitula:  Yes ya Fedha  na yeye ndio hu w anakaa katika B unge hili Mheshimiwa 
Spika , nimesema mara ya pili kwamba hii imeandikwa hapa ni headline haijaandikwa content 
yote na hata ukia ngalia b iashara ya nambari tisa  inakuja itashuhudia kwamba hapa imeandikwa 
ni deadline  lakini content iko na yule mtu ana yeuliza na yule mtu ana yejibu l akini haiwezi 
andikwa content  yote kwenye Orodha ya siku kama desturi za taratibu za B unge hili lakini h ilo 
namfahamisha kwamba Taarifa  iko akitaka nitaweza kumpatia lakini Mheshimiwa Spika 
afadhali niwe wazi katika moyo wangu kwamba sion i nikipata jibu mwafaka katika B unge hili 
kwa hivyo afadhali nitumie mbinu ninazojua mimi kisheria kuweza kuhakikisha kwam ba 
nimepata majibu haya kikamilifu.  Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Thank you Hon. Kitula . Yes Clerk ? 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON IMPLEMENTATI ON HON . SALIM 
KALUME ON THE STATUS REPORT ON IMPLEMENTA TION OF AUTISM  SPECTRUM DISORDER IN  
MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Yes Committee  on Implementation , Hon. Salim Kalume.  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 Hon. Kalume : Thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir . Response to statement , on the status report 
on implementation of autism  spectrum disorder in Mombasa County . Mr. Speaker I stand 
pursuant to S tanding order 41,  2(c) to give a response to S tatement on the stat us report on 
implementation of Autism  Spectrum disorder in Mombasa Coun ty as asked by Hon. Hamida 
Noor.  Hon. Speaker the Committee on I mplementation held a Committee  meeting on Tuesday 
25th August , 2020 at 11:30 a.m in the Committee  room  where the County Secretary was invited to 
shed more light on the above raised issue.  Hon. Speaker the County S ecretary informed the 
Committee  that he is  waiting for the department of H ealth to finalise on the compilation of the 
report and once the report is ready he will forward it to the Committee.  Mr. Speaker I will bring 
the response to this House once the County Secretary responds back to the Committee with the 
detailed report.  Thank  you Mr.  Speaker S ir. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Kalume but make a 
follow up Hon. Kalume  and the C ommittee make  a follow up on the same issue so that you fast  
track it and bring the report as so on as possible, Yes Hon . Charles?  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir. 
 
Hon. Kitula: Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika. N imesema nasubiri majibu haya  kwa sababu 
ni majibu ambayo ya naangazia mambo muhimu sana Mheshimiwa Spika , nataka B unge hili 
liweze kuwa na u shahidi wa kutosha, tazama vile Mwenyek iti wa Utekelezaji  ameleta barua ya 
ushahidi kutoka kwa Katibu wa Kaunti,  sote tuko nao pia akaleta na ushahidi ya vile Taarifa  hii 
inastahili kujibiwa akiwa yeye amethibitisha . Kwa hivyo katika B unge hili ni dhahiri sha hiri 
kwamba stakabadhi  za Fedha  zinafichwa,  wananchi hawawezi...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Hon Kitula you are out of order ! 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker he should withdraw [Off microphone] . 
 
[Technical hitch]  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Hon. Kitula you are out of order!  
  
            Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): You are out of order! If you want  to 
proceed first withdraw the S tatement.  
  
[Applause ] 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadh ili Mwalimu ):  Hon. K itula for you to proceed you will 
have to withdraw the statement.  
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba unis ikize. Nakubali.  
 
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13             The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): You withdraw first and apologise.  
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Under  Standing O rder… 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Hon. Kitula you are out of order , 
withdraw first and apologise then we proceed . 
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Hon. Speaker , I withdraw . 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Okay then proceed . 
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama kat ika B unge hili na kusema bila u oga 
wowote katika Bunge hili kwamba m husika mkuu wa uharibifu wa pesa za umma ni Mohamed 
Hatimy kat ika B unge hili … 
[Loud mu mmurs ] 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Hon Kitula ! Yes?  
 
            Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  He should give us ….evidence  [Off microphone] . 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):   Yes Hon. Amri ya. Have your seat Hon . 
Kitula . 
 
            Hon. Amriya Juma: Mr. Speaker S ir, I rise on S tanding order 104 . Mr. Speaker; g ross 
disorderly conduct , conduct is grossly disorder ly if a M ember concerned deliberately gives false 
information to the County Asse mbly and (d) persist s in making serious allegations without 
adequate substantiation and (j) acts in any other way to serious detriment of the dignity or 
orderly procedure of the County Assembly , Mr. Speaker and also 104  (2)... Thank you.  
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Mhes himiwa Spika Kanuni za Bunge nambari 87 iko…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
           The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Kitula . 
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Yes.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): First substantiate.  
  
            Hon. Kitula:  Naam . Nataka niwe kwenye H ansard records kwamba S tanding order 87 
inasema , ikiwa nimeweza kutuhumu mtu sheria inasema niweze kuthibitisha sa a hii saa hii na 
mimi nathibitihsa hap a kwamba idara anayoongoza Moha med Hatimy niko na stakabad hi 
kuunga mkono. .. 
 
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14             The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  There is a P oint of order. Yes 
Honourable u se your mic rophone . 
 
            Hon.  Samba:  Unless you give us  direction   
we were on another S tatement response now i do  not know why w e are ending up discussing a 
matter that was already resolved because it does not even appear in the Order paper , just on a 
lighter note.  
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika ? 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Hon. Kitula subst antiate on your 
allegations first.  
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Naam,  nataka nimalize hiyo Standing order  ndio niweze ku substantiate . 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Provide evidence in the House . 
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Yes, Standing order  87 inasema , a Member shall be responsible for the 
accuracy of any facts which the M ember alleges to be true and may be  required to substantiate  
such facts instantly . Mheshimiwa Spika nataka nikukabidhi sa a hii ushahi di wa kuweza kusema 
kwamba Moh amed Hatimy, Mariam Mb aruk na Taufiq B alala hawa ndio wanaotumia pesa za 
umma vibaya na ushahidi nakupatia sasa hivi.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Give the evidence.  
 
[Hon. Kitula  laid a document ] 
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Mhesh imiwa Spika ushahidi wangu naukabidhi wa mwaka wa fedha wa  
2017/2018, 2018/2019 na 2019/2020 kuon yesha kwamba Wizara  hizi zimekuwa zikitumia pesa 
huku viongozi hawa waki … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
          The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Those people t hat you have mentioned . 
 
[Interruption ] 
[Consultations]  
  
          Those people you have mentioned . 
 
[Silence]  
 
            Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Mr. Speaker, Point  of Order! Mr. Speaker ! 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ):  Ok, thank you Mr. Charl es Kitula .  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 I can see what you have forwarded to us ; Controller of Budget R eports , can you 
substantiate how  those people that you said  are the ones stealing or controlling these monies that 
you have mention ed? 
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa nimekukabidhi ushahidi wa kutosha na viongozi…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : These are R eports so substantiate if Hon. 
Hatimy and the other two that you mention ed are the ones that are misusing public funds in 
Mombasa . 
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa mimi nimekupatia ushahidi wangu kwa mba Wizara  ambazo 
zinatumia pesa nyingi ni za hao viongozi ambao nimekutajia ; Moha med Hatimy akiwa 
anaongoza hiyo Wizara  ya Fedha , Mariam Mbaruk na Tawfiq Balala . Sasa wao…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Moha med Hatimy is the Chair of 
Finance Committee…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
            Hon. Kitula:  Ni mhusika mkuu kwa hizo idara…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So from these Reports how can you 
substantiate that Hon. Hatimy has misused certain amount s of money in this evidence that you 
have given us ? 
 
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu hizo amount ziko hapo wao kama 
Wanakamati na viongozi katika hizo idara hawawezi kuele za jinsi walivyotumia pesa hizo. H uo 
ni ushahidi wa kutosha kwamba pesa hizo ziliweza kutumika kama kweli ni uongo wao waweze 
kunieleza vile pesa ziliweza kutumika hazijatumika kama kifisadi wanieleze katika Bunge hili 
kwamba Mheshimiwa Kitula ni muongo hizo p esa zimetumik a hapo zimetumika ipasaavyo na  
mimi nitaweza ku  withdraw statement  yangu lakini kufik ia sasa pesa hizo zimetumika 
zimekwenda kwa mifuko ya watu hazijaenda mashinani . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
Hon. Amriya Jum a: Mr. Speaker I think when you look at our Evidence Act , when you 
look at S ection 114 it talks a bout one who alleges must prove . Mr. Speaker , Hon. Kitula has 
come out very firmly in op en Assembly to mention names adversely and these are names of 
persons w ho have reputa tion in the society, this is a P arliament of rules that is guided by rules 
and procedures . 
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16  Mr. Speaker if the Hon. Member has mention ed Mr. Hatimy, Ms. Mariam, Ms. Aisha I 
was expecting that he was going to dish ou t documents to prove that t here i s a signature of one 
Mr. Hatimy or Ms. Mariam in misappropriation or will bring out facts in evidence just the same 
way you do it in court . Mr. Speaker i f you look at the Constitution th is Parliament and its 
Committees ha s been given the same jurisdi ction as the High Court and y ou can not tolerate such 
precedence  where Members have started defaming each other  and other Members of the society . 
So Mr. Speaker I urge you before you make a ruling that you be guided by the Constitution, that 
you b e guided b y the Evidence Act and lastly you be guided by th ese Standing Orders and af firm 
your Chair. Thank you.  
 
[Applause]  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker just as I said that one Hon. Kitula is behaving more of an 
investigator because he cannot just stand up here in  this Honourable  House and allege  the three 
who are mentioned have been found guilty of what is alleging . Mr. Speaker when you look at the 
three that he is mentioning these are human beings, these a re people who have got families , these 
are people who have got very good reputation in their work and Mr. Kitula  can just stand up and 
mention as if is in his own house and allege that the three have actually mishandled funds for the 
County . 
Mr. Speaker I thi nk this is a very serious offence according to me and again it will be 
very wrong when we come into this House that we should always entertain Mr. Kitula every now 
and then in this House ; in fact he should not be trying to underrate your seat , let me tell you for 
free every time  Mr. Kitula is underrating your seat because you see here every time  he want s to 
argue with you it becomes an argument but here we already have the Order Paper which we are 
supposed to  follow not bring issues . Thank you.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Hon. Members I can see we have dwel t 
well o n this issue and there are Standing Orders that have been mention ed, 104  Standing Order 
and others . Standing Orders have been mentioned ; the Hon. Member Hon.  Kitula also provided  
some documents before this Honourable  House. I now take this opportunity to rule that the 
Member will be called before the Powers and Privileges Committee to substantiate his arguments 
and th e Committee will give its stand. T he said Member and the Committe e will look up either to 
call the mention ed people also to come before that Committee , so Hon. Kitula you will be 
notified when to come before that Committee to substantiate on whatever allegations but Hon. 
Kitula if you fail to substantiate and the Commit tee will take its stand . 
 
Hon. Kitula:  Most obliged Hon. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Yes Clerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE CO UNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker let me move a Procedural 
Motion Adjournment of the County Assembly.  
August 26, 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of  the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17  
That Pursuant to Standing Order 25 (3) and the County Assembly Calendar adopted by 
this House on Tuesday 18th August, 2020 this Assembly adjourns for recess to resume 
regular sittings on Tuesday 15th September, 202 0.  
 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Who is your seconder?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Hon. Amriya Boy . 
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : I highly second Mr. Speaker . 
  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  I now prop ose a question that the 
Motion by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani on Adjournment of the County Ass embly be considered 
by this Honourable  House in the same terms as moved.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
Yes the Leader of Majority , any contributions?  
 
The Lea der of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I think I do  not have much  to 
say, I know Members want to leave very early so that they can meet their people at their Wards 
and some in their Maskani  although we have a lockdown or we can say it is a curfew I me an but 
am hoping that maybe the curfew will also be lifted so that Members can have a good time to be 
in town up to midnight. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members , the House  stand adjourn ed until Tuesday 15th September, 2020 at 
10:00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:50p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 