March 16 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thur sday, 16th March , 201 7 
The House met at 2: 36pm. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down. Yes, Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Hon Mary Akinyi . 
Hon. (Ms) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker I wish to table  a Notice 
of Motion on inclusive  of ICT hubs in Village Polytechnics . Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to give  
Notice of the following Motion;  
(Hon (Ms) Akinyi  moved a Notice of Motion ) 
INCLUSIVE OF ICT HUBS IN VILLAGE POLYTECHNICS  
THAT AWARE that the County government is  charged with the responsibility of 
overseeing Village Polytechnics, Pre –primary education, Home craft centres, and Childcare 
facilities under Part 2(9) of the Forth Schedule of the Constitution of Kenya 2010;  
FURTHER AWARE that Village Polytechnics withi n the County are yet to 
incorporate ICT Hubs which are vi tal to any learning Institution;  
Mr. Speaker Sir,  
CONCERNED that the lack of ICT Hubs within the Village Polytechnics in the 
County may impede not only students but also the wider public in this digital age;  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that:  
All Village Polytechnics within the County be equipped with ICT Hubs, and that the 
ICT Hubs be accessible not only to students but also the wider public especially Women and 
Youth.   
Thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
Hon Saad Faraj . 
Hon. Faraj : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr Speaker we had agree d with the H onourable 
Member who requested for this Statement Hon. Fadhil i Mwalimu Ma karani who is 
representing Portr eitz that after having brought forward the issue  to this Honourable House 
we were to convene a meeting the following day but unfortunately we called for that 
particular  meeting we were with a few mem bers and the deputy , my ass istant  but later on we 
come to understand that the H onourable Member was com mitted elsewhere and he had  sent 
his apologies  to the C ommittee and therefore we are yet to   prepare this rep ort because  we 
needed to be furnished of the particular plot and  to be  exact we needed to understand where, 
which village that this issue ; that of the grabbing  was actually happening but we were not 
able to grasp that information and therefore we request  for more time Mr. Speaker, thank you.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : How long do you think it will take for the 
report to be ready?  
Hon. Faraj: We are planning to meet the H onourable Member who has  actually  
raised that issue tomorrow at around  10.00 a.m. therefore we hope by Thursday next week  we 
will be able to avail the information  that is  needed , thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Ahmed E brahim . 
March 16 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Hon. Ahmed Omar Ebrahim : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for awarding this 
opportunity, concerning  the statement of poor drain age and lack of adequate garbage 
collection equipment at Kongowea Market.  
Mr. Speaker  as per my request is , I was requesting to know from the Chairperson 
Committee  on Environment and N atural resources whether he is aware of the condition of 
poor drainage system and lack of adequate garbage collection equipment at the Kongowea 
Market.  
Mr. Speaker we need to  know what measures the County government is taking to 
remedy  the situation, as the situation is not good  Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Committee Chairperson of Environment 
and Natural Resources.  
Hon. Ahmed Omar Ebrahim : Mr. Speaker, the Chair and Vice -Chair are not around 
but am also a M ember  so.... 
(Laughter)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay then find out and then bring us an 
answer.  
Hon. Ahmed Omar Ebrahim : Mr. Speaker, its unfortunate that im the one who 
raised this…  
(Loud  consultation)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Then if you are a M ember you should  take 
it straight  to the committee level. Yes Hon Patrick.  
Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker I was wondering the Honorable Member who brought  
this particular statement  belongs to the committee which deals with Environment , and to save 
this House time and money he should just take it direct to the Chair and the will deal with it 
instead of bringing this matter in this House.  
Mr. Speaker the Committee shoul d work and it is up to him because  he is a Member 
of the Committee and is in this House Mr. Spea ker to bring the report himself. .. 
(Laughter and Applause)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you Hon  Ahmed Omar I think 
this matter since you are a Member of that Committee you should take it to the Committee 
level first , before the Committee . Yes Hon  Hatimy , 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker he should tell us when he is going to tab le the 
report in the House?  
(Laughter)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Ebrahim when are you b ringing 
it? Other  Members w ant to know? Can you tell this House when you are bringing the report?  
(Laughter)  
Hon. Ahmed  Omar Ebrahim : Mr. Speaker I cannot bring the repor t because I 
brought this statement  to this House because am a person who has been  affected by this issue ; 
because I work with the people there and we have discuss ed about this matter and there was 
no follow up and solution that's why I brought to this House  so that the Chairlady and the 
Executive can take it seriously Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Hatimy  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  So Mr. Speaker he is confirming that the committee to be 
dissolve d because it is not working , so Honorable Chief Whip can we go ahead  with a 
Motion to dissolve the Committee ...  
(Laughter)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  KIthinzi  
March 16 , 201 7                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for  information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 Hon. (Ms) Zainab Kithinzi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , kama tunavyoelewa hili ni 
Jumba la sheria na ikiwa tumeleta hoja yeyote hapa ni lazima tuwe makini na 
tunayoyazungumza . 
Mimi ni Mwanakamati wa Kamati ya Mazingira sijaona Mheshimiwa Omar Meti 
akileta hii ripoti kwa Kamati na leo anasema eti tulikaa na tukaijadili na hatujaleta jibu lolote.  
Mheshimiwa Sp ika napenda kuhakikishia hii Nyumba kuwa hajawahi kuleta lakini 
saa hiz i tuta fanya uchunguzi tujue ni nini k inachoendelea hapo ? Na yeye mwenyewe akiwa 
mmoja wao ili hoja atakayoleta hapa ama majibu yatakayoletwa hapa awe ataridhika nao  kwa 
sababu yeye pia ni Mwanakamati . Ahsante.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Patrick Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker Members of the same Committee are really conflicting ; 
the owner of the statement is  saying he has taken it to the Committee but the other Member is 
rejecting so you need to give another directive because we will not get an answer. Mr. 
Speaker I beg for your direction.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay Hon  Ebra him you take the matter to 
the Committee ; that is the work of the Committee,  you have br ought it to me if it was other 
Member who brought it  I woul d have taken it to that Committee so you ta ke to the 
Committee first. Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members there being no other business this House is adjourned until Tuesday 
afternoon.  
The House rose at 2:50pm. 
 
 
 