March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thur sday, 17th March, 2016  
The House  met at 2 :35p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker ( Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : You may have your seat s Hon.  Members, yes C lerk. 
PAPER  
 Hon.  Zainab  Mumba , Chairperson,  Committee o n Water, Environment  and Natural  
resources . 
(Silence)  
(Business differed)  
 Next? 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 Any Member  of this C ommittee ,  
(Silence)  
(Business differed)  
Next? 
 
MOTION  
 Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy . 
 Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I request this House  to 
adopt this  County Fiscal Strategy Paper and the Debt Management P aper under the  following 
observations ; The County Fiscal Strategy Paper should be aligned with the Annual Development 
Plan, the County Integrated Development Plan, the annual budget and th e Debts Management 
Strategy Paper. Figures should match where appropriate and projects be cascaded appropriately 
and planned over the medium term. The C ounty priorities in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper 
should be in line with the national objectives in the Budget Policy Statement and policy goals 
clearly outlined pursuant to section 117 of the Public Finance Management Act,  2012 . Thank  
you, Mr. Speaker . 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Hatimy just read it as it is,  it is very obvious  that 
this...  
       Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy : I request Mr. Speaker my Member  Hon.  Nyamvula to  second 
the Report . 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Nyamvula . 
 Hon.  (Mr.s.) Nyamvula : Ahsante  Bwana Spika , I second .    
(Question proposed)  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : I now propose th e question  that the M otion by Hon.  
Hatimy be  discussed in this House...   
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Hon.  Hatimy .  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I request  this House  to 
pass the resolution of the recommendation of this Paper so that we can go with  our coming 
budget , so I think we have  the Report  and I request a ny Member  who has any question to  raise 
the question so that we can adopt this Report . Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
2  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : There is that proposal by  Hon.  Hatimy on this particular 
Report  in...(Inaudible )  so that we just… (Inaudible )... in case of any difference or anything  Hon.  
Members  you would want  added or de leted i n this particular Report  then that should be done ; 
alternatively is that we tackle this p articular Report  clause afte r clause, can I hear your views.  
 Hon.  Murfad ? 
 Hon.  Amu r: Mr. Speaker  we go clause by clause so that we can adopt this document  
thank  you Mr. Speaker . 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Patrick . 
 Hon.  Siminyu : Mr. Speaker this is a ve ry important document  and  I support what the 
Member  here has proposed that we go through this document clause after clause so that the 
document can be passed.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Moham ed. 
 Hon.  Moha med Hatimy : I have no objection Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Now you need to take us just through , we would not 
handle  introduction  isn't that important , but clause two observation, then findings , yes Hon.  
Hatimy . 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I think Hon.  Amur is ready to give  us this Report , 
he is willing t o read it .  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Murfad . 
 Hon.  Amur : (Inaudible ). 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker the observations and findings ;  
(Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy moved the Report ) 
REPORT  ON REVIEW OF THE COUNTY FISCAL S TRATEGY PAPER,  2016 AND 
DEBT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY PAPER  
 2. Observations and Findings  
2.1 The goals of the workshop were:  
 
a. Review and consideration of the County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016 and the Debt  
Management Strategy Paper,  2016.  
 
b. Compare and assess t he alignment or lack thereof between the documents under review 
with other national and C ounty fiscal, financial and development policy documents.  
 
c. Assess , compare and assess the compliance of the documents under review with 
stipulations of the Public Fin ance Management Act,  2012.  
 
d. Make recommendations for corrective measures where anomalies are found in the policy 
documents under review and any other.  
 
 2.2 The National Vision 2030 is the main developmental policy guide passed during the 
Grand Coalition g overnment of 1997 to 2012.  
 On the ascendancy of the Jubilee government from 2013 to date national economic and 
development policy was shift ed towards an Economic transformative a genda which is 
contained in the annual Budget Policy Statement.  
 2.3 Members  were taken through the County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016 and the Debt  
Management Strategy Paper,  2016 by the facilitator Mr. Fred Oundo.  
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
3   
The following was noted during the discussions:  
I request  my M ember Serah Nyamvula to continue . 
(Hon.  Nyamvula  continued with  the Report ) 
COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY PAPER,  2016  
a. There was under -absorption of funds particularly in terms of development 
expenditure across departments for the period July 2015 to December 2015.  
 
b. Projected revenues and expenditures could not match agains t actuals with actuals 
falling short of expectations in the previous fiscal year.  
 
c. Projected revenue for 2016/2017 were: Local revenue – Kshs. 3,588,023,012/= while 
total excheque r issues are projected at Kshs. 6,337,731,281/= with total revenues 
given as K shs.9,925,754,293/=.  
 
d. Projected expenditure for 2016/2017 were: Personnel – Kshs. 4,456,154,057/=, 
operational expenditure - Kshs. 2,293,358,862/= and development expenditure at 
Kshs. 3,176,241,374 with total expenditure given as Kshs. 9,925,754,293/=.  
 
e. The document contains departmental ceilings with the lions share going to health at 
24.53% while the County Public Service Board got the least allocation at 1.34%  
 
f. It was noted that the departmental allocations in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  
2016 were n ot in conformance with the priorities in the same document and the 
County Integrated  Development Plan. While some departments were highly 
prioritized the allocations to them were low while non -prioritized departments were 
given higher allocations.  
 
g. A compa rative assessment of the document under review with its previous year’s 
version shows a departure/variance in the strategic priorities of the county 
government with no sufficient explanatory notes being given for the radical shift.  
 
h. A look at the County Integrated  Development Plan shows some development 
projects had not been initiated four year’s down the line partly due to cumbersome 
procurement procedures and failure by departments to prioritize the same. This also 
shows failure to cascade the projects to  the Annual Development Plan and factoring 
their allocations in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016. Delayed exchequer 
releases were also mentioned as a contributory factor occasioning the delay in project 
implementation.  
 
i. A ta ble of revenue realized by  the C ounty government since financial year 
2012/2013 to December 2015 shows wide fluctuations in revenue realized.  
Debts Management Strategy Paper,  2016  
a. A statement of C ounty government debt was given as: Kshs.435,238,530/= for 
development expenditure,  recurrent expenditure  – Kshs.2,776,044,324/= with total 
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
4 given as Kshs.3,211,282,854/=.  Recurrent debt exceeds development debt by a wide 
margin.  
 
b. According to the Public Finance Management Act,  2012 debt should be development 
oriented and not predominant ly recurrent. The Debts Management Strategy Paper,  
2016 however, shows  the reverse to be true at the C ounty government.  
 
c. It was Report ed that the figures contained in the Debts Management Strategy Paper,  
2016 do not truly refle ct the total debt stock of th e County government and there are 
significant amounts not disclosed.  
 
d. While the debt stock has been partially disclosed in the Debts Management Strategy 
Paper,  2016 no accompanying schedule of repayment of the same has been anne xed 
to show seriousness by t he County treasury to reduce or clear the same.  
 
e. Some allocations have been made in the current financial year’s budget for debt 
repayments but there is a mismatch between the figures in the budget and the Debts 
Management Strategy Paper,  2016. This needs to be corrected and a repayment 
schedule over the medium term prepared to clear the debts.  
 
f. The Debts Management Strategy Paper,  2016 mentions the establishment of a Debts 
Management Office but indications contained therein are that it is a data/statistica l 
collection office rather than an authoritative unit for debts control and management.  
 
g. The Debts Management Strategy Paper,  2016 does not show achievements in debts 
reduction since the previous financial year to enable assessment of success or failure 
of previous policies and efforts to contain or reduce debt.  
3. Conclusions  
 
3.1 The County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016 and Debts Management Strategy Paper,  
2016 are a remarkable improvement over previous year’s versions of the policy 
documents in terms of an alysis and content but some modest improvements needs to 
be done to ensure it complies with the law and aligns to other policy documents.  
 
3.2 While the general economic and financial outlook look positive , some key 
interventions and actions need to be tak en to narrow the gap between planning and 
implementation of policies. The C ounty government needs to ensure legislation is 
enacted and operationalized to create key institutions such as the Debts Management 
Office and there is sufficient political good wil l to ensure it is effective.   
 
3.3 Planning should be integrated  and co -ordinated and ensure cascading is done from 
long-term to medium -term to annual planning. Adherence to medium term expenditure 
framework should be done.  
 
3.4 Debts reduction should be  a priority and minimization of the same should be 
enhanced.  
 
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
5 3.5 Budgeting should go in tandem with revenue enhancement at the local level to 
enable full implementation of projects and programmes.  
 
4. Recommendations  
County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016  
4.1 The County Fiscal Strategy Paper should be aligned with the Annual Development 
Plan, the County Integrated  Development Plan,  the annual budget and the Debts Management 
Strategy Paper.   
 
Figures should match where appropriate and projects be cascaded appr opriately and 
planned over the medium term. The C ounty priorities in the County Fiscal Strategy Paper should 
be in line with the national objectives in the Budget Policy Statement and policy goals clearly 
outlined pursuant to section 117 of the Public Fina nce Management Act,  2012.  
 
4.2 The C ounty government should desist from over -budgeting by preparing realistic 
budgets where revenues are not extremely over -projected and expenditure is modest. 
Containing the wage bill by keeping employment within a managea ble level.  
 
4.3 There is need to conduct cost -benefit analysis to find out whether leasing of 
medical equipment or buying the same is more advantageous and cost -effective.  
 
4.4 The C ounty government needs to put in place a Revenue Enhancement Plan to 
ensur e local revenue projections are achieved to enable proper funding of the budget.  
 
4.5 The County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016 needs to review and analyze  
accomplishments in the development arena since the previous year and what corrective 
action is taken to  initiate or complete stalled projects.  
 
4.6 An annual statement of revenue projected versus revenue realized and variances 
thereof needs to be published and circulated for an informed view of performance.  
 
Debts Management Strategy Paper,  2016  
 
4.7 The De bt Management Strategy Paper,  2016 be revised to provide full disclosure 
of all C ounty governmen t debts including those of the C ounty Assembly and a debts 
repayment schedule to clear all debts.  
 
4.8 Debts repayment should be geared towards clearing long ou tstanding and minor 
debts first before clearing recent and major debts.  
 
4.9 Debts should be development oriented rather than recurrent in line with 
stipulations in the Public Finance Management Act,  2012. To minimize debts 
especially recurrent approval of  expenditure should only be done subject to availability 
of funds.  
 
4.10 There is need to impose debts ceilings across departments and proactive action to 
clear debts. Political goodwill is necessary to ensure success in containing debt.  
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
6  
4.11 The establis hment of a Debt Management Office must be supported by enabling 
legislation which will give the office power and authority to make the office effective 
in managing county debt. Further, the County Treasury should prepare, publish and 
circulate a concept no te on the establishment Debts Management Office providing full 
details on its roles, mandate and modus operandi.  
 
4.12 There should be transparency in publication of C ounty government debts with 
information being made available on the official County gover nment/C ounty treasury 
website.  
 
4.13 The Debts Management Strategy Paper needs to be aligned with the annual 
budget by factoring debts repayments in the budget.  
 
4.14 The Debts Management Strategy Paper needs to show achievements in debts 
reduction and man agement since the previous year so that it is known whether the 
policy espoused previously are working or not.  
Other s 
4.15 A comparative assessment/alignment needs to be done in the C ounty 
government ’s policy documents i.e the County Integrated  Development  Plan,  the 
County Fiscal Strategy Paper with the national government’s Vision 2030,  the 
Economic Transformative Agenda and the annual budget policy statement.  
 
4.16 The C ounty government needs to seriously address the mismatch between 
planning and implemen tation of development projects by ensuring that there are 
sufficient resources to initiate and accomplish projects and sufficient goodwill to back 
the same.  
 
4.17 A worksh op be organized for the C ommittee to review, consider and recommend 
the alignment/ame ndment to the County Integrated Development Plan and the Annual 
Development Plan.  
 
4.18 The County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016 and the Debts Management Strategy 
Paper,  2016 be revised by the County Treasury to take care, cognizance and ad opt the 
recommenda tions of the C ommittee contained in this Report . 
 
4.19 The County Assembly to approve and adopt this Report . 
(Hon.  (Mr.s.) Nyamvula ended reading the Report ) 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : I beg to move Hon.  Speaker . 
 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : As per the prayer of clause 4 (19) be considered by this 
House . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes Hon.  Nyamvula . 
 
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
7  Hon.  (Mr.s.) Nyamvula : Thank  you Mr. Speaker this is just to reinforce what our Report  
indicate d that some of the figures especial ly on the departmental  expenditure,  development  and 
recurrent  vary. It was noted  during  the meeting  that departments have spent ... have  done some 
developments but there seems to be some mistakes  that in their development  index  percentage s 
are low even  though they have spent  on development . This indicated as we were discussing Mr. 
Speaker ; the ex chequ er, the treasurer  has not been  balancing things properly by not taking  into 
account ... not indicating  what some of the departments have been  doing  to ensur e that the show ... 
the figures i n the right area whether it  is development a nd recurrent  and more particularly is  the 
only...  If I remember there were three departments that have the highest development  percentage 
i.e. health,  agriculture and I’ll check ; when you look at other departments Mr. Speaker am trying  
to recall  to be correct is that we have commitments; f or instance  the department  of Youth, gender  
and sports have commitments which are not indicated i n their accounts . For instance  we have 
three  policies which are coming  through ; they were supposed to come to this County  Assembly 
and they have not been budgeted  for and so some of the biggest ... just t o say on the Report  is that 
the indications  of the Report  there is something lacking  in terms of  the way it was Report ed. 
Thank  you, Mr. Speaker .  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Murfad . 
            Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I wish to congratulate  the Committee 
for good work;  if you go to 4,2 There should be transparen cy in publication of C ounty 
government debts with information being made available on the official County 
government/C ounty treasury website.  This will enable  our Members to see exactly what is 
happening in the County government of Mombasa, and 4: 16, the C ounty government needs to 
seriously address the mismatch between planning and implementation of development projects 
by ensuring that there are sufficient resources to initiate and accomplish projects and sufficient 
goodwill to back the same.  That means  that the C ommittee is very much alive a nd is working 
towards  to improve this ; the third Mr. Speaker the C ommittee spoke of i t the Report  was 4 .18, 
The County Fiscal Strategy Paper,  2016 and the Debts Management Strategy Paper,  2016 be 
revised by the County Treasury to take care, cognizance and ad opt the recommendations of the 
Committee contained in this Report . If the C ommittees could be working this way Mr. Speaker ; 
if the C ommittee will work this way in line with the budget  then this County  would al so be 001 
in its budget and achievement and doing its job the way it is supposed to do . I want to 
congratulate the C ommittee f or work well do ne. Thank  you, Mr. Speaker . 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu . 
 
Hon.  Siminyu : Thank  you Mr. Speaker I would like to give a statement  on upholding 
peace during  and after the elections . 
(Mr. Speaker ( Hon.  Rajwayi)  interrupt ed) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Patrick  I know  you have been  waiting  to crossover 
but you need  to wa it till we reach that bridge ; we are still handling  this important stuff here . 
Hon.  Siminyu : Thank  you Mr. Speaker I was excited  to bring my statement . Mr. Speaker 
this document is a very important  document in the budget cy cle and I take this opportunity to 
congratulate  our a ble Chairma n Hatimy  for making sure this document reaches this House  on 
time. Mr. Speaker I want  to say that the last time  we had somebody  in charge of finance he went 
home because he failed to deliver such a document in time and this time we have pe ople who are 
working very hard to make sure that these things  are happening  in time.  
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
8 Mr. Speaker what I want to say is to  thank the C ommittee a nd that they should keep  the 
fire burning  so that they ca n continue working for Mombasa C ounty.  Thank  you. 
(Appla use) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Jimmy Odari . 
Hon.  Odari : Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  Mr. Speaker  even though  I came late I think i 
need some time to go through the Report ... 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Murfad Amur . 
Hon.  Amur : This is the problem of coming i n late.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Tom . 
Hon.  Ogalo: Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ni Mwanachama wa hii K amati na n ingependa 
wale ambao walikuwa pale wasikie hata mimi niko pamoja na naunga mkono. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Paul O nje.  
Hon.  Onje : Ahsante sana  Mheshimiw a Spika. Mheshimiwa S pika mim i si Mwanachama  
lakini  hata vile  nimeona  hii ripoti kutoka kwa finance na mimi napongeza kazi nzuri ambayo 
wamefanya  kwa sa babu wamegus a kila mahali . Kwa mfano nikiangalia  hapa kwa  Debt 
Management  Strategy Paper, 2016 hapa wameweza  kuleta mambo mazuri sana; .hii 4.7  ‘The 
Debt Management Strategy Paper,  2016 be revised to provide full disclosure of all C ounty 
governmen t debts including those of the County A ssembly and a debts repayme nt schedule to 
clear all debts’. Bwana Spika  ikiwa haya mam bo yata tekelezwa  kulingana   na vile Kamati ya 
fedha  wameeleza nafikiri kazi itakuwa rahisi hata kwa  upa nde wa executive  na tutawapatia kazi 
rahisi na kila  mmoja am baye anafanya  kazi na serikali y a Kaunti ya  Mombasa  watakuwa 
wanaona matu nda ya kazi am bayo wa naifanya. Kwa hi o mimi nawashukuru kwa kazi nzuri na 
kwa hayo machache a hsante sana. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Well ladies and gentlemen there is a clause in  this 
particular Report  which is actually  sending  some message to us as a government  that we need  to 
do a little bit more than what we are doing . 
Clause 4.4 which reads that , The county government needs to put in place a Revenue 
Enhancement Plan to ensure local revenue projections are a chieved to enable proper funding of 
the budget’.  It is important  we say this as a House  and be united  about  this because  some of the 
reasons as to why we are losing  our revenue  is that some are not paying  taxes ; one, two we have 
individuals who are paradi ng outside there collecting  money  illegally pretending  to be working 
for the County  government  and in that manner  we are losing  a lot of revenue  as a County  
government  and in  the e nd the person  who is suffering most is the citizen outside there.  You will 
also find that most of the times you go there and collect Kshs  200 per day the n thereafter we end 
up as a government arresting  the same  citizens  for a mistake that is not the irs. This one we also 
need  to stand  up and help also the executive i n fighting th is because  each and every time th ese 
persons  are molested it is the same Hon.  Members who  will actually start to go a nd plead for 
them to go . We must stop protecting these  particular individuals and  we have evidence a nd those 
particular claims that people already have , so whenever private individuals Hon.  Members  this 
House  needs  to start  saying  no to such ki nd of behaviors  because  this is a double tragedy for us 
as a government . The common  man is losing ; crying  and the government  also is losing  money  
and this Report  is very clear that we still h ave more ways o n how we can deal with this particular 
issue, of that must be done.   
Again there is the aspect where this particular paper  I have see n somewhere where the 
Public  Service Board actually is the least depa rtment  in terms of funds ; and when we look into 
the allocation which was give n in 2015/2016 (??) 112,000,000  the one that we were able to use is 
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
9 only 21,000,000 . I have just looked at the propos als in this particular Report , and  to me the 
proposal s need  to be taken into consideration , i need  to know  for instance  why we have only 
utilized a maxi mum of 37.8  per cent , and again  ladies a nd gentlemen  this document has 
operations  for the next 12 months  but am so surprised that some are not having the document , 
even the notice  of Motion  was placed o n Tuesday a nd again  now it is a surprise I don’t  even 
know  the time we have to give this notice . 
For that reason therefore that will not stop us from moving forward because we must be 
ready and able to work with the con stitutional timelines . As it is I will give this chance to Hon.  
Mohamed Hatimy who i s the mover of this particular M otion to have the last say before the 
question is put. Hon.  Mohamed . 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika na kama u navyojua kwa hi o 
itakuwa ni b ajeti ya mwisho … 
(Mr. Speaker ( Hon.  Rajwayi)  interrupted)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Amur that doesn’t mean there will be no budget for 
your case and that’s … (Inaudible ). 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatim y: Kama tunavyojua hii ni b ajeti yetu ya mwis ho, ukiangalia 
tumeweza kusema kuwa ni lazima  ile stakabadhi  ambayo itakuwa imetumika na ile b ajeti lazima 
ziwe zimefuata na. Tumesema kuwa tu nataka kuhakikisha CIDP imekaa na kuangalia kama 
itaambatana na b ajeti na Fiscal Strategy P aper na Debt Management  Strategy P aper kwa hiyo  
Mheshimiwa S pika nas hukuru N yumba hii kwa kuweza kuona h uu Mswada  ni muhimu na 
kuweza kupitisha na kusema kuwa wakati huu stakabadhi  iko sawa kabisa . Kwa hi o 
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba N yumba hii iwe na umoja na muungano  wa kuweza k uambiana 
kwenye tumekosa tuambiane ili tuwe tukiondoka hapa tuwe kwa mstari mmoja  na tuweze kutoka 
kwenye N yumba hii kwa njia ya usawa na njia ya usafi sio kuwa tutaambiwa kuwa tumetumia 
pesa kama juzi ilivyoandikwa  kwa gazeti  ile 255 milioni  zimetumika bi la kujulikana lakini 
Nyumba hii iko safi kama pamba na safi kama Gavana  wetu alivyo . Kuna jambo limefunga watu 
wengi mdomo kuwa we are the least kwa corruption kwani sisi tulikuwa twangojewa kuonekana 
Mombasa  ndio ina yoongoza  lakini imeonekana Mombasa  haiko kwa list hiyo ...  
(Applause ) 
Kwa  hivyo  naomba N yumba hii tuwe na umoja na tuwez e kufaulu kwa yaliotuleta hapa , 
ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Well very  quickly  one allow  me to remove the fear that 
this may be your last budget  I want  to believe  that you  still have much more to do a nd you will 
do another  fiscal paper God willing and  secondly whether we are  listed or not in  the most corrupt 
or least corrupt I think  we must continue , we must urge ourselves to continue  condemning  this 
particular nightmare  and disaster called corruption  so that we just  have to be at peace within 
ourselves.  Thank  you for also bringing  that up because  those who have been  mentioned  are 
crying  and those who have not been  mentioned  are celebrating  so for  us to go o n celebrating  we 
must continue to condemn ; we do  not condone  corruption as a government . Otherwise as it is 
Hon.  Members  allow me to place the question that the County  Fiscal Strategy P aper, 2016 be 
approved in this House  as presented by Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy .  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
STATEMENT  
Hon.  Patrick  Siminyu . 
Hon.  Siminyu : Thank  you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity.  Mr.  Speaker I want  to make 
a statement on upholding peace a nd integrity during a nd after the elections. Mr. Speaker this  is 
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
10 due to the fact o f what happened  in Malindi last time a nd as you know  integrity  and peace during  
elections  is up to us and the security apparatus to ensure  there is peace a nd there  should not be 
bias by the police , it will bring problem s to our people and eve n the leaders themselves. As you 
saw even MPs like  Ferdinand  Waititu were involved in voter bribery, it is a shame Mr. Speaker , 
it’s a shame this should not happen in  this era , leaders should lead by integrity . Leaders should 
make sure that each a nd everything is do ne by the book  as required by the law,  but you fi nd 
because they feel they  are in  the ruling  party they can do whatever they want  to do , even the 
police themselves when  the youths from opposition are harassed because  of such it takes the 
opposition leaders to stand  firm so  that action can be take n. 
Mr. Speaker it is wrong  and I would like to ask t hose police plus  those in power they 
should not take this opportunity , they should show equal service  whether in  the opposition or 
not, integrity  from the police,  integrity  from those in leadership should be held during  and after 
the elections . Mr. Speaker we find that during  and after elections  we find so many  cases even in 
politics where it is when people discover that they belong  to certain commun ity and others . Mr. 
Speaker  usually some l eaders fuel these  activities sir, I  thank  the G overnor he did a lot to bring 
all together so that Malindi  will speak with one voice as Malindi  people a nd there should be 
more of such a leadership direction where l eaders bring  people together not to divide people.  
Mr. Speaker I would like to ask because  people are asking  this; what action are  we taking  
to address this? W e should not go down , action should be take n so that we can see peace a nd 
integrity i n the futu re elections that we are going to have a nd we should le arn from whatever has 
happened i n Malindi . Thank you . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Well that to me was kind of a great insight from Hon.  
Patrick Siminyu  who has brought  to this House ; it is important  that we, there is no other leader 
that will think about bringing this C ounty and country  together apart from yourself . To me 
whatever has happened  is actually a wakeup  call as leaders we must... there is no option  here,  we 
must stand  up be together a nd preach  peace a nd togetherness a nd thank  you Hon.  Members  for 
heading my call that we must not politicize whatever is happening  to the G overnor of this great 
County  and let us allow the due process to take its c ourse,  immediately that is do ne I want  to 
assure you  that if there is a ny County  that is more cosmopolitan  then  that other County  is  none  
other than Mombasa  and we must preach  peace for us to  coexist together. We must wak e the 46 
Counties to  learn  from us that when  you are peaceful that’s the only way you can achieve even 
what  you want  to achieve because  in the presence of violence nobody benefits ; whether  you are 
the person  who is promoting  or perpetrating that violence nobody is actually a beneficiary  of 
violence and we have to accept that there is nothing wrong  when  you think  even outside the box 
and try to petition the NCIC and see how best we can bring them aboard  and communicate to 
you the agenda , the workplace  and how best they want  to bring this country  together.  
It must not be viewed from only one side, it  must cut across , not that when  something 
happens  to Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  it is a si n but when  it happens  to Hon.  Hatimy it is a right,  that 
must not happen  and let us not wait until it is too late for us to make up.  I want  to assure you if 
you want  to sleep now come the election day you will be dead , so either wake up now we walk 
the talk so that when  it comes to that time we are all up a nd running  because  we are o n the wrong  
side when  we allow bad things  to happen  but we are o n the right side when  we stand up a nd give 
our vice when  that is needed and that time is now. And Hon.  House  we must get up and bring all 
communities together a nd so each and every person  who is living  here so that we must know 
elections are something that will just pass b ut we will continue to be here as a people a nd as one 
family s o make su re Hon.  Patrick Siminyu you build on that particular statement that you have . 
Next? 
March 17, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         36 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   page 
11 ADJOURNMENT  
This House  stands adjourned until Tuesday next week at exactly 2:30 p.m. 
The House rose at  3:35p.m. 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 