March 21 , 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      37 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offici al Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 21st March , 201 7 
The House met at 2: 40pm. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you sit  down. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
Yes Leader of Majority ? 
PROCEDURAL M OTION  
ADOPTION OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY CALENDER 2017  
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Procedural Motion Adoption of County 
Assembly Calender 2017.  
(Leader of Majority (Hon Mwidani) moved Procedural Motion)  
Persuant to Standing Orders 24 and 25 this Assembly resolves that the following 
County Assembly Calend ar for the year 2017 be adopted;  
Period, for the Fifth Session; First Part ; 
A. Sitting days, from Tuesday, 17th January  to Thursday 30th March 2017 that comes to 
11 weeks.  
On the;  
B.  Long Recess, Mr. Speaker it resumes from 31st March to Monday 17th April, 2017.  
On Fifth Session;  
Second Part Mr. Speaker which is ;  
C. Sitting days it will be from Tuesday 18th April to Thursday 15th June 2017 which will 
take eight  weeks ; 
D. Mr. Speaker which is Sine  Die Recess Period it starts from Friday 16th June to 
Monday 7th August, 2017 ; only seven weeks end of term First Assembly 7th August, 
2017 at midnight. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Appl ause) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes who is to second ? Yes Hon Fadhili 
Makarani.  
Hon. Mwalimu : Yes I second . 
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Honorable  Leader of Mojority.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, P ersuant ... 
(Interrup tion) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Than k you  Clerk for reminding me, Members 
I should p ropose the question first , adopt ion of County Assem bly Calendar 2017. Yes Leader 
of M ajority.  
Leader of Majority  (Hon Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, pursuant to Standing 
Order number 24 and 25, this Assembly resolves that the following County Assembly 
Calender for the year 2017 be adopted: Mr. Speaker Sir, Fifth Session first part ;  
A. Sitting days Tuesday 17th January to 30th Thursday March 2017 which will  take 11 
weeks...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Leader of Majority you are supposed to 
defend the Motion , now it is a time to defend the Motion, tell the House why you want your 
Motion to be passed?  
March 21 , 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      37 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offici al Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Leader of Majority (Hon Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker, defending and introduc tion; i must 
repeat the introduction and then i defend because may be  something has not gone through  to 
the Members...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay that is good, that is your style , it is 
okay . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): So it is better I go back to the introduction . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker ; that will be for 11 
months , and then on long recess which w ill be Fr iday 31st March to Monday 17th April 2017. 
Fifth Session second part C. Sitting days to be on tueday 18th April, Thursday 15th June 2017 
with eight weeks. D Sine Die recess period Friday 16th June Monday  to 7th August 2017 
which w ill be seven  weeks. End of term First A ssembly 7th August 2107 midnight. So Mr. 
Speaker I want this House to adopt this C alend ar even though it is our last session of our 
period but I still would like to request and to beg to the Almight y God to make my col leagues 
so that they can return to this House ... 
(Applause ) 
...and lead the way we are now , because I  understand getting a new person i s not like the 
way we have known each other . So I pray so that all the Members God give them time so that 
they can return to this House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
(Appl ause) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Honorable  of Tudor.  
Hon. Siminyu : Thank you Mr. Speaker ; due to those procedures of the House the 
calendar has to be passed for the  House to work , these regulation s were set and the c alendar 
to pass and be adopted . Although the term is sho rter and I believe that God has heard the 
prayer of the Majority Leader on us to be in the next Assembly  Mr. Speaker it is good to ask 
the Assembly t o adopt this so that we can abi de with the laws so that the Assembly can be le d 
because without the calendar then our commons will  not have che cks and balances required 
by the law  of Kenya . Mr. Sp eaker I would like to  urge the Honourable Members in  this 
House to accept this cale nder because it has been catered for what as Members required 
because I can see the Sine Die on 7th August because the term is supposed to be next year.  
Mr. Speaker our welfare has been catered for and i want to congratulate the Honorable 
Majority Leader because for some time this Ca lender has been into this House, and the 
amendments that Members wanted to be reflected in the calendar  have been catered for.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir and I fully support this.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I think there is no further debate, so 
I will return to the Leader of Majority to answer to  the Motion.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, let me take this 
opportunity again  to congratulate the Members who supported this Motion ; I know it has 
been taken with 100  per cent  accepted , so I am so happ y today t his afternoon for the 
Members to acce pt this Calend ar. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members i h ave to put the question of the 
Motion, as many as of the opinion that this House adopt the Calend ar of the County  
Assembly Calend ar for th e year 2017 ... 
(Question put and agree d to) 
 Yes Clerk.  
ADJOU RNMENT  
 Members now the House is adjourned till tomorrow morning . Thank you.  
 
The Hous e rose at 2:52pm . 