March 22 , 201 6                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         37 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 22nd March, 2016  
The House  met at 2: 32p.m. 
(Temporary Speaker ( Hon.  (Mrs. Serah Nyamvula ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you M embers  I have a 
communication here addressed to the Speaker . The letter is from Kenya Alliance for 
Advancement of Children  (KAAC) . 
(Temporary Spea ker (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula read C ommunication)  
       Dear Sir,  
       Subject to distribution to fire equipment to  20 publ ic schools in Mombasa County, 
KAAC is a national membership NGO  allocat ed for children rights in Kenya, KAAC w as 
established in 1989 with the primary duty of monitoring and evaluating  daily implementation 
of the recognition of the rights of the child , that is CRC in Kenya.   KAAC in partnership with 
Save the C hildren in Kenya  is implementing a project on child rights governance, investing in 
children in Mombasa and Kwale County . As part of the implementation of the project the 
organisation with other s takeholders advocat es on child rights and various instruments 
protecting children in the  country as well as advocate on enacting or implementation of 
various policies which favour children.  As part of the project objective KAAC trains the 
community and chi ldren on disaster risk reduction  (DRR) , preparation of DRR, plans and 
lobby on enactment and implementation of DRR. DRR strategies in schools and the 
community by the law makers , as part of our efforts through the request by schools KAAC 
has procu red five extinguishers, first aid kits and blankets for the  20  schools w here we  are 
working for Mombasa County . The DRR equipment will be handed over to the target 20 
schools in an event which shall be held on 23rd March 2016 at Mombasa County A ssembly 
ground s from 9 .00 am, the event will be presided over by Hon.  Tendai CEC education . 
Among the dignitaries  attending the event will be H is Excellency the Governor Hon.  Hassan 
Ali Joho, the E xecutive Director K AAC, Director of Save the C hildren International, 
representati ves from County and national  departments, children from the 20 schools among 
others.  It is in this regard that KAAC is inviting you to participate on this event on 23rd 
March 2016 at Treasury S quare Mombasa County Assembly building from 9 .00am.  For more 
information kindl y call Teddy Saka on 0721354945.  Thank you in advance for your 
continued support .           
       Yours faithfully Teddy Saaka Masika , 
       ARC, regional coordinator, Coast .  
       Yes Clerk ? 
PAPER  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon.  Musa . 
       Hon.  Mwidani:  I request this House in a very polite way  to be given time to table this 
Paper, because as you know Madam S peaker the whole week I was in Malindi for the finance 
March 22 , 201 6                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         37 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Page 2 paper so I did not have time to prep are this P aper b ut i have already consulted my C lerk of 
the Committee it  can be ready next Tuesday.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you Hon.  Hamisi  Musa I do 
appreciate , next week on Tu esday that will be it, Clerk ? 
 
MOTION  
       Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba...  
(Interruption)  
       Yes Hon.  Hamis i Musa . 
       Hon.  Mwidani : Madam Speaker,  I would like to take thi s opportunity on behalf of the 
Majority leader if you can allow me so that I read this Motion . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon.  Caroline Auma . 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Auma:  Madam Speaker I was with M ajority leader and he said he is sick so 
he is requesting to bring the Motion  tomorrow .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Very interesting if that is confirmed , I 
suppose Hon.  Hamis i Musa you were just trying to assist ...  
       Hon.  Mwidani : Madam Speaker as you are aware this is one of the issues under the 
Standing orders and when we delay is when we give other people room to challenge this 
House, that's why I don’t  deny what my colleague  has said but because i didn’t  have that 
communication that why I proceeded, but actually Madam S peaker I think it’s better we leave 
it so that you can decide whether I proceed or we wait until tomorrow .  
       Tem porary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Very well Hon.  Members , all of you 
have the interest of this House, the Motion  in front of us is the adoption of County A ssembly 
calendar for th e fourth session 2016 and yes I know some of us have been trying to get t his to 
come to the Assembly and am glad that it is here . I appreciate what Hon.  Musa is trying to 
do, it is to move to the agenda to see that this House moves to its rules and regulations, but 
what I would say is that I believe Hon.  Caroline has been in  touch with Hon.  Majority leader 
and what I rule is that this Motion  to be moved until tomorrow 9 .00am  o’clock  that is 23rd 
March .  
       Hon.  Mwidani : Thank you M adam Speaker I think it’s better if I give an observation 
from what i have seen because  maybe I might not be there tomorrow.. . 
(Interruption ) 
      Temporary Speaker (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : I have made a ruling on that, i think what 
you can do and I appreciate on that if you are not in you can share and it will  be brought in 
tomorrow, you can pass i t to a colleague o r share it with me, thank you, C lerk? 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Thank you this House sta nds adjourned until tomorrow 9: 30a.m.  
The House rose at  2:45p.m. 