May 17, 202 3                                COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       37 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 17th May, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Thirty Seventh  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  2:54p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Take your seat Members.  Yes Clerk? 
STATEME NTS 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND 
INFRAST RUCTURE HONOURABLE HASSAN AHMED  TO FIRE OUTBREAK IN KONGOWEA MARKET  
Honourable  Hassan Ahm ed, Chairperson Committee on Transp ort and Infrastructure ? 
[Silence] 
 Any Member from the Transport C ommittee?  
[Silence ] 
 Yes, Honourable  Bernard Ogutu?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Tuliweza kukaa kama Kamati na bado kuna uchunguzi amba o ukitupatia 
kama wiki moja tu takuwa tumemaliza . Ahsante . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Okay we ll noted though the matter has 
taken quite a long time , so please the Committee  of Transport as you have asked for one week 
make sure you have the response in a week’s time. Yes, Clerk? 
RESPONSE TO S TATEM ENT BY CHAIR PERSON COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND DIGITAL 
TRANSFORMATION  HONOURABLE ALLEN  KATANA ON THE STATUS OF PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF MOMBASA AND THE UNIVERSITY OF SUDAN ON THE SCHOLARSHIP AS 
PORTRAYED IN THE COUNTY  GOVERNMENT SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORM S 
Honourable  Allen Katana , Chairperson Committee on Ed ucation and Digital 
Transf ormation  
Hon. Katana:  Thank y ou for this opportunity . Mr. Speaker, you k now I was checking on 
the Standing Order, I wanted to see whether it is  a must for us to have a quorum for the Clerks , I 
wish to continue . 
May 17, 202 3                                COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       37 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2  Honourable  Speaker , I wish to respond to a sta tement in this Hon ourable  House by 
Honourable  Kibwana Baya Swaleh the Member of County As sembly from Miritini Ward on 
Wednesday 5th April , 2023 at 2:30  p.m. during the 29th sitting . The Hon ourable  Member inquired 
about the status of partnership  of scholarship program between t he County government of 
Mombasa an d the University of Sudan.  Honourable  Speaker , the County Chief Officer for the 
Depart ment of Education and Digital Transformation in his letter Ref. DoE/G.8/22B/VOL.I/122  
dated 16th May 2023  responded as  follows ; that it is unfo rtunate  that the political tensio n in 
Sudan has brought the scholarship progr am to a temporary halt for the wellb eing of the 
beneficiaries.  However, the Department plans to resume the moment stability is reassured. Thank 
you, Hon ourable  Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes Clerk ? 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND DIGI TAL 
TRANS FORMATION , HONOURABLE ALLEN KATANA ON DIGIRIKANI ECD E IN MWAKIRUNGE WARD  
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana?  
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker once again for this very hono ured opportunity.  I 
wish to respond to a statement requested in th is House by Ho nourable  Khamis Mwinyi Mtoto , 
the Mem ber of the County Assembly for Mwakirunge Ward on Wednesday, 10th May, 2023 at 
2:30p.m during the 33rd sitting . The Hon ourable  Member sought a statement on the status of 
Digirikani ECD and the plans the County governmen t has in place to address the situation.  
Honourable  Speaker , the County Chief Officer for the Department of Education and Digital 
Transformation in his letter Ref. DoE/G.8/22B/VOL.I/121  dated 16th May 2023 responded as 
follows : that the department of Educa tion has processed the pending certificate of Ksh s 1.7 
million. The process has reached the last stage and is awaiting payment very soon. Once the 
payment is made, the contractor will return to the site  in order to finish the pending works.  
Thank you , Honourable  Speak er. 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
HARASSMENT  OF BOAT OPERATORS AND BEACH TRADERS AT BAMBURI  PUBLIC BEACH  
Honourable  Allen Katana please make your statement.  
Hon. Katana: Thank you Mr . Speaker Pursuant to Stan ding Order 41 (2) (c), I request a 
Statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Tourism, Culture and Trade as follows:  
1. Is the Chairperson aware th at the boat operators at Jomo Kenyatta Public Beach in 
Bamburi, S hanzu Ward are constantly harassed and arres ted by Kenya Wildlife Service 
personnel for allegedly encroaching the Mombasa Marine Park while plying around the public 
beach and what measures wi ll the County government take to protect our innocent beach 
opera tors from such harassments?  
2. Mr. Speaker, w hat measures will the County government take to resolve the issue of 
multiple fees, charges and taxes levied by National government agencies to beach  traders at 
Jomo Kenyatta Public Beach in Bamburi, Shanzu Ward wh ile the County government of 
Mombasa is not collecting anything. The National government tourism agencies involved are the 
Kenya Wildlife Service, the Tourism Regulatory Authority and Kenya M aritime Authority.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker .  
May 17, 202 3                                COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       37 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Allen Katana. Yes , 
any Member from Trade Committee ? Yes , Vice  Chair Hon ourable  Joshua Ong ‘ au, do you have 
a response to this Statement?  
Hon. Ong ’ au: Thank y ou Mr. Speaker . You give us time , like a  weeks’ time then we wi ll 
report back to th e House . 
The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you permission granted. 
Honourable  Patrick Mbelle , are you up on a point of order or? Then if it is not a point of order, 
please have a seat...  
[Interruption ] 
Hon. Mbelle:  Mr. S peaker Sir... ! 
[Interruption ] 
The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Just hav e your seat Hon ourable  Patrick 
Mbelle. Yes Clerk?  
DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS AND DRAINAGE IN BAMBURI  WARD  
Yes, Honourable  Patrick Mbelle, MCA Bamburi Ward?  
Hon. Mbelle: Thank you Mr. Spe aker Sir . Honourable  Speaker, I stand Pursuant to 
Standing Order 41 (2) (c) to request for a Statement from the Chairperson Committee on 
Transport and Infrastructure o f the dep lorable state of roads and drainage in Bamburi Ward. 
Honourable  Speaker , the County governmen t is respon sible for the repair and maintenance  of 
County designated roads to facilitate its residents with ease of safe accessi bility  and access . The 
Count y government , after the  just experienced rains most of the r oads have now been rendered 
impa ssible while others  are completely cut off thus hindering  the core mandate of facilitating  
accessibility,  they include the following roads;  St. Anne’s R oad that connects Kiembeni to 
Utange, Kashani Mdengerekeni Road , Kashani Mpesa Road, K ashani Matangini Road, Majaoni 
Migumi ni Road , Majaoni Ziwarani Road, Loma Roads that connects Kiembeni to Wema Center, 
Loma that connects to Abdallah Harus, Ma ji Machafu Road  that connects Kid arajani to Green  
Estate, Ugatuzi Road  that connects Kiembeni t o Kimbunga, Barawa Road that passes thr ough  
Shamba London and Kiembeni Road.  Mr. Speaker Sir , Bamburi Ward also hosts Karisa Maitha 
Road which is under the manda te of Keny a Urban Roads Authority (KURA) , in as much as we 
thank the agen cy for constructing a very good road, the residents of Gorofa ni, Barawa  and 
Kidarajani villages  have suffered an imaginable loss  due to the floods occasioned by poor 
drainage system de signed along the road. Hon ourable  Speaker, I request the department to look 
into rehabilit ating the afore mentio ned roads especially K iembeni  Utange road that has a broken 
culvert within Kashani quarry  areas as well as engage KURA to find a long-lasting  solution to 
Karisa Maitha Road  to avoid future loses . I thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Spe aker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Any Member f rom the T ransport 
Committee . Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogutu?   
Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika. Tumesikia ombi la Mheshimiwa Mbel le lakini sis i pia 
kama Kamati ya Uchukuzi  tulikuwa mbele tukampatia barabara moja kuanzia na natumai hiz o 
barabara  ambazo ame taja ha po, ameweza kuziweka katika ADP na ziko pia katika CIDP ili 
tuweze  kuziangalia wakati tutakuwa tunaangalia hayo mambo ya ADP .  
May 17, 202 3                                COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       37 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 Kwa hio  tunaomba tupewe wiki mbili tuende tutembee tuangalie , lakini la  msingi ni lazima 
awe ameziweka katika ADP. Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa Spika . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Patrick Mbel le are you 
satisfied ? 
Hon. Mbel le: Mr. Speaker Sir, I thank Hon ourable  Member Ogutu for giving me that 
response but the reason as to why I raised that parti cular issue is I fully  understand that we are on 
the budget making process  but these roads are in a very terrible state and that is why in my 
statement  I asked for rehabil itation  and not full construction because they are impassable. Thank 
you, Mr. Speake r. 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Benard 
Ogutu?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker , even rehabilitation has a budgetary implication , so if there is no 
budget for that we must put a budget and we are in that process.  
The Deput y Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): So, you mean Hon ourable  there was no 
budget for rehabilitating our roads in Mombasa?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Maybe Mr. Speaker , there was but i t was not that may be not specific to those 
roads so we request for two weeks to complete . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ogutu , just go back to your 
department and come back with a very good report Hon ourable  Ogutu.  
Hon. Ogutu:  We will respond back in the next two weeks.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): In two weeks’ ti me? 
Hon. Ogutu:  Yes. 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Okay granted in two weeks’ time , 
Committee on Transport please, in two weeks’ ti me bring back the report on rehabilitation of the 
said roads. You should reply on  the statement f rom Hon ourable  Patrick Mbel le on the 
rehabilitation of the said road because in matters of budget am sure the County government had 
budgeted for rehabilitation of it s roads and maintenance of its roads. Yes Clerk?  
BILL  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATION FUND , 2023  
FIRS T READING  
  
[The Clerk introduced t he Bill in the House]  
 
A Bill for an Act to the Mombasa County Assembly to provide for its establishments of a 
fund to mobilize resources to promote education through prov ision of bursaries, scholarships 
and loans for conn ected purposes.  
Yes Clerk?  
 
May 17, 202 3                                COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       37 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes, Deputy Majority Leader, please move the Motion?  
The Deputy Majority Leader (Hon. Maimuna Salim ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika.  
THAT P ursuant to the provisions of Standing Order 30, this Assembly adjourns until 
Wednesday 31st May, 2023 for the purpose of discussing matters of urgent Coun ty 
import ance. The House will resume its regu lar sittings on Tues day, 6th June, 2023.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. F adhili M akarani ): Honourable  Maimuna our Deputy 
Majority for the purpose of Hansard and this County Assembly am sure that you are not wearing 
your specs  so you can delegate to somebody to read  the Motion for you or you can read it again 
for the benefit of this H ouse.  
The Deputy Majority Leader (Hon. Maimuna Salim ): Mr. Speaker Sir ,  
THAT P ursuant to the provisions of Standing Order 30, this Assembly adjourns until 
Wednesday 31st May, 2023 for th e purpose of discussing matters of urgent Coun ty 
importance. The House will resume its regular sittin gs on Tuesday, 6th June, 2023.   
[Silence ] 
    The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Maimuna  Salim , who 
is your seconder?  Yes, Honourable  Shuhudia Ab dalla.  
Hon. Shuhudia Abda lla: Mr. Speaker , I second the Motion.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now propose a 
question that that the Motion by Hon ourable  Maimuna  Salim , the Deputy Majority Leader on 
adjournment of the County Assembly be  considered in this House?  
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
Yes, Honourable  Maimuna please make your contri butions . 
The Deputy  Majority Leader (Hon. Maimuna Salim ): Mheshimiwa Spika sisi kama 
Bunge  hapa watumishi wa watu hua tunatakika na tufanye kazi kwa Bunge  na twen de tukafanye 
kazi mashinani . Kwa hiyo hizi siku tumepawa kulingana na sheria  na sisi wenyewe ili tuweze 
kuingia mashina ni tukae na watu waliotuchagua na tuweze kuangalia ni jinsi gani tutafanya nao 
kazi pamoja na tuc hukue m aoni yao ya kuweza kuwafanyia kazi k wa hiyo ni jambo a mbalo ni la 
muhimu . Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you our Deputy Majority Leader. 
Yes, Honourable  Khamisi Baya.  
Hon. Hamisi Mtoto: Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii  ambayo ni 
adimu kwangu . Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi naiunga mkono hoja kwa asilimia 98 kwa sababu hichi 
kipindi ambacho kimepita tumeku wa na matatizo mengi mashinani ambayo inastahili tuwe na 
muda wa kwenda kuungana na wale am bao wameweza kutucha gua tuwe viongozi ilikua ni 
kipindi c ha mvua kum ekua na m azishi mengi tumekosa muda w a kwenda kuwafariji jamaa zetu . 
Kwa hiyo kutokana na hali hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika sina  budi kuweza kuunga mkono hoja hii 
kwa sababu wao wana tutarajia wakiweza kuongea kwa saa hii tumeweka nyuma si si tuko mbele .  
May 17, 202 3                                COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       37 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Mheshimiwa Spika ipo haja kub wa na kubwa zaidi kuweza kwenda kuwa nao karibu zaidi 
kwa hiyo nimeunga mkono hoja hii kw a asilimia 90 na naona hata zile  nilizotoa ni k idogo wacha 
niseme asilimia 99. Ahsante . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , as per the move r of 
the Motion we are going on a matter of County importance and not about the norma l recess , so 
when you debate the Motion,  please  touch on issues of County impo rtance as to why we are 
going for this short  recess. B ecause I understan d we have got pub lic participation s for the very 
many documents ahea d of us , so for the benefit of Hansard please let us debate on that 
perspective . Yes , Honourable  Athuman Rama , the Majority leader.  
The Leader  of Majority  (Hon. Ath mani Mwamw iri): Ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika . 
Nishukuru  Waheshimiwa kuweza ku peana fursa h oja hii kujadiliwa katika  Bunge  hili ya kwamba 
Bunge  lichuku e likizo kwenda  kuzingatia maswala nyeti ya serikali yetu Mheshimiwa  Spika ; 
miongoni mwa hayo ni marekebish o ya sheria  kuhusu  masw ala ya e limu ambayo yameweza 
kukwamisha utoaji wa karo alma arufu bursary  kwa watoto wetu, kwa sababu ya yale 
mapendekezo tulio ombwa kuyatekeleza na msim amizi wa fedha . Mheshimiwa Spika , vilevile   
chini ya Kamati ya maswala ya bajeti wah asibu,  maswala ya baj eti fedha na makadiri o kuna 
taratibu mahsusi ambazo zinap aswa ku tekelezwa na kupitishwa kwa wakati ili tuweze kupitisha 
kwa bajeti kufikia  tarehe 30 mwezi wa sita.  Katika taratibu ya maswala haya ni lazima 
Mheshimiw a Spika Kamati n a Waheshimiwa wawez e kurudi nyanjani kwa hakiki ya kwamba 
maoni yale yalio  zingat iwa katika daftari zil e ni yale ambayo wananchi walipendekeza na pia 
katika  hayo na ina jukumu Kamati kuweza kukaa na idara husika za serikal i yetu ili wawez e 
kubainisha ama ku pambanua yale walio  yakusudia shaba ha yake ni ipi, faida yake ni ipi na 
matumizi y ake itakuwa yapi katika mwaka wa kifedha unaofwata .  
Vilevile Mheshimiwa  Spika kama Bunge , vilevile Kamati husika zina kibarua za kwenda  
kamilis ha Ripoti za ma afisa wakuu walioweza  kuhakiki katika ki pindi cha nyum a ili waweze 
kuja sh ika doria katika utekeleza ji majukumu katika idara mbalim bali. Mheshimiwa Spika , hili 
pia ni swala la kidharu ra kwa saba bu wengi wanao  shikilia nafasi hiyo wan akaimu  na wengi 
wanaok aimu nafasi kubwa kama hii ya afisa mkuu kuna maswala ambayo huwezi kuyachukulia 
adhima moja kwa moja kwa sababu unajua mwisho wa siku sio wewe utakae  kuwa k atika kiti 
kile bali uko katika hali ya kushikilia Mheshi miwa Spi ka. Pia Mheshimiwa  Spika ifahamike ya 
kwamba waheshimiwa majumba ya nyuma walikuwa katika k onga mano Nairobi Mheshimiwa na 
wakajadili maslahi yao kama wawakilishi ambayo hii  Mheshimiwa pia inaleta ufanisi wa 
utendakazi wao iwapo yale yalio kusudiwa yaliweza  kujengwa na kuweze shwa kwa 
waheshim iwa hawa. Mheshimiwa Spika waheshimiwa hawa kama  saran gi wana mengi  
wanayopitia ambayo wamekosa kuweza kuyawa jibikia inavyostahiki kwa sab abu ya jinsi 
walivyo  hujumiwa na usimamizi  wa idara m bali mbali katika utenda  kazi wao.  
Pia ni fursa h ii Mheshimiwa  Spika wale  walio katika nafasi t uliowapa kutuwakilisha 
waweze kuyafwat ilia yale yanayotusibu kama wawakilishi na sisi tukitekeleza mengine am bayo 
ni ya maslahi kwa w ananchi wetu wa Mombasa . Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa hayo niombe tu 
Waheshimiwa  ya kw amba hii fursa ambayo tu meweza kupel eka Bunge  likizo tuweze kuitumia 
barabara katika  kukabili idara zinazohusika na  kurudi nyanjani  kufany a uhakiki wa hizi daftari 
ama hizi Ripoti ambazo zinakusudiwa kuweza kupita katika Bunge  hili na kuwe zesha kupit a kwa 
bajeti y a makadi rio ya kifedha ya mwaka  unaofuata . Ahsante Mheshimiw a Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Athman Rama . Yes 
Honourable  Maimuna  please reply.  
May 17, 202 3                                COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       37 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 The Deputy Majority Leader (Hon. Maimuna Salim ): Mheshimiwa Spika , ahsante sana  
kwa kunipa  fursa hii. Nime rudi ku changia k ufunga kwa Bunge  kwa mda mfupi , kwa s ababu 
tunajua kuna mamb o ambayo yanahitaji public p articipation  na tuweze kukaa na ida ra husika . 
Kwa hivyo kuna umuhimu wa sisi twende kwa mda mchache wa mapumziko ili tuweze 
kukamilis ha zile Ripoti  watu wetu wa Mombasa waweze kupata huduma kwa sababu kuna  
mambo ambayo yamekwama ni mpaka twende tukae na hao wananchi kama public participation  
ndio tuhakikishe  ya kwamba tukija hapa tunapitisha  zile sheria na yale ambayo yamekwama . 
Kwa hivy o mimi nimeunga mkono hii ambayo ni likizo fupi ili tuweze kuwatumikia watu wetu  
wa Mombasa.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Maimuna.  
Honourable  Members , I now stand to put a question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Maimuna 
Deputy Leader of Majority be approved by this Honourable  House . 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable M embers , the House stands adjourne d until Tuesd ay 6th June, 2023.  
The Hous e rose at 3:32p .m. 
 
 
 
  
 
 