March 22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      38 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedn esday, 22nd March , 201 7 
The House met at 9:08am. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Memb ers you may sit down. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
 Hon Mary Akinyi.  
 Hon. (Ms)  Akinyi:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker S ir, I beg to move a 
Motion on inclusion of ICT Hubs in the Village Polytechnics.  
(Hon (Ms) Akinyi moved the Motion) 
 THAT AWARE  the County government is charged with the responsibility of 
overseeing village polytechnics, Pre - Primary education, home craft centres, and children 
facilities under p art 2 (9) of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of Kenya 2010.  
 Mr. Speaker, FURTHER AWARE that village polytechnics within the County are 
yet to incorporate ICT Hubs which are vital to any learning institution;  
 CONCERNED that the lack of ICT Hubs with in the Village Polytechn ics in the 
County may imped e not only students but also wider public in this digital age;  
 Mr. Speaker, I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that; 
 All village Polytechnics within the County to be equipped with the ICT Hubs, and 
that the ICT Hubs, be accessible not only to students but also the wider public especially 
women and youth.  
 I beg  to move and I may ask Hon  Madundo to second the Motion.  
 Hon. Mohamed Madundo:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, I second the 
Motion.  
(Applau se) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay M embers I  propose the  question of 
the Motion ; that is Inclusion of ICT  Hubs in village Polytechnics.  Yes Hon  Mary … 
 Hon. (Ms) Akinyi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  kama vile 
tujuavyo kuwa shule za chekechea na hata vyuo vya ufundi yaani Polytechnic s za vijijini ni 
jukumu letu ama jukumu la Kaunti, serikali ya Kaunti kuchukua hayo majukumu .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika tukiwa tunaangal ia Kaun ti yetu tunaona sasa hizi kuna Faiba, 
zinachimb wa kila pahali amba po zitakuwa zinatolewa bure bila kutozwa .  
 Hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ndio nimeomba kuwa kwa  vile Faiba  zitatumika bure na  
watu wengi bado hawajaingia  katika mambo ya digitali, h ivyo basi katika zile Polytechnic s 
zetu za vijijini , ningeomba tuweke hayo  mambo ya ICT ili wananchi  wote ambao wanaishi 
katika Kaunti ya Mombasa waende wakasomee mambo ya ICT na kuweza kuwa katika  hali 
ya digitali kuweza kusomea mambo ya tarakilishi  na mambo yote ambayo yanahusika.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa unaangalia saa hizi wa kina mama na hata vijana 
wanatakikana waweze kupata ma endeleo na  haya maendeleo wataweza kupata kama 
wameku wa na mtandao  kila mahali . 
 Hivyo basi w akiwa wamesomea mambo ya ICT wata weza kuwa na network  kila 
mahali ya kuweza  kujua hata kuna kazi mahali fulani kuna sponsor fulani anaweza kutoa 
mambo yakaweza kuwaendeleza.  
 Hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba Nyumba hii tushirikiane kwa pamoja tuweze 
kupitisha mjadala huu ya kuwa tuweze kuweka ICT katika  vyuo vyetu vya ufundi vijijini  
amba vyo tuko na vyo hapa Mombasa ili watu wapate nafasi ya kw enda  kuelimika na waweze 
March 22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      38 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 kuishi katika maisha ya kidigitali ambayo tunaendelea nayo. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa  
Spika . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon Enock Mwinga … 
Hon. Mwinga : Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika msw ada ambao u meletwa na 
Mheshimiwa  Mary ni msw ada mzuri sana lakini lazima tukubaliane ya kwamba katika huu 
ulimwengu kunayo ma kundi  mawili ya watu ; kuna wale ambao wanaitwa analogue na kuna 
wale wanaitwa digital i.  
Mheshimiwa Spika huw ezi kulazimisha lile fungu la analogue  ukaliweka katika 
digital i. Mheshimiwa Sp ika nimesimama hapa kuupinga msw ada huu ...  
(Laughter)  
....kwa sababu Mh eshimiwa Spika mimi sioni faida ye yote wamama wa  kutoka  
Mwakirunge walazimishwe ama waende  waingie katika kujifunza  mambo ya tarakilishi , hii 
itawasaidia na nini ? Wale ni wamama ambao wako mashambani Mheshimiwa Spika hata ile 
tarakilishi  yenyewe  hajui vile inavyokaa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tukisema ya kwamba  tumeweka tarakilishi  katika vyuo vya ufundi 
vyote vijini vyote vya Kaunti ya Mombasa , hii pesa itatoka wapi? K wa sababu Mheshimiwa 
Spika  kila jambo linalofanywa  katika Ny umba hii tunajua ya kwamba mpaka li fikiriwe katika 
bajeti , je huu msw ada umeku wa factored katika b ajeti?  
Kwa hi yo Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama hapa kuupinga msw ada huu na zile pesa  
ambazo  zingetumika kununua hi vi vifaa  afadhali wanilete e Mwakirunge watu wangu 
wanakufa na nja a ili waweze  kununuliwa chakula . Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Madundo … 
Hon. Mohamed Madundo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ninaunga mkono kwa 
hii hoja ambayo imeletwa na M heshimiwa  Mary kwa sababu zamani k ulikuwa kuna  na shule 
inaitwa Ngumbaru , na hiyo  Ngumbaru  wakati ilipokuwa imegunduliwa  watu wengi 
walikuwa hawaju i kusoma baadaye  walikuja wa kajua kusoma…  
(Applause ) 
…kwa hivyo h aya ni maendeleo ambayo hivi sasa kulingana na ulimwengu vile 
ambavyo unakwenda sisi  haturudi mambo ya nyuma, tunaenda vile  maisha yanavyo enda ; kila 
mmoja akiwa na elimu huwa ni bora zaidi . 
Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono tena moja kwa moja suala la kusema Mheshimiwa, 
Mheshimiwa mwenzangu anasema kuwa mambo ya b ajeti, bajeti  sisi ndio tu tapitisha bora 
sisi ndio tunapitisha hakuna watu wengine kutoka nje si si ndio  tuko kat ika Bunge wewe 
ukisema kuwa uwezo utatoka wapi, pesa ziko kama wewe unasema pesa, pesa ziko . 
Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono ili watu amb ao wako katika vijijini wapate 
maendeleo kulingana na mswada huu ambao umeletwa. A hsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Paul Onje…  
Hon. Onje : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika ni kweli ni vizuri 
tunataka wa mama na vijana wafundishwe wajue , wakae kijiji cha digitali Mheshimiwa Spika 
lakini tujue  ya kwamba kuna watoto  ambao sisi tunahangaika  nao kila siku tuki walipia karo 
ya shule  na wanasomea hizi m ambo ya  ICT ili kesho nao w aweze kupata nafasi mahali ya  
kuajiriwa kazi .  
Wakati tunachukua wa  mama ambao tunajua ni wa analogue  kamili na wamejua 
kwamba wameamua kuwa analogue tunataka kuwafundisha mambo ya ICT faida yao itatoka 
wapi na itakuwa wapi Mheshimiwa Spika?  
Kweli Mheshimiwa mwenzangu amesema ya kwamba kitambo kulikuwa na 
Ngumbaru , Ngumbaru  mpaka saa hii  bado  iko tena ukienda pale Tom Mboya  bado 
wana endelea wanasomea pale wale wa  mama hawakubahatika na wazee wanaendelea na hiyo 
March 22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      38 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 ni sawa kwa sababu mtu kujua kusoma si vi baya unaweza kufika  mahali unaambiwa ya 
kwamba hakuna  njia mbele  ama no road  ahead  ukienda u naweza  kushikwa bure . 
Kwa hivyo hiyo kidogo inawasaidia lakin i tukirudi kwa mambo ya tarakilishi  
Mheshimiwa  Spika saa hii kila mmoja anajua kusomea tarakilishi  manake  hata hii simu ya 
rununu ni tarakilishi . 
Mheshimiwa Spika  hawa wamama ambao tunasema ni analogue  wanajua ku tumia 
simu sawa sawa hata hakuna mtu anamtuma aangalie, wengine wako na akili ya kisawa sawa 
hawajui kuandika majina lakini akishika namba ameshika  kwa akili yake anaweza kushika 
namba mia moja na anajua hizo namba zote off head  na hao tunawaita ni analogue  ambapo 
hata sisi ambao t uko hapa kushika namba hata ya W aheshimiwa watano ni shida.  
Kwa hivyo kwangu Mheshimiwa Spika napinga huu mswada hauna faida kwetu, 
hauna faida kwetu kabisa mimi pia ningesema  ya kwamba iwapo kama tungelikuwa na hiyo 
pesa barabara za kwangu Junda ziko mbaya sana kama mungeniletea hizo pesa kule 
ningeshukuru. A hsanteni sana.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Saad Faraj . 
Hon. Faraj:  Thank y ou very much Mr. Speaker I rise to support the Motion which 
has been brought by Hon  Mary … 
(Applause)  
Reason being Mr. Speaker that this world has become a global village , it has become 
a global village  due to the fact that we get a lot of investments internationally and nationally 
through  the fibre optic cabling and the ICT infrastructure will bring about a lot of change to 
our communities . 
I am hearing  some of our  colleagues complaining about embracing this but it is high 
time Mr. Speaker not only the people who are in the urban areas but also those who are 
residing within the rural areas to embrace technology an d because of the fact that the 
government have invested heavily on ICT we need as p eople , as County government to tap in 
to this potential and make sure that we connect not only village polytechnics but all other 
institution s from bottom upwards and I think it is high time that all of us become conversant 
to the te chnology and because at the moment everything that is moving is actually moving 
with time and time requires us  to embrace this wonderful technology  and I support fully.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon  Karume … 
Hon. Karume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I also arise to support the Motion ...  
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker ICT refers to  Information Communication and Technology , it does not 
restrict us to computer lessons  as you  may think  or heard , there's a lot that comes with ICT 
and as it is well known with technology the world is small whatever that we are talking about 
even about farming in Mwakirunge  it can even  be done and realise d easily through ICT ... 
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker it i s high time for us to come to terms  with the fact that as my colleague  
Hon Saad has rightful put it things are changing and we need to move with time s... 
(Applause)  
As it stands right now Mr. Speaker Mombasa County nee ds to be counted as one of 
ICT C ounties and we cannot realise this  if we don't invest in  the vocation al training and 
education sector . 
Therefore,  Mr. Speaker I really urge  this Hon  House  to come to terms and agree and 
support  and pass  this Motion  because the  sooner we do this the better  because  in fact we 
really delayed but  it is better that we act right now.  
March 22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      38 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 Talking about inclusive ICT Mr. Spe aker Sir I would like to recognize  the special 
community  or constituents  that is the  disability fraternity we are also part and parcel of 
technology and th erefore maybe would be  include  someone a bit late but  then I would like to 
urge the Honorable Member who has brought this Motion to also inclu de people living with 
disabilities  (PWDs)  because there is  special technology for them . 
Personally am well embrace d with this  technology  but then I really wish that also  my 
colleague s who are disable d can also access the information through  these program s of 
learning . 
So Mr. Speaker Sir I would urge this Honorable House to really support this Motion 
for the betterment of the development that we are talking about becaus e development cannot 
be fast tr acked without bring ing on board ICT. Thank yo u very much Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashi d): Yes Hon Ahmed Omar .            
Chief Whip (Hon. Omar Ebrahim ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity to contribute in the Motion by my fellow colleague Hon Mary Akinyi . 
Mr. Speaker I did stand to support the Motion but am also telling my colleague  to 
consider some certain points maybe we c an make some amendments to the Motion to the fact 
that not all villages  have polytechnics because  where am coming f rom is Nyali C onstit uency 
and the polytechnic  that we do  have is just the Kisauni polytechnic . 
 So Mr. Speaker  if you venture in to this it may bring a lot of congestion  because 
people will be many,  it will for ce the people from Kisauni and Nyali all to share the sam e 
polytechnic , so I think I can advise  my fellow colleague  maybe we come up with recreation 
centres in each village or we can take on each and every ward of our County so that this 
project can be something that is enjoyed by all people of Mombas a and they will be at least  
adequate space of such things . 
 Mr. Speaker  am referring to recreation centres maybe we can put a container  with 
computers inside , maybe also VCT and where the youths , women an d also the community of 
disabled  can go to such centres and ac cess information such as maybe job advertisements , 
tenders and all that but we should consider that the fact not all villages do have these 
polytechnics so to others it won't be an advantage , us especially the peo ple of Nyali we don 't 
have any polytechnic so maybe if we can make some amendments  it will be much better o n 
this Motion Mr. S peaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Saad Faraj . 
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker am up  on Standing Order Number 52 on amendments  and 
Number (1) clearly  states that the proposer  of an  amendments  to a M otion shall , before 
moving it , hand the proposed amendment to a Motion  in writing , signed by the proposer , to 
the C lerk at  least  two hours before the order is read . Thank you . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon Ahmed Omar .  
Chief Whip (Hon. Omar Ebrahim ): Mr. Speaker it was just a piece  of advice on my 
contribution . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Ma ry Akinyi can you reply to the 
Motion  
Hon.  (Ms) Akinyi:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa S pika, kwanza ni kushukuru wale 
wote ambao wameniunga mkono mjad ala huu na hata wale ambao wamepinga pia 
nawashukuru kwa s ababu ilikuwa ni mafikirio yao . 
Mheshimiwa Spika ningeonelea ama ningeomba J umba hili lote tubadilike tu unge 
mjad ala huu ili u weze kuleta maendeleo na watu waweze kui shi ka tika hali ya kidijitali katika 
Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa .  
March 22, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      38 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 Mheshimiwa Spika kule tunaelek ea hizi si mu za mulika mwizi zinaelekea kuisha 
ambapo simu ambazo zitakuja ni hizi za kushikilia  shikilia ...  
(Laughter)  
Mheshimiwa Spika wakati hizo simu za mulika mwizi zitakap okuwa zinaish a sisi 
tukipitisha mjadala huu utatatupata sisi kama wakaazi wa K aunti ya Mombasa wote 
wanaume, wanawake, watu amba o wanaishi na ulemavu  tutakuwa  sasa tuko mbele .  
Kwa hivyo naomba J umba hili  tushukuru  na tupitishe m jadala huu ili tuweze 
kusaidika. A hsante.  
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much . Members I  will 
now put the question ; Members  it has  been  proposed that the County government of 
Mombasa to include ICT h ubs in all village polytechnics ... 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members t here being no other business this  House is adjourned until in the afternoon.  
Thank you.  
The House rose at 9 :32am. 
 
 
 
 
 