May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 7th May, 2019  
The House met at 2:43p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated, yes Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Hon. Members welcome to this sitting . I take  this opportunity to thank the A lmighty God 
for enabling us to assemble here today, as you all know the Holy month of Ramadhan 
commenced on Monday 6th May, 2019. It is my prayer that it will be a perio d of reflection for the 
Muslim  faithful , I urge us to remember the less fortunate by ensuring that we ease their burden 
by sharing what God has graced us with in terms of f ood, stuff and other provisions. I wish all 
Muslim faithful and Mombasa County resid ents Ramadhan Kareem and Saum Maqbul. Thank 
you. 
 
(Applause)  
 Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
TIMELY PAYMENT OF SA LARIES BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 Yes Hon . Athman Shebe please give the Notice of M otion.  
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the seat ) 
(The Temporar y Speaker (Hon. Raphael B wire) in the Chair ) 
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker S ir I beg to give the 
following Notice of M otion;  
 
THAT AWARE  that the County g overnment of Mo mbasa has both state and other public 
officer s who are employe es, Hon. Speaker.  

May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 FURTHER AWARE that A rticle 41(2) b of the Constitution provides that every worker 
has a right of fair remuneration and that Section 18 (2) (c) of E mployment Act, 2007 
provides that wages and salaries shall be deemed due at the expiration of each month or 
part thereof;  
CONCERNED that the payment of salaries within the County government often times is 
delayed and paid past the due date for salaries thus subjecting employee s to anguish and 
desperation which may affect their performance at wor k, Hon. Speaker;  
FURTHER concerned that statutory deductions and other remittances deducted from 
salaries of employees are not remitted as and when they fall due and which result to 
negative listings and unnecessary penalties , Hon. Speaker.  
I urge this Cou nty Assembly to resolve that:  
1. The County Executive C ommittee Member  of Finance to ensure that salaries for 
County workers are paid in acco rdance with Section 18(2) c of E mployees Act, 2007 
which is not later than 30th of each month.  
 
2. That the County Execut ive C ommittee Member of Finance to ensure those 
statutory deductions and other remittances deducted from County employees salaries is 
remitted as and when they fall due.  
 Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Sp eaker I seek leave  for this M otion to be debated toda y. 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member it is on Order Paper number 8 so 
there is a M otion, you do  not have to seek leave , autom atically there is a M otion. Thank you 
Hon. Athuman Shebe, yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
 Yes Hon. from Bamburi, Hon. Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. May I take this opportunity to  stand on your 
behalf and give S tatement Mr. Speaker.  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY HON . NYIRO O N THE STATUS OF IMPL EMENTATION OF PROJEC TS BY 
THE COUNTY GOVERNMEN T IN THE FINANCIAL Y EAR S 2017/ 2018  AND 2018/2019  
 Mr. Speaker S ir I stand pursuant to Standing O rder 41(2) (c) to compe l the Chairperson 
Committee on I mplementation to bring a detailed S tatement before this Hono urable House as 
regards to the following;  
1. Number of development projects th at were acknowledged in FY 2017/20 18 and FY 
2018/2019 in all the D epartments , 
2. The project that were implemented during these  two financial years,  
3. The expenditure incurred on each project and,  
4. Location of each project.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  The Temporar y Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes I think the Chairperson on the Committee 
on Implementation you have ta lked; I mean you have the point already so you kindly work on 
the same and you will tell us maybe when you will be okay with this or when you will be 
reportin g back to this House.  
 Hon. Salim Kalume : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Naomba unipatie muda kama wa wiki 
mbili ili niweze kua hirisha hii  ripoti  manake itabidi tuwasiliane na M awaziri wote katika Kaunti 
ya Mombasa. Kwa hiyo naomba unipatie muda wa wiki mbili.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you also putting in consideration that we 
will be going for a recess so you still have more time to work on the same. I think it is more than 
now two weeks so kindly when we report back the very first week we need  to hear from you and 
your Committee over the same. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
TIMELY PAYMENT OF SA LARIES BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 Yes Hon. Athuman Shebe?  
 Hon. Athuman Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker , at the very beginning I did  not see my 
Motion coming next. Othe rwise I am very glad Hon. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to give 
notice of the following Motion;  
 THAT AWARE  that the County government of Mombasa has both state and other public 
officers who are employees;  
 FURTHER AWARE that Article 41 (2)b of the Const itution provides that every worker 
has a right to fair remuneration and that S 18(2)(C) of  employment Act, 2017 provides 
that wages and salaries shall be deemed due at the expiration of each month or part 
therefor e Hon. Speaker;  
 CONCERNED that the paymen t of salaries within the County g overnment often times is 
delayed and paid past the due date for salaries thus subjecting employees to anguish and 
desperation which may affect their performance at work Hon. Speaker;  
 FURTHER concerned that statutory deduct ions and other remittances deducted from 
salaries of employees are remitted as and when they fall due and which results to negative 
listings and unnecessary penalties.  
 I urge this County Assembly to resolve that;  
1. That the County Executive Committee Membe r Finance to ensure that salaries for County 
workers are paid in accordance with section 18 (2) c of the employees Act, 2017 which is 
not later than 30th of each month Hon. Speaker.  
2. That the County Executive Committee Member Finance to ensure that statutor y 
deductions and other remittances deducted from County employees salaries is remitted as 
and when they fall due Hon. Speaker.  
  Thank you.  
May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 (Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Who is to second?     
 Hon. Athuman Shebe:  I beg Hon. Kitula to secon d this Motion Hon. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : I second Mr. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Members . I now  propose the 
question that the M otion on timely pay ment of salaries by the County g overnment be co nsidered 
in the same terms as moved . 
(Question p roposed ) 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Athuman?  
 
 Hon. Athuman Shebe: N aam Shukran za dhati sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa 
Waheshimiwa wenza kuweza kupitisha Hoja hii. Nafikiri kiatu Mhes himiwa Mwenyekiti 
kimetubana  takriban miaka miwili sasa na mimi naweza sema ni Bunge letu tu la Mombasa. Kwa 
sababu hulka hii haiko pande zote Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , ni hulka ambayo imebuniwa katik a 
Bunge hili la pili la Mombasa.  Kwa hivyo mimi nafurahi kwa sababu mas uala mazima ya 
marupurupu na mishahara ya wafanyi  kazi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni suala moja muhimu sana 
ambalo tunatakikana tulipatie kipao  mbele. Sote hapa ni wazazi, sote ni viongozi tuna majukumu 
makubwa sana mashinani mwetu lakini kulingana na ratiba ye tu ya ulipaji mishahara na 
marupurupu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti imekuwa changamo to kubwa kwa hivyo nawapongeza 
Waheshimiwa wenza na nawaomba isiishie hapa tuhakikishe kuwa tumeweza kufuatilia Kaunti 
ya Mombasa pindi itakapofika leo takriban ni mfano tu tarehe saba tunaelekea tarehe nane  
unaona na bado mfuko umetoboka Mheshimiwa Mw enyekiti, hii si desturi ya kawaida.  
 Hivyo basi  ukiona nimesimama hapa na nimekuja na hoja kama hii ni kiatu kimenibana 
sana. Kwa hivyo ninawaheshimu na nin awashukuru na ninawapongeza Waheshimiwa 
kuhakikisha kuw a ikiwa sisi hatutaangaliwa mas lahi yetu na ya wafanyi  kazi wetu wanao  
tuangalia katika Bunge hili, vipi tutaweza kuangalia maslahi ya watu ambao tunawaongoza? 
Kwa hivyo ni vizuri kuwa tuhakikishe kuwa maslahi na marupurupu na mishahara tutaweza 
kupata kwa wakati unaotakikana ili tuhakikishe kuwa majukumu yetu ya kifamilia na ya 
kiuongozi mashinani hayataweza kuathirika kwa njia moja ama nyengine.  Nashukuru  sana 
Bunge la Kaunti la pi li kuhak ikisha kuwa tumeweza kupitisha Hoja hii. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Athuman. Hon. Members now 
the floor is open for the debate . Any contribution from Members , yes Hon. Samba?  
 Hon. Samba: Thank you Hon. Speaker . I would also like to congratulate the Hon. 
Member for the courage that he has gathered at least bring a timely motion and I would advise 
Members as from today hence forth when we come to Assembly at least go through the O rder 
Paper first of all then when you want to leave at least you might leave knowing what is at hand...  
(Applause)  
May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  ...This issue is affecting us, all of us but I do  not see the reason why some  Members have 
just decided to leave.  Hon. Speaker it is quite pat hetic the state that the culture that we are 
breeding, we are breeding and we are setting a very bad precedent or rather in our County. Hon. 
Speaker we are the only County th at always we cry for everything ; everything we cry , we cry 
starting from salary, t hese  deductions we have never been ...I have never benefited from my 
NHIF and whenever I look at my pay slip  it is being deducted on time , when it comes to loan, 
loan deduction remittance the same thing happen s and Hon. Speaker we cannot just bu ry our 
heads  in the sand , no because we cannot be fighting for Wanjiku and we are pressed and 
sometimes a wrong done several time s sometimes some people take it to be  a right, and it is 
wrong and where that is a culture .  
 When we first joined the House we were being paid around 29th to 30th there now it went 
to 5th and now after 5th and Members are just comfortable and outside there the County 
employees depend on us . The culture that we are br eeding Hon. Members am telling you will be 
used to judge  us unfair ly, one day whatever the thin gs that you are doing right now  will 
determine your future whether you will come back in this House or not and I have been saying 
more of that some of us will not come back here not because they did nothing  but God will have 
(??) them and find them wanting that this kind of a person cannot be a leader ...  
 
(Applause)  
 …All we consider is solid man agement , I do  not know why we have never summon ed the 
County Executive Member for Finance, I do  not know why even the Chie f Officer has never 
been s ummoned even to explain, all th ese cries, when will these cries stop? Hon. Speaker the 
prayers that we have been pray ing for these should not be even be prayers, these are things that 
are there, you know that at the end of the service d elivery you need to pay your emp loyees, you 
need to pay them it  is something that i s obvious, it  is in bold black and white . I do not see the 
reason why this thing should be a prayer and Hon . Speaker I would advi se or I would request 
that the Committe e of Finance to take charge and if the y fail to take charge then the Committee 
of Implementation to take charge  because all this while who does  not know that after the end 
service delivery som ebody should be paid . Even the Employment Act, 2007 Section 18  states 
very well Hon. Speaker not only payments or rather deduction, even those people who provide 
services even tender s are crying . It has reached  a point whereby even somebody ha s not been 
paid Kshs. 200, 000  for one year ; Hon. Speaker  these people are crying, their cry do  not affect 
those people  they affect us because we are supposed to stand for them, if we cannot stand for 
ourselves how can we stand for somebody who we are representing …  
(Applause)  
 It is high time somet hing has to be done and their prayers and resolution s that we are 
going to make in this House should not be the normal and the obvious one that we will be 
making, we need to be paid as early as 27th or 25th. You can  not be a Hon . Memb er where you 
live on credit, when you get your salary you settle all the debt s that you have , no! We are setting 
a very bad precedent  and mark you Hon. Speaker for your information some of them do not 
depend on salary some of them sit on the Committees tha t have very heavy attendan ce and you 
know what  attracts  them they are com fortable we are not comfortable . There is no source of 
income we are getting apart from the one we are supposed to get by serving wananchi  in this 
House . 
May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Otherwise Hon. Speaker if we continue like this am telling you  it will reach 2022 we will 
even disappear we w ill not even be able to defend our  seats; if your salary you cannot get on 
time what else will you get on time ! Thank you Hon. Speaker I beg to support the Motion.  
 The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Samba . Yes Hon. Chief W hip? 
 The Chief  Whip ( Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Mwenyekiti 
nimesimama kuweza  kuunga mkono hoja iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa wa Jomvu kuu Athuman 
Shebe Salim . 
 Mheshimi wa Mwenyekiti kuongezea tu maneno yali yozungumzwa na Mheshimiwa 
Samba Mwakilishi wa Tudor, mimi kama Mwakilish i wa Fr ere Town, tayari tunaomba kulingana 
na ukaguzi wangu katika ripoti iliyoletwa na Control ler of Budget kusema kweli idara inapatiwa 
pesa lakini kusema kweli pia kule nje watu wanala lamika, wafanyi  biashara wa Kaunti yetu 
wanalalamika, wa wekezaji  wanalalamika , wanaop atiwa  zabu ni wanalalamika . Sasa sisi pesa 
tunapata expenditure  imetumika lakini watu bado  wanalalamika sasa hizi pesa zi naenda wapi? 
Ndio swali kuu sisi t unajiuliza kama Wabunge katika Bunge hili, lakini licha ya ha yo hili ni 
jukumu letu na nashukuru vile vile ndani ya  Hoja hii ime zingatia maanani  kipengele cha pili  
inasema kwamba ; that the County Executive Committee  Memb er Finance to  ensure  that 
statu tory deductions and other remittance deducted from County employees of salary is remitted 
as when the  date is due .  
 Kusema kweli Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hili ni donda sugu sana  sisi tunapitia, tunapata 
watu walikatwa mishahara y ao twasema kwamba tunasema kwamba hiari yetu haijengi binafsi 
lakini still idara  hawalipwi yale madeni wanastahili kulipa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini 
mwisho wa siku sisi ndio tu nawazunguka baadaye inakuwa ni k izungumkuti unapata  haki yako 
unapelekwa huku na huku wakati sio jukumu letu sisi kama Wabunge ni jukumu la Waziri  
kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba malipo ha yo yanafanywa katika idara husika . Sasa tunajitokeza 
sana kulingana na Hoja ya leo na ikiwa Mwenyekiti wa Implementation yuko hapa katika Bung e 
Mwenyekiti tunamhimiza, twamsihi kila mwezi aweze kuhakikisha kwamba idara hii imep eleka 
pesa hizi na kama atakuwa...  
 
(Applause ) 
 …Atuite sisi Waheshimiwa twende kwa Waziri  kupitia idara ya F edha  tuweze kum ualika 
Chief officer  pamoja na  Mawaziri wake waje kutueleza kwa nini pesa hizi hazijalipwa ili 
baadaye sisi tuna mkataba w a miaka mitano ikiwa ni sisi pamoja na wafanyi  kazi wetu 
tunaolipwa na  Mombasa  Kaunti  itakuwa hizi remittance  hazifanywi tutakuja kuzipokea n dani 
katika Bunge . Juzi angalia mfano mzuri Wabunge walitoka katika Bunge hili wanakuja mpaka 
hapa w akizunguka hu ku na huku hakuna mtu anaweza fursa ya kuweza kuwasaidia Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti, je hili ni sisi Wabunge sasa tuta weka msukumano kwamba matakwa yetu ya 
baadaye pale 22, 21 utakuja hapa utampata nani Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti? Wengine kama sisi 
tunasimama kusema ukweli utakuja hapa utaambiwa kwamba wafanyi kazi hawako kwa sababu 
ilikuwa unapinga katika Bunge ama ilikuwa unaunga mkono mtu f ulani ka tika Bunge . Kwa 
hivyo hatutaki pesa nyingi twataka ile ilikuwa haki yangu baada ya m uda unastahili kama 
kutakuwa na nadai wa nitoe peke yangu sio kwa kuwa ofisini ulikuwa mpinzani wa serikali 
unakuja unadhulumiwa haki yako Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti…  
(Applause)  
May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  …Kwa hivyo nasihi sana juk umu hili ningependa sana kama Kiranja wa Bunge hili na 
Mwenyekiti wa Implementation  tushirikiane na wakubwa  wetu katika Bunge Mheshimiwa Amu r 
tuweze kwenda katika wizara husika kila mwezi tu ulize kwamba je hii haki ya wenzetu a mbao 
sisi wahusika 42 ambao tuko hapa, wanapata haki yao a u la? Ili wafanyi  kazi pia wajihisi kama 
kweli kuna Wabunge katika Bunge lao. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , kwa hayo 
machache naunga mkono.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :  Thank you Hon. Chief Whip . Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Chair, I want to start by thanking the Hon. Member for Jomvu 
Kuu who I am sure might have even borrowed the bus fare to come to this Assembly…  
(Applause)  
 …And I want to also say tha t I personally have borrowed fare from my neighbour who 
happens to be a shopkeeper , very true Mr. Speaker it is because of the situation and it is a 
tendency that has been going on for quite some time  and if we keep quiet then it becomes a habit 
like what Ho n. Samba has said whenever something is done the wrong way it becomes a culture 
and people might think that is the way things are being done.  
 So it is high time that we talk to the res ponsible people or rather the C EC for Finance so 
that she can maybe s hed some light because maybe we are blaming them but also they are 
receiving their disbursement s late but they have to explain to us because I have come to realize 
also apart from the delays in our salaries the last two months I think our offices were not paid, I 
think like for two months and people who were put in our offices were really crying . 
 But there is also another thing that is very important that we should look on to, the 
projects that were supposed to be implemented in our areas . Some of these Projects  are stalling 
or rather have stal led for years because the contractors are not being paid ; personally I have a 
contract or who have not been paid an d he has carried a project half way but he has used his 
money, he has exhausted his money and he has not been pai d and now the project that he was 
doing because of the rains is being destroyed and he will be forced to start again.   
 There is no reason why you give work to somebody and the money is not there ; so there 
is a lot of laxity in the Department of Finance an d if we want to be true to this County and to 
ourselves we should be able to summon this Minister  so that she can sh ed light because we have 
been looking for the last two , three weeks we have been really looking at the expenditures and 
the way money is being  brought to Counties and seriously there is a lot of money that is coming 
in, there is a lot of money that is being used but there is little to show for the money that is being 
used including the money that comes for our salaries.  
 So it is only good that we are paid in time so that we do not become  Hono urable  beggars, 
it is good for us to continue being Hon. Members and not Hono urable  beggars. So I beg to 
support the Motion and because I am a Member of the Implementation Committee I think 
actually if called  upon then I should be able to act quickly with my able Chair and also the other 
Members who are supposed to come in so that we can do the necessary and make sure that this 
trend changes and all is well again. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
May 7, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  The Temporar y Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :  Thank you Hon. Mem ber, I think you have 
exhausted  but also I must declare the interest despite that I am the Chair we are all affected by 
the issue raised by the Hon. Member and I think the Department should be h eld responsible over 
the issues raised by the Member and also the C EC Finance plus the Chief Officer to come out 
clear why do we have always delays when it comes to  salary of the County employees ? So it 
must be noted that it is not an issue tha t will be tolerated  either by myself or the Hon. Members 
or any of the County employee since we also have bills to pay and children to take to schools . 
We pray that we must be paid in time so that we can carry out  our duties effectively , I think I 
will invite the Motion mover now to reply since the Members have exhausted their contributions. 
Hon. Athman Shebe?  
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you very much Hon. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity once again to say some few remarks. It is very unfortunate Hon . Speaker to see such 
a Motion and Hon . Members in the House others are just leaving, I do not know what is 
happenin g in this Assembly Hon. Speaker . Sometimes I find it very difficult to comprehend what 
is happening to us because whenever we come  up with a such an issue, such a Motion which 
really affects us and our livelihood and the livelihood of our people . It is very unfortunate to see 
such Hon . Members just walking out without even contributing to what was brought forward to 
us, I do not  know sometimes I feel very discouraged and disappointed but otherwise I really 
appreciate my Hon . Members who have backed up this Motion and we hope even if we are going 
to remain a few Hon. Speaker but our voices In Shaa Allah  by God’s Grace we are  going to be 
heard…  
(Applause)  
 …And the right s of our people, the right s of our workers, our staff  and our Hon . 
Members will be achieved Hon. Speaker. Thank you very much.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :  Thank you Hon . Member for your reply.  Hon. 
Members I now put a question that the Motion on timely pay ment of salaries by the County 
government  be adopted in this House in the same terms as moved . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 Yes Clerk .    
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members , there having being no any other busin ess the House stands to adjourn  
until Tuesday 8th May, 2019 next week 9: 00a.m.  
The House rose at 3: 15p.m. 