May 30 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 30th May, 2018  
The House met at 9:47a .m. 
 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You may be seated Hon. Members . Visitors 
and the  Hon. Members welcome back to our today sitting. Yes Clerk . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Hon. Members  we are very lucky today to have visitors . The Miss Tourism Kenya 
Mombasa County , 2018 contestants  and the Aga Khan School , welcome  feel at home . This is 
Mombasa Cou nty Assembly and I am so happy to  have you today as our visitors;  I will read 
out your names to recognize you , we have   Emira Adbumamadova , Ummikulthum Abubakar , 
Kaleem Adamjee , Joy Alande , Murtadha Ali , Shafyina Alibay , Ilana Alibhai , Armaan 
Alykhan , Azmat Amarshi , Shema Anthony , Yumna Ariff , Kavya Bhagani , Maaher Bhaloo , 
Maleeha Bhaloo , Guraj Bhamrah , Yash Charaniya ... 
 ...You guys  have names!  
Arsh Dharani , Phoenix  Foshee , Diya Gohil , Sayi Goyayi , Taha Gulam H ussein, Sabiha 
Ismail , Alyssa Jam al, Medha Jhingran , Muhammad Zahid Jiwani , Shante Kamar , Muhammad 
Kanji , Brandon Knyerez , Faith Kasi , Ayden Keshavjee , Aahil Khan , Diya Khataw , Madina 
Khudobakhshova , Mayana Kioko , Abel Komora , Daniel Kyabayinze , Fadumo Mahmood , 
Fakhir Malik , Omar Masoud , Anis Mukairshoev , Aryen Muravvej , Ahmed Mussa , I-em-
hotep Mutinda , Joe Mutua , Mwiny i  Mwamwiri ... 
(Applause ) 
 Yes we have Hon . Mwamwiri in the House that is why! Hon . Member you hav e a 
daughter or son in Aga Khan?  

May 30 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 (Hon. Mwamwiri stood  and bow ed) 
 ...Thank you. 
 Myles Mwang’ombe , Clemence Mwanjele , Ethan Mwasingwa , Gakenia Mwi ge, 
Emmanuel Mwiwawi , Orzu Nasridinshoeva , Einara Nasser , Rayann Natha , Debra N icole, 
Armaan Noorani , Eshak Noorani , Mohamed   NoorM ohamed , Zahra Noormohamed , Nadia 
Ntenge , Jonathan Ogut u 
(Applause)  
 …Yes we al so have Hon. Ogutu in the House w elcome , Ethan Olweny , Christine 
Ongele , Mark Oundo , Ayush Ranjan , Sonakshi Roy , Mwanpwani Said , Shayne Shah , 
Maodbegim Shakarmamadova , Rayn Shamji , Shakhrbonu Shonazarova , Luciano Torrian , 
Tanya Veka ria, Zahran Vergero , Cecilia Wachira  and Ozraoz Nusharadusheva . Then we have 
teachers ; we have Mr. Gorge Kamau, w e have Harriet Chadrik, Ol iver Wanje and Baghrat 
Jimraan, t hat is the Department of Humanities Aga Khan Academy Mombasa. Welcome to 
the Mombasa  County Assembly where the rules and procedures are adhered to.   
 We also have Miss  Tourism Kenya,  Mombasa County , 2018 contestants;  Ms. Rose 
Ndeto , Ms. Dorcas Musangi , Ms. Judith Musau , Ms. Maureen Togoo , Ms. Cynthia Majala , 
Ms. Kezia Oloo , Ms. Silvana W anjiru , Ms. Kethi Akinyi , Ms. Mary Mueni , Ms. Hawa 
Mwendwa , Ms. Lydia Achieng  and Ms. Riziki Awadh the Director Rizfar College . 
 
(The Miss Tourism contestants at the Public gallery stood and bowed)  
 
 ….Rizfa college, once again welcome to our today’s sessi on, feel free as I said earlier, 
feel at home, adhere to the rules an d regulation since this is the H ouse of rules , welcome.  
Next order?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 What’s  your point of order Hon. Samba?  
 Hon. Samba:  Am standing on a point of order 41( 2) (c) and I have a S tatement, am 
requesting the Statement from the Chairman of F inance , Hon.  Hatimy concerning NHIF 
remittance.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon.   Member did you submit your 
Statement?  
 Hon. Samba:  No. 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bw ire): Because it ought to be captured.  
 Hon. Samba:  But I can seek leave of the House at least because it is a matter of 
urgency and of importance, because am somehow directly involved.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Then you would have sought  leave before.  
 Hon. Samba:  Then can I seek leave of the House at least  to seek a statement from 
Honorable  Hatimy concerning the NHIF remittance.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy s witch of f your 
microphone please, you ha ve switch ed on your mic rophone  Hon. Moham ed. 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I rise under the S tanding order number 31, pleas e Mr. 
Speaker that there is no q uorum in this House . 
May 30 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member, the  Member is raising a 
concern.  
 Hon. Samba:  I was on the fl oor now may be you give a direction but ... 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Am yet to give a direction Hon.   Member.  
 Hon. Samba:  It’s an urgent issue . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : I already have your request with me, allow 
me to make a ruling o n the same as I also con sider...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Hon. Member  who is seeking lea ve in the House because of the q uorum is 
directly involved;  maybe he ought to have given  us the date . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order! I have your reques t with me , 
at the same time I have a concern from the Hon . Member over the q uorum.  I will just instruct 
the Clerk to check if there is q uorum before we  transact any business, kindly C lerk check 
whether there is a quorum.   
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Member I m ade a ruling, we want to start the business of this House and I have 
just instruct ed the C lerk to check whether there is a q uorum  and may be your prayer will be 
considered so  let us check whether there is q uorum then we transact the business of the 
House. H on. Member kindly p lease, Clerk ? 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Member you don’t interrupt with the ruling of  the Speaker, kindly allow the 
Clerk to check whether there is quorum, what you want to raise will be discussed  if there is 
quorum, if there will be q uorum  I will give you a chance  to raise your concern, Yes Clerk?  
(Clerk confirmed quorum)  
 That’s my Cle rk confirming that there is no quorum. Serj eant-At-Arms kindly ring the 
bell for those who  are  outside to come before we start our today’s business ... 
(Quor um bell rung ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
 ...Order Hon. Member! Hon. M embers the Member  has raised a concern over the 
quorum of this House and we all understand that the l aw requires at least 13 Members to be 
present in the House for any business to tak e place, and as we  speak  Hon. M embers we are 
only 10 so we cannot transact the business of this House, it will be against the Law . 
May 30 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           39 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  I have  instructed Serjeant -At-Arms but it seems the  Members are not within, we wi ll 
therefore adjourn  for one hour then we wi ll be back f or the normal business of this H ouse, 
therefore the House stand adjourned and we will be back after one hour.  
The House rose at 10: 09a.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   