May 30, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          40 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A cer tified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 30th May, 2018  
The House met at 2:38p .m. 
 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members you may be seated. 
Welcome back to our afternoon session. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
 Yes Hon. Nyiro, the Motion Mover . 
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Samba:  Point of Order Mr. Speaker ! 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : What's your Point of Order Hon. Member?  
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker I rise on a Point of O rder under Standing Order 31 (2) . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Once again a Member has raised a concern 
on a Standing Order Number 31 (2), yes I direct the Clerk to check whether there's quorum in 
the House. Yes Clerk please?  
 
(The Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
 
 Hon. Members there's no quorum in the House and we all understand what the law 
says on matters to do with quorum ; on matters to do with transactions of the business , for the 
House to conduct its business there must be quorum of at least 1 3 Members and we are less 
than that and in a situation where there's no quorum the alternative is adjournment . But 
before we adjourn allow me to instruct the Serj eant-At-Arms to ring the quorum bell for five 
minutes , if there's any Member outside to come i n. 
 
(The Serjeant-At-Arms r ung the quorum bell)  
 Hon. Oindo : Point of Information Mr. Speaker . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I have given the directives Hon. Member .  
 

May 30, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          40 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A cer tified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 (The Serjeant-At-Arms r ung the quorum bell)  
ADJOURNMENT  
 ...Order Hon. Members we have given five minutes and the five minutes is over ; 
already I want to make an appeal before I give the next direc tion or rather directives that  we 
must take serious this House Business . We adjourned in the m orning and it's on records just 
for the lack o f quorum, we are adjourning again for the same lack of quorum ! We must be 
serious with what we do  and I thank you that you were here in the morning and you are still 
here with us . Kindly pass the message to those who are not with us today that we must take  
our work very serious otherwise there might be complications or rather implications that 
might land some of us in problems . So due to lack of quorum and having being there no any 
other business the House stands t o adjourn until tomorrow at 2: 30p.m. Thank you. 
The House rose at 2:48p.m.  
 
 