March 24, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              40 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thurs day, 2 4th March, 2016  
The House met at 2:30p.m. 
(Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Members  have your seats, let’s  start.  
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Kibwana?  
       Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I sincerely thank the Members, today  
being Thursday it is a sad day for us and unfortunately there are few t hings that are going on in 
the C ounty .  This is about water vendors and kiosks ; and I ha ve witnessed and other Members  
like the Hon.  from Kipevu Ward , that is Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo , water service  vendors who are 
selling above five shillings there  are orders that their licenses have been revoked . Mr. Speaker  as 
you are  aware that as a C ounty we have scarcity of water and this has come as a result of the 
constr uction of the Standard Gauge R ailway (SGR) which has been using up to 90 per cent . So 
you will find out in our C ounty we have scarcity of water and if today the vendors who sell water 
are being affected to me this is  serious . Mr. Speaker I wish to give this statement to the H ouse so 
that we get t he clear picture on this operation so that we are able to in form our members on this 
issue. Hon.  Speaker  I would also like  the intervent ion on this issue by this Hon.  House  so that 
they will be able to inform the M embers because at the moment we do not know what 
procedures were used,  we do not know how th is operation is going . Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
      Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Karisa Nzai?  
       Hon. Nzai : Ahsante sana,  ningependa kumshukuru Mheshimiwa Kibwana ameona sija oga 
leo kwa sababu ya maji,  Mheshimiwa  Spika  ningeomba ya kwamba jambo hili uweze kuliangalia 
kwa dhati ama utupatie mwelekeo Waziri wetu wa maji na weny e kuhusika na maji watupatie 
mwelekeo . Haiwezekani ya kwamba China R oad imekuja sisi twate seka; watuambie watu wa 
China R oad wanatumia maji siku gani na siku gani il i siku zingine watu wapate maji;  
wanahangaika kwa sababu ya maji wakina ma ma, watoto wana  shida sana na sisi tukiwa kama 
wakaazi , kama viongozi inahitaji tupewe ratiba ya kwamba maji ya itakuwa leo,  siku flani  
hayatakuwa . Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa sasa imekuwa takriban miezi miwili  watu hawapati maji 
wana nchi wanateseka , kina mama ndio wanapa ta shida , kwa hivyo ingilia kati na utupatie 
suluhisho ... 
(Hon.  Kondo st ood up) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Is it another  statement Hon.  Kondo or it’s the same 
issue on water?  
(Hon.  Kondo  nodded) 
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo:  Mheshimiwa Spika  hili ni jambo limekumba Kaunti  yote, si maeneo 
ya Changamwe peke yake . Kazi hiyo imeanza na itazunguka Mombasa Kaunti  nzima .        
Kupitia kwa kiti chako B wana Spika  nafikiri litakuwa jambo la busara tukipata ruh usa kupit ia 
kwako ili kumualika meneja mpya wa  maji aliyechukua ofisi wakati mfupi uliopita na ndani ya 
Nyumba hii kuna K amati inahusika ili tujue kuna mipango gani ilioko na mipango gani 
imewekwa na mikakati gani itawekwa ili wanan chi wetu wawe ze kupata huduma hii kwa haraka 
upesi . Kwa sababu Mheshim iwa Spika  jambo hili limeanza maeneo ya Jomvu , Miri tini na mpaka 
hivi sasa tunapokea simu kutoka kila kona ya kwamba wanaouza maji wanadhulumiwa lakini 
March 24, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              40 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hansard Editor  Page 2 ikiwa tutakuwa na haraka ya kuwaita wahusika  jambo hili tutalisuluhisha na kila kitu kitakuwa 
sawa. Ahsa nte, Bwana Spika . 
      Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Members , the issue of water is a 
relevant issue .  I hereby take it to the relevant Committee and we need a report in this Hon.  
House in a week’s time , so it is upon the Committee of W ater and N atural resources to plan on 
whether they are going to invite the Managing D irector to find out what is going on.  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Hon.  Members  the H ouse stands adjourned until 29th March , 2016 Tuesday .  
The House rose at 2: 39p.m. 