June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 7th June, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Fourtieth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  10:39a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri ): Honourable  Members , you may be  seated. 
[Silence ] 
Yes, Clerk next order please?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
APPROVAL OF LOAN FACILITY TO SETTLE PENDING DEDUCTIONS  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Chairperson Commi ttee on Finance, Budget and  
Appropri ation , please give the Notice of Motion . 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker.  Mr. Speaker  Sir, I beg to give 
the following Notice of Motion;  
 
AWARE THAT Section 1 40(1) of the  Public Finance Management Act, 2012 , empowers a 
Count y Executive C ommittee Member for Finance to raise a loan f or the government’s  
purposes, subject to certain conditions , 
 
Honourable  Speaker ; 
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT  the County government see ks the approval of the County 
Assembly for a loan  facility from Equity Bank, amounti ng to Kshs. 504,105 ,025.55 , to 
settle pending statutory deductions for April, May, June, and July , 2022 ; 
 
Honourable  Speaker , NOTING THAT  alternative options have been explored, and the loan 
facility is considered the  most viable solution;  
 
Honourable  Spea ker, 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 CONCERNED THAT  the non -settlement of t hese deductions may have legal implications 
and adversely affect the County government's reputation and relationships with employees  
and stakeholders ; 
Honourable  Speaker , I therefore, urge this Assemb ly to RESOLVE : 
 
1. THAT  the County Assembly of Mombasa approves th e loan facility from Equity 
Bank, totaling Kshs  504,105 ,025.55 , to settle the pending statutory deductions ,  
 
2. THAT  the County governm ent, in accordance with Section 140(1) of the Pub lic 
Finance  Management A ct, 2012 , ensures that the loan and its terms and conditions comply 
with relevant provisions, including Section 142  of the Act, fiscal responsibility principles, 
and the financial obj ectives outlined in the County Fiscal Strategy Pa per, and th e county 
gove rnment's debt management strategy ,   
3. Honourable  Speaker , THAT the County government guarantees the timely and 
consistent repayment of the loan facility, amounting to equal monthly installment s of Kshs. 
91,745,455.05 , and utilizing  allocated  budgetary resou rces, 
4. Honourable  Speaker , THAT  the County Treasury is responsibl e for providing 
regular updates and reports on the loan facility's utilization and repayment to the County 
Assembly , 
Honourable  Speaker , I wish to ask one of my Member Hon ourable  Kambi to seco nd. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): It is a notice.  Thank Hon ourable  Kibwana Swa leh for giving 
the Notice of Motion . Yes, Clerk next orders  please.  
MOTION  
ESTABLISHMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT CENTERS IN AIRPORT WARD  
 
Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim  Omond i, please move the Motion.  
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move 
the following Motion , 
THAT AWARE  THAT , there are no pub lic Early Childhood Development (ECD) centers in 
Airport Ward , leading to limited acc ess to basic education and literacy  for young children 
in the area;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT, the importance of early childhood education is the cornerstone 
for a child's futur e academic and social success;  
Mr. Speaker , 
 
NOTING THAT, the continued absence of Earl y Childhood  Development (ECD) cente rs in 
Airport Ward  will perpetuate the lack of access to basic education among young children, 
potentially impacting their future academ ic and social achievements negatively;  
 
Mr. Speaker , 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 CONCERNED  THAT, the lack of Early  Childhood  Development (ECD) center s in Airport 
Ward  is a hindrance to the development of the children in the area and is a matter of great 
concern to the community;  
I, therefore, urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
 
1. THAT, the County government of Mombasa throu gh the Dep artment of Education and 
Digital Transformation to establish Early Childhood Development (ECD Es) centers in 
Airport Ward to improve access to basic education and li teracy in the area.  
 
May I request Hon ourable  Milka to second the Motion . 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank  you. Mr. Speaker I second . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Members . Honourable  
Ibrahim for the Motion and the Milka for seconding the Motion. Ho nourable  Members , I now 
propose the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Ibrahim O mondi, on Es tablish ment of Early 
Childhood Deve lopment Centers in Airport Ward , be considered by this Hon ourable  House in 
the same terms as moved ? 
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi , please make your contribution to  the Motion. 
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , it is with great concern that we 
acknowledge the absence of public ECD E centers in Airport Ward ; this la ck of access to basic 
education and illiteracy for our young children has significan t implication for the future 
academ ic an d social success . Mr. Speaker , as we all  know early c hildhood education lays the 
foundation for a child lifelong  learning journey , shaping the cognitive emotion al and social 
development. Mr. Speaker , the absence of EC DE Centers in  Airport Ward perpetuat es the 
educational display among ou r young children ; it also denies them the opportunity to  receive  
quality early  education a nd also hinders the ir overall development , we cannot ignore the fact t hat 
these formative years are crucial for nurturi ng their potential  and preparing th em for future 
academic passions.   
Mr. Speaker Sir, by Establishing ECD Es Centers in Airport Ward  we can bring this 
educational  gap and provide equal opportunities for all child ren in our community , these  center s 
will serve as nurturing space s where our young can develop their cognitive abilities , improve 
their language and normalcy sk ills and also enhance their social interaction with peers. Mr. 
Speaker , moreover EC DE Centers provide holistic development by fostering creativity , critical 
thinking a nd problem -solvi ng skills , laying a  solid foundation for  their future  academic and 
social  achievement s.  
Mr. Spe aker, as elected  represen tative s it is our duty to address the c oncerns of our 
community and work towards t heir betterment , the establishment of ECD E Centers in Airport 
Ward  is an essential step towards ensuring the educati onal wellbeing  of our children  and by 
doing so  we invest in the future of our communit y and contribute to the overall development of 
the society. Mr. Speaker , together let us take this progres sive state towards transforming the lives 
of our young  ones and building a stronger more inclusive community  and I urge Hon ourable 
Members to support this Motion. 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 Recognizing the urgency and the significa nce of this issu e and by doing so we pave the 
way for a  brighter future where all our children have equal access and opportunity to b asic 
education and literacy sett ing them on a path to success . Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank yo u very much . Yes, Honourable  Jackto ne Madialo 
make your c ontribution . 
Hon. Madialo : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for the opportunity . When this Motion was table d 
yesterday,  I afterwar ds so ught to inquire from the mover of the sa me if maybe he ha s checked 
the CIDP  and the ADP and inde ed he said he checked and whatever is moving the provision of it 
is line with what is in the CIDP and ADP . So, because of that and setting a precedence  that 
wheneve r an hono rable Member  comes to us plead ing a case that concerns their Ward because 
really we ar e not from those  Wards then the fir st thing is not to go against what the Member is 
seeking for the Ward because they know best what fits them in their Ward so for that reason I 
hereby support . Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir . 
The Speake r (Hon. Khatri ): Thank  you ver y much Hon ourable  Jackto ne. Yes, Honourable  
Abdulkadir please make your contributions.  
Hon. Abdul rahman Abdul kadir: Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker for spotting me and 
giving me this opportunity to contribute.  I would like to say  first of all I’m a very junior 
legis lator in this House and I would lik e to s eek advice on this particular Motion . Honourable  
Speaker in this House we do have  petitions , statements and motions as  well so I would like to 
inquire whether this particul ar mot ion qualifies to be a Moti on to be discusse d by t his House as it 
pertains a pa rticul ar ward. I’m not standing to oppose the prayers of my senior Hon ourable  
Ibrahim Bomoa ; however I would like to inquire more on w hether we are also allowed to brin g 
individu al issues affecting each Ward to be discussed as a  Motio n I am also of the opinion th at 
this Motion should at the very least be table as a statement and not as a Motion be cause I’m sure 
no Member will oppose this howe ver its better suited to be a statement . Secondly , this issues are 
better captured in the ADP an d the CIDP I think we  ae stil l in the public participation and we are 
still not done with the  CIDP  and ADPs and the Hon ourable  Member , should rather petition to 
the Committee on Finance Public Finan ce and Appropriation to consider his plead and have his 
prayers captured either in the CIDP or  ADP b ecause Hon ourable  Speaker , I’m afraid we might 
just pass this and it will be so hard to implement it just like the many Motions we  have done and 
Honourable  Speaker, Hon ourable  Bomoa  is talking about development of ECDs … 
[Interruption]  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Point of order please ! There is s no Hon ourable  Bomoa in 
this House . 
 Hon. Abdul rahman Abdul kadir:  I stand guided . Honourable  Ibrahim he  is talking a bout 
the devel opment of ECD Es in Airport Ward, will ECD Es come  infrastru ctures come with 
teach ers does the Co unty have enough ECD Es as the first question before start having such 
developments, do  we have the necessary equipment  for such development ? So, I stand guided 
wheth er this qualifies to be a Motion or a statement . Thank you, Mr. Speaker .  
The Sp eaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very  much . Honourable  Abdulkadir , so I think the 
Clerks will advise  on that because as far as I know the Motion came to the Hou se Business and 
you yourself was sitting in that House Business when you are allocating  this Motion to come to 
this House so you should be g uided from the House business . 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 I believe you yourself are sitting in that House, I heard Hon ourable  Jackto ne Madialo  
talking about the CIDP and you did  not mention whether  it was capture d or it not captured in the 
CIDP and I can see th e prayers which the Hon ourable  Memb er is asking in his Motion . The 
prayers  are that the County government of Momb asa Through the Departme nt of Education and 
Digital Transformation to Establish the Early Childhood Development  so, Honourable  Members 
for now will just continue with the  Members to give the contribu tions on this Motion then you 
will vote for either to pass it or not to pass the Motion. Yes , Honourable  Milka Moraa please 
give your contributi on as you’re the seconder of this Motion ? 
Hon. Ngar e: Thank you Mr. Speaker for givi ng me a chance to contribute to thi s Motion . 
As I seconded it, I stand to support the Motion introduced by Ho nourable  Ibrahim Omondi to 
this Hon ourable House ; I know that early childhood  education is very important as it is the 
shaping s tage where a child recognizes and  learns the basic skills incl uding recognizing , skills of 
sharing and a child who misses this s tage will have a setback of so many issues as he or she 
progresses in her  education . You will find a child lack  even the social s kills of sharing  learning 
materia ls with the others or other s kills including recognizing certain shapes in life. So this is t he 
stage where a c hild must be introduced and serious ly introduced so that  they get the basic 
foundation that is necessary for the ir future development and I’m sure it’s a Motion that each and  
every  Member in this House  wants to support because it is for t he sake of our child ren whether in 
Airport Ward, Bamburi,  Mikindani , Timbwa ni or wherever an ECD E school is supposed to be 
establi shed and with that I want urge my colleagues  it is a Motion tha t we s hould all support. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  for giving me the chance.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Mora a. Yes, Honourable  
Patric k Mbel le please make your con tributions.  
Hon. Mbel le: Thank y ou, Mr. Speaker Sir first of a ll allow me to fully support the motion 
by my brother Hon ourable  Ibrahim for asking thi s particular  Assembly to pass within  Miritini  so 
that he and his fel low ward mates are able to receive and have a n ECD E center. Mr. Sp eaker S ir, 
with as much as it is an issue of hi s ward but I  am sure that when these kids grow at so me point 
they will come to contribut e to the economy of old Town , I am  very sure that these kid s at some 
point when they grow up they wil l be the same people that will employ as doctors and nurses i n 
all our hospitals within this County so I highly and fu lly support this Motion knowing  very well 
it is a matter of existence in this County and som e of the wards not just his ward only but eve n 
our wards also affected by th e lack of proper capacitated E CDEs centers so I fully support and 
ask on top of whateve r he is saying that all other wards t hat lack such kind of facilities are also 
looked into and they also receive the necessary support that  is needed . Thank you, Mr. Spea ker.  
The Speaker (Hon.  Khat ri): Yes, thank you very much Hon ourable  Patric k. Yes, 
Honourable Athman Mwamwiri  Leader of Majority  pleas e make your contributions.  
The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mheshimiwa Spika , tuko hapa kama wakilishi Wadi na k ila m moja katika jukumu la wawakilishi 
tuna haki ya kuwa wakilisha watu wetu kwa ku pitia hoja , kupitia taarifa na k upitia Miswada kwa 
hivyo kwanza Mheshim iwa wa Airport  kuwakilisha watu wake kw a kutumia hoja hii yuko sahih i 
kama mwakilishi wa  Airport isipokua hoja tunazo fikisha zinategemea uzito , pili uhalisia , tatu 
wakati wa utekelezaji wa jambo hili. Mheshimiwa Spika sa a hii tuko katika har akati ya 
kutengeneza makadirio ya mw aka huu wa serikali yetu Gatuzi  na makadirio haya Mheshimiwa 
Spika hutokana na m ipangilio ; moja kuna mipangilio ya miaka mitano wataalam wanaita CIDP , 
Pili kuna mipangilio ya m da mfupi am bayo wataalama wanaita ADP ya mwaka m moja .     
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Mheshimiwa Spika am bayo kutokana na ADP Mheshimiwa  Spika nd io tunajenga 
makadirio ya  utekelezaji kwa mwaka unaofuata wa kifedha nikiwa Mwana chama katika Kamati  
ya masuala ya kifedha niko na kumbukumbu ya hizi daftari zote za  haya masuala yanayo stahi ki. 
Mheshimiwa Spik a, kwa u pesi kwa yeyote ataka e pitia ADP u kurasa wa 11 atakuta ya kwamba 
mwaka huu serikali  imepania kujenga madarasa maw ili au kujenga shule mbil i za chekechea 
ambayo ni Digirikani  na Chaani  zimetajwa na Wadi ya Airport haipo  kwa mpa ngo huu . Vile vile 
imetajwa imefanya marekebisho shule za chekechea saba ambayo ni Mwangala , Shika Adabu , 
Bora ka V oroni  iko Mwakirunge , Amani , kuna Stella Mary Mikindan i na kuna R.G N gala pia 
hakuna chochote kinacho  husiana na  Wadi ya A irport . Kwa pendekezo Mheshimiwa Spik a 
mwa faka kwa Mheshimiwa kwa  sababu Kamati haijaleta Ripoti  na Bunge hili kupitisha ripoti ya 
haya ambayo serikali imepangia ningemwafaka kwa njia mbil i ambayo Mheshimiwa  kutekeleza 
hii moja imefika ka ma Bunge ni kumbukumbu k atika  Bunge hili lakini pia in gekua  bora zaidi 
pia aweze kuleta lalama au petition  kutoka kwa Wadi anayo wakilisha  ikiambata na na eneo 
ambao tayari lipo kwa mahsusi kujengwa shule hi i iliyobakia serikali kuwekeza kw enda kufanya 
swala lile i li wa weze kufanya marekebisho y a ADP  na estimates  tunazo zishungulikia ya 
kuongeza mgao katika s wala hii ili waweze kulitekeleza kama ilivyo  mipango ya mwaka huu ya 
serikali haina chochote cha shule  ya chekechea  katika Wadi amba yo Mwakilishi Ibrahim 
anawaki lisha  kwa hivyo...  
[Interrupti on] 
The Spe aker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Jacktone  Madialo?  
Hon. Madialo:  Mr. Speaker Sir , is the Hon ourable  Majority Leader ; a person I respect , in 
order to say that one of the E arly Childhood Development Education s (ECDEs)  that will be 
refurbished is at St. Mary’s  Bangladesh where there is none in existence , will we be refurbishing 
hot air? In the words of the Chief Justice … 
[Applause ] 
The Speaker  (Hon . Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Majority Leader please.. . 
[Interruption ] 
The Lead er of Majority  (Hon.  Athman Mwamwir i): Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika...  
[Interruption ] 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Answer that … 
The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwamwiri ): Mheshimiwa Spika , shule iliotajwa ni St. 
Mary’ s Mikindani Ward , nime inukuu nikasema Bangladesh ... 
[Inter ruption ] 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Yes, Honourable  Joshua?  
Hon. Ong’au:  Some point of inf ormation  Honourable  Madialo , we did a public 
participat ion of Annual Development  Plan (ADP) in Mikindani  and you w ere not present , it was 
captured  and we talked ab out it ... 
[Appla use] 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 ...Your Members  were the re, they coul d have said there is no E arly Childhood 
Developme nt Education s (ECDEs) , stop disturbing us.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Thank you.   
The Leader of  Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante M heshimiwa S pika. Katika ripoti hii 
kuna shule mbili z a che kechea ambazo zimetajwa ; Mikindani , Amani na hiyo St. Mar y’s 
Mikindani ambayo kwake yeye ni bahati kubwa . Kwa hivyo iwe iko ama hai ko lakini mipango 
ni kwamba  serikali imetambua  na itarekebisha  shule m bili za che kechea katik a eneo lake kwa 
hivyo hiyo ni baha ti pia labda anaweza kuleta petition  na yeye aka forfeit  moja ili iweze kwenda 
kwa jirani yake vile vile . Pili Mh eshimiwa Spika ni kuelekezana pia Mheshimiwa na  fursa ya 
kutengeneza ku mbukumbu am a memorandum  vile vile na kuikabidhi Kama ti hu sika likiwa na 
pendekezo ya kwamba eneo lake linalo sehe mu ambayo ina yo uwezo wa  kujeng wa shule ya 
chekechea na katika mipango ya Kamati chini ya Mheshimiwa Kibwana kama Mwenye kiti vile 
vile ataishaur i Serikali katika Wizara  ya Masuala ya Fedha na Bajet i waw eze kuongeza mgao 
ama kubadilisha sehemu moja na kupelek a dharura hii kwa Mheshimiwa wa Airport na  yeye 
aweze kujengewa shule ya  chekechea ili w atoto wa Airport kwa sababu sh eria ya elimu 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  inasema ni marufu ku kwa mtoto mwenye umri chin i ya miaka sita ambaye ni 
mtoto wa chekechea kutembea zaidi y a kilomita saba kwenda  katika shule ya chek echea . Kwa 
hivyo tukizingatia Wodi  yake Mhesh imiwa Spika kukosekana hata shule moja  haistahiki kwa 
mujibu wa ka nuni za elimu . Kwa hivyo yuko katika haki ya ku pata huduma hii bora lakini kwa 
mipango inayostahiki  na moja wapo ni kuleta lalama ama petition  na pili kuleta memorandum  
kutili a nguvu hii Hoj a yake  sababu hata ikipita ikiw a haya hayataingia katik a ripoti am bazo 
zinashug hulikiwa na Kamati ya Fedha b ado M heshimiwa Spika itakuwa kama Bunge 
tumepitisha lakini up ande wa pili itakuwa tumewafunga mikono kuweza kutekeleza hilo . 
Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spik a. 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Hassan U lher please make  your 
contribution . 
Hon. Hassan Mohammed:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity  to 
contribute on the Motion brought by my brother Hon ourable  Ibrahim. I think we  are all in  that 
need of notion to eradicate  the level of poverty in ou r society  and giving them education ; for 
children  the quality, the education  they need but actually Mr. Speaker not all the children who 
undergo the 8 -4-4 system  be successful  in life . There is ano ther way  and making  them have their 
best in life is nurturin g their talents ; I am talking on my behalf  Mr. Speaker I requested for the 
Bilima Ground s and we we nt through a procedure whereby I was told to follow the right 
procedures as my brothe r once said , we all know t hat the ECDEs  which is an essential  for my  
brother  Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi in his Ward to ensure that the ch ildren get the quality 
education  but if we do not follow the right procedure every individual  will come up with  his own  
problems and I as t he person and as the peo ple of Mago goni we do not have any facility of 
education  and I do not have any land to construct the same . I think Mr.  Speaker we should follow 
the right procedure for every Honourable  Member to g et his or the bes t for his people Mr. 
Speaker Sir, so I reques t the C lerk to advi se as you once said so I request the Clerks to advise my 
brother Ibrahi m Omondi on the same issue so that we can get the right answers  for him . Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker . 
The Spea ker (Hon.  Khat ri): Thank you  very much . Yes, Honourable  Juma Kambi pl ease 
make  your contr ibution . 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 8 Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipati a fursa hii. Mimi 
nimesimama kumuunga mkono ndugu yangu kwa sababu ya huruma … 
[Applause ] 
Mheshim iwa Spika itakuwa  ni hujuma kata yake  ndio ili o na kiwanja kikubwa ch a ndege , 
wageni wote wa ulimwe ngu mzima wanapitia kwake lakini itakuwa ni sikitiko k wamba h akuna 
hata shule ya chekechea. Kwa hivyo yangu ni huruma tu huyu Bwana Mheshimiwa aweze 
kusaidik a kupitia Bunge h ili. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
[Applause ] 
The S peaker  (Hon . Khatri) : Thank y ou. Yes , Honourable  Makarani Fadhili, Deputy 
Speaker please make you r contribution . 
The Depu ty Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mheshimiwa Spik a mimi pia n achukua fursa hii kwanza kumpongeza ndugu yangu, mwenzangu, 
jirani yan gu Mheshimiwa Ibrahi m Omondi kwa kuleta Hoja hii mbele ya Bunge hili , japo kuna 
taratibu am bazo zahitajika kufanyika lakini sitosita kumpa pongezi maana ameanza ka tika zi le 
taratibu ambazo zinahi tajika kufanyika Mheshim iwa Spika. Mheshimiw a Spika , tumesomewa n a 
Mheshim iwa Kiongozi wa W engi katika Bunge letu la Mombasa zile ECDE s ambazo zilishaanza 
kujengwa na zinatakiwa ziweze kumalizwa na kuna zengine  ambazo zimetaj wa nda ni yake 
ambazo zin atakika na ziongezewe madarasa m anne ikiwa moja ni M wangala, Mtongwe Ward  
yatoka Liko ni Constituency . Kuna na Shika Adabu ambayo inatoka Likoni Constituency , kuna 
Baraka Voroni yatoka Mwakirunge Kisaun i Constituency , kuna Amani Mheshimiwa Spik a 
Mikindani Ward ambayo inat oka Jomvu , St. Mary’s Mikindani inatoka Jomvu , RG Ngala Tudor 
Ward  inatokea pia Mvita Mheshimiwa Spika.   
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi najua kuwa kwangu ipo Mwijabu Primary ambayo haikutajwa 
hapa  wa sababu inatengenezwa  na Worl d Bank lakini tuelew e kuwa hii ilioko mbele yetu ni 
mipa ngilio ya mwaka ama makadirio ya mwaka ambayo ba do hayajapitishwa na Bunge letu sasa 
haijamzuia Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi kuleta malalamiko yake na pia vile vile ayalete mbele 
ya Kamati ya Fedha Mheshimiwa Spi ka kama ni livyosema kuwa ni ta ratibu ambazo zip o 
haijazuia hili Bunge letu  ikija ikipitisha na yeye Mheshimiwa awe katika Kata yake ama Wodi 
yake imeangaziwa kwa sababu  katika  moja y a sababu ya kuleta ugatuzi ni kila mtu ajisikie kuwa 
amefiki wa, yule mwana nchi wa ch ini ajisiki e pia na kuwe na usawa.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi 
ninge omba  wenzangu wakati tutakapokuwa tunakuja sasa  kujadili haya makadirio n a mipangilio 
ya mwak a ama Annual Development Plan (A DP) tuweze kuang azia kwa kina maana tu merudi 
kwa wananchi w etu pia tumesikiza mao ni ya wananchi wetu na hili ni moja katika yale ambayo 
yamezungumzwa kule Changamwe , Mheshimiwa Ibrahim ameb idi abebe  yale mazungumzo ama 
maono ya watu wake p ia aje ayalete h apa mbele japo kwa njia ambayo  ni ya hii hoja vile vil e. 
Ningezidi kumuomba Mheshimiwa ndugu yangu Ibrahim katika matakwa ama maombi yake 
angezidi pia ku ongezea katika suala  nzima la  Kamati ya Fedha inapoketi iweze kuangazia suala 
hili waka ti wanapoangalia zile ripoti zao kuweza kutenge neza hii Annual Developm ent P lan 
(ADP).  
Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi naomba  ndugu zangu  wenzangu wote ili tupean eni nguvu 
tuweze kuwezeshana hili sua la ambalo  ndugu yetu  Mheshimiwa ame lileta hapa mbele 
atakapolileta k ule katika Kamat i na hapa mbele ya Bunge tuwez e kukubaliana na kumkuba lia ili 
wananchi wetu , watoto wetu waweze kufikiwa . Nimejitaja kuwa mimi Mwijabu haijatajwa hapa 
lakini ipo shule ambay o inaende lea japo imesimama lakini inaen delea, Chaani ipo lakini 
ilisimama miaka hiy o na imetajwa kuwa itaendelea . 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 9 Kwa hiyo  nawaomba nd ugu zangu maan a kwetu  Wadi ya Changamwe  ipo imemalizwa, 
Wadi ya Kipevu ipo imemalizwa , ndugu yangu Mhe shimiwa Ibrahim hana hata hiyo ch ekechea, 
hana shule ya umma kule chini  kwa hio  nawaomba tukikaa ndugu zangu tuang alie na tuangazie 
na tuhakikis he tumeweza kuje ngana wa kati tuna kuja kupitisha hii Annual Development Plan 
(ADP)  ndani ya Bunge letu . Kwa hayo Mheshimiwa Spika mim i naw eza kuw ashauri pia tuzidi 
kuipitia hii Annual Developme nt Plan (ADP)  maana bado haijaletwa  katika Bunge  hili na 
twashukuru ndugu yangu  Madialo  amesimama na kusema kuwa yeye ana mbili . Mimi 
ningeomba pia ya kwamba wakati t unasema tunakata moj a aruhusu  moja tuweze kuikata ili 
tumpe ndugu yetu Mheshimiwa Ibrahi m. Ahsante sana Mhesh imiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank yo u. Yes, Honourable  Joshua please make your 
contribution?  
Hon. Ong’a u: Ahsante sana Mhes himiwa Spika pia kwa kunipa n afasi hii . Pia mimi  
niweze kuc hangia biashara ya Bunge ya l eo; ninge penda kuuliza swali kwa M wenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya F edha kama a mefanya Publ ic Participation  ya Annual Development Plan (ADP)  
katika Wodi ya Airport na kama a lifanya nini wananchi wa huko  na Mheshimiwa wa huko 
walisema kuhusu Annual Development P lan (ADP)  kwa sababu if we continue dis cussing this 
Motion  tutakuwa tunaweka  a very ba d precedent  kila mtu atakuwa anakuja na Hoja ya W adi 
anaileta katika Bunge hili . Tunaelewa kwamba  matatizo yako W adi zetu lakini kuna njia ya 
kuleta haya matatizo yetu ya W adi katika Bun ge, kwa hivyo mimi naona hii ingekuwa ni 
Statemen t so am req uesting my  brother Ibrahim Omondi to bring this as a Statement and we 
discuss and the relevant  Department w ill give feedback . Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you v ery muc h Hon ourable  Joshua. Yes Hon ourable  
Nyache L eila?  
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa  Spika na mimi kuweza kunipa nafasi ya kuweza 
kuchangia. Kwanza nataka nichukue fursa hii kump ongeza Mheshimiwa Ibr ahim ambaye ni 
jirani yangu ; kwa kweli mengi yamesemwa na end apo ya mesemwa ya kwamba hayuko ka tika 
orodha, hayuko kati ka ripoti y a fedha laki ni ni haki  yake kusimama na kuweza kutetea wananchi 
wake. Kusema la kweli  kama munavyoelewa Waheshimiwa tunavyo fuatwa na wananchi 
kuulizwa hiki ama kile katika  Wadi yako ni vile vile  Bomoa  anavyopelekeshwa m bio na watu 
wake. Kwa ni ni Wadi zengine kuna  shule za che kechea na  pale Airport hakuna ! Wanaona kama 
hawakilishi lakini hii itakuwa historia ama itakuwa kumbukumbu Mheshimiwa Ibrahim 
ameweza kuwakilish a Wadi  yake vizuri  aweze kupat a na yeye chekechea. Enda po huo mgao 
utakuja awek we katika h iyo orodha, i takuwa h iyo tayari ameshawakilisha watu wake na 
ameshaomba hiyo shule ya chekechea na watu wake kule wataingia imani na yeye ya kwamba 
anawakumbuka na a nawawakilisha vili vyo. Kusema la kweli  elimu ni msingi wa maendeleo na  
ni  kama tunawanyany asa wale wato to ambao wanastah ili kuanza chekechea, kutoka katika Wadi 
yake na kuenda katika Wad i nyengine ni kama kuwanyanyasa ki haki zao . Kwa hivyo pia 
tuhurumie w ale watoto na tuwe ze kuchangia hoja hii  iliokuja na Mhesh imiwa Bomoa na 
tunampong eza sana na ni imani ku bwa amewe za kutia w ananchi wake. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika, na unga mkono  hoja ya Mheshimiwa Ibrahim mia fil mia. Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Okay thank you Hon ourable  Leila. Ye s, Honourable  
Mwamwiri are you o n a point of order or in formation ? 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 10 The Leader o f Majority (Hon. Athman  Mwamwiri ): Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mhesh imiwa Spika kwa hesh ima ya Bunge hili na kumbu kumbu, nim eghafilika nilipokuwa 
natoa maelekezo yangu ; nimetaja kil omita saba za hatua ya chekeche a lakini  kitaalamu 
ilista hilikuwa mita mia sa ba chini ya k ilomita moj a kwa hio  so nilitaka kupeana taarifa hiyo 
kwaajili ya kumbu kumbu sijenikaja kumbukwa kuwa nilielekeza Bunge isivyostahiki. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Sp ika. 
The Speaker ( Hon. Khatri): Ahsante. Yes , Honourable  Pamela please make your 
contri bution. 
Hon. Arwa:  Ahsan te Mheshi miwa  Spika  kwa kunipatia nafasi hii na mimi pia niweze 
kuchangia katika hii hoja. Mheshimiwa Spika ijapokuwa wenzangu wengine wamesem a 
Mheshimiwa wa Wadi ya Airport hakutumia u taratibu zingine lakini kwa vile twa jua sisi so te 
elimu ni msingi  na mimi ninge penda k uungana na Mheshimiwa wa Shika  Adabu vile amesema 
kule kwa Mheshimiwa Ibrahim  ndio wageni wote wa ulimwengu mzima wanapokelewa na  kwa 
heshima yako Mhesh imiwa Sp ika vile  unatupenda sisi kama waheshimiwa wen zako , mimi najua 
hii hoja ut aitia maanani m a Mhesh imiwa Ibrahim Omondi ataweza kusaidiwa na watu wake 
wataweza kusherehekea kwa usaidizi wako . Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Frankline ple ase 
make your co ntribut ion. 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwanza samahani  kwa sababu nafikiri  leo    
umenipata nikiwa hali mbaya lakini hii yote imechangiwa na m atatizo a mbayo ya ko pale 
mashinani Mhesh imiwa Spika. Kwanza nasima ma kuunga  mkono hoja ya Mheshimi wa Ibrahim 
Omondi…  
[Applause ] 
Na niseme hivi Mheshimiwa Spika, swala hili ambalo amelileta hapa licha ya k uwa b ado 
kuna  stakabadhi zinatengezwa ili kuweza ku fanikish a shughuli  ya mak adirio ya miaka mitano na 
pia makadirio y a mwaka m moja. Mheshimiwa  Spika lazima ieleweke kwamba Wadi ya Airport 
ndio Wadi  ambayo haina shule yoyote wacha ya chekechea ; shule ya upili, shule ya vyuo vya 
katikati ama  colleges  wala shule ya msing i. Kwa  hivyo hil i ambalo ameliomba hapa ni swala la 
kimsingi na k ama kwe li sisi  tunawathamini wa kaazi wa Wadi ya Airpo rt, kwa sababu kwa sasa 
wao hukopa masomo kutoka kwa Wadi zingine . Watoto wake huyu Bwana inabidi watoke 
kuanzia Port Reitz kule amb ayo ki  maeneo iko katika Wadi  yake, waende katika Wadi  ya Kipevu  
ama waende  katika  Wadi  ya Mheshimiwa Fadhili  ambayo ni Mwijabu na Bomu ama waje 
Chaani Mheshimiwa Spika. Tunaomba kwa  sababu watoto ni haki yao ya kikatiba na imewekwa 
katika schedule  4 ya Katiba  ya kwamba shule  za chekechea zime gatuliw a hili halihitaji 
mazungum zo m engi.  
Kile tunge omba ni kwamba Mheshimiwa asaidike kwa njia yoyote ; sometimes tunasema 
the end justif ies the means, we may lock it out, out  of pro cedures  ya kwamb a out of technica lities  
hakufuata kanuni zinazo st ahili lakini je,  yale m aswa la ambayo ameweza ku leta katika Bu nge 
hili, ni  maswala ya msingi ! Na jibu ni ndio Mheshimiwa Spika ; kwa hivyo haijalishi tutatumia 
njia gani ili muradi watoto wa Wadi ya A irport raundi  hii kwa miaka hi i mitano wapate shule ya  
chekeche a. Na Mheshimiwa Spika nikimalizia, haimaanishi ye ye akipata na mimi nikose ; kuna 
yangu pale Chaani ambayo imekwama kwa miaka mingi na mimi nimesema ya kwamba 
Mheshimiwa Spika r aundi  hii lazima  hili sw ala la c hekechea, shule y a chekechea ili oko Chaani 
tumal izie twende pale  Mwijabu. 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 11 Kisha  tukamalize ya Mheshimiwa  Naibu  Spika na kwa kila Wa di ndani ya Mombasa 
Mheshimiwa Spika a ngalau  kuwe na ECD E watoto wetu wasome masomo ambayo yana misingi 
ya sawa.  Mheshi miwa Spi ka, nikimalizia hi li si jambo ambalo litak uwa limea nza Mombasa , 
ukienda Kwale ECD E zimejengwa imekuw a kama vibanda  vya watu wa kula Mogokaa  kwa 
sababu viko kila mahali Mheshimiwa Spika na Kwale sasa hivi watu wanasoma , masomo Kwale 
yameinuka.  Mombasa  is the second largest ci ty in Kenya  na kwa  hivyo inafaa sisi tutilie ma anani 
elimu na tuanzie hapa kwa  chekechea. Mh eshimiwa Bomoa mbali na kukuunga mkono hapa, 
tutakuomba  Mungu akusaidie maana una  matatizo mengi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Frankline. Yes , Honourable  Mwak a 
Mulundonda?  
Hon. Mwak a Bakari : Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spik a kwa kunipatia fursa hii nam i 
niweze kuweka maneno kidogo kulingana na hoja hii.  Mheshimiwa Spika , mengi yameongewa 
kumhurumia ndugu ye tu ambay e pia ni masi kitiko makubwa ya kwamba hak una ECD E kule 
kwake kwenye  Wadi. Mheshimiwa Spika , jambo l a elimu ni msi ngi ambao lazima msingi ule 
uwe ni msingi ambao umesimama imara  huwezi kujenga nyumba ukaweka matope alafu juu 
yake ukawe ka matop e, itapo romoka  lazima uweke  msin gi ambao ni thabiti amba o ni wa block, 
ambao uko strong ili uweze kuweka madong o juu ile nyum ba itaweza kuendelea.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika , kwa kusema ukweli ni  sikitiko kubwa sana ya kwamba utakuta katika Kaunti  yetu watot o 
wanaso ma katik a maeneo  ambayo ni y a shule ya msingi , pale pale n dio tunap ewa madarasa 
maw ili ama matatu, tunasema ni EC DE. Ile sio ECD E ile ba do ni shule ya msingi , ECD E 
inatakikana iwe kando wale watoto wa chekechea ili wafurahie elimu yao kwa upande wa 
mazi ngira m azuri, v yoo vizu ri na pia pal e ambapo wanacheza kwa grou nd watoto w aweze 
kufurahia machezo  ama mahali ambapo ni pa  kusomea .  
Kwa kusema k weli ni masikitiko mimi kama mama Mwaka ama Mheshimiwa Mwaka  
nilipokuwa ni MCA wakati wa Wadi ya Timb wani , nilitaka kuleta ho ja hii l akini wa kati ploti 
hakuna  lazima pia tukiangalia kuomba ma hali ujengewe je , jambo  la kwanza pia utaulizwa, uko 
na mahali? Kama huna m ahali basi hak una kujengewa. Mimi kwa kusema kweli sikuwa na 
mahali kwa hivyo nilinyamaza lakini nilitafuta wafadhi li nikap ata kuje ngewa  ndani ya il e shule, 
madarasa matatu , najivun ia kwa hilo nime wacha kumbu kumbu katika shule ya msingi ya Maji  
Safi. Kwa hivyo  ndugu  zangu wa le ambao ni MCAs  wateule  lazima mwanzo tuangalie sehemu  
ya kujengewa , unayo? ! Na kama huna sasa utabaki kuwa pal e. Kwa hivyo naomba Kamati  ya 
Elimu pale m ahali amb apo tunaweka ECD E zetu hata kama kuweza watuwekee mipaka  kidogo 
ili waju e kwamba hapa ni  pa watoto wa chekechea lakini leo utakwenda shuleni break time, time 
table  ni ile  ile. Ratiba ni ya shule ya msingi  lazima uifwate ile ile kwa sababu shule  ya msingi  
wakitoka nje ku cheza pale, wale wa chekechea huwa hawataki tena kusoma, ita bidi watoke.  
Kwa hivyo tunatumia time table ambayo ni moja ya  shule za msingi  ndio ile ile ya ECD E. 
Wakitoka break  wakitoka pale wan akuta na na watoto  wakubwa . Pia kwa upand e wa mazi ngira 
ni mabaya kwamba watoto wanapatana na watoto ambao ni wakubwa, wanajiun ga machezo 
huwezi kuju a watoto wale wanapata mafunzo gani katika ile compound . Kwa  hivyo mimi naunga 
mkono jambo  hili la  kuwez a kusisiti za ECD E zijengwe kama maeneo yako na yale a mbayo 
hayako kam a Timbw ani hatuna plot i, maanake Timbwani hatuna plot i ambayo in a hati miliki , 
hatun a mahali popote iki weko Mheshimiwa Mbaya yuko hapa pia namuekelea kwamba tuweze 
kupata ukuta wa w ale wato to ambao  wako katika maeneo  ya shule waweze kuan galiwa vi zuri. 
Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono jambo hili kuweza kutilia mkazo kama Mheshimiwa Fra nkline 
alivyos ema kwamba  Kwale ni kama vibanda vya Mogokaa  na kweli Kamati ya Elimu  tunaweza 
kufanya  benchma rking  pia huko . 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 12 Kwa hio  twendeni tukaangalie wenzetu wanaf anya vipi  ili nasi  tuweze  kuiga tulete Kaunti 
ya Mombasa . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speake r (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Salim Mbaya , please make your 
contributions.  
Hon. Salim Mbaya:  Ahsa nte sana  Mheshim iwa Spika kwa kun ipatia fursa hii na kabl a 
sijaend elea, nimshukur u Mweny ezi Mungu kwa kunipatia afya na pumzi, vile vile ni washukuru 
waheshimiwa wenz a wakiongozwa na Spika. Mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii na sina 
sababu za kupinga kwa saba bu yale Mheshimiwa mwenza  ameweza kuyasema kuhusi ana na ho ja 
hii, ni maneno  yanaeleweka na sisi ni viongozi na nia na madhumuni yaku a viongozi ni kwamba 
tuwakil ishe zile kata zetu kule ambako tumetoka. Mimi naiunga mkono hoja hii kwa sababu 
ndugu y angu ame weza kul eta hoja hii hasw a nia yake ni kule kukam ilisha ah adi ya kwamba 
yeye ni mwakilishi wa kule  Wadi ya  Airport  naiunga mkono hoja hii kwa asili mia tisaini na  tisa 
kwa mia.  
[Applause ] 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Salim Mbaya.  Yes, 
Honourable  Benard  Ogutu, please m ake your contributions.  
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika . Nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii n a 
leo na hata  mimi niweke a silimia tisaini na pia niweze kumwambia  Mheshimiwa Bomoa 
kwamba hii hoja ni nzuri lakini,  usipoiw eka kati ka CIDP, ikapati kana katika ADP itakuwa n doto 
amba yo utaota miaka yako mi tano yote! Kwa hivyo uhakikishe kwamba iko katika CIDP na sisi 
tutakusaidia kuisukuma ili  watoto wako wakae kwako nyumbani wasije kwangu kusoma katika 
shule zangu. Ahs ante san a Mheshi miwa Spika.  
[Applause] 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourabl e Benard O gutu. Y es, Honourable  
Mwinyi . 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwanza kabisa Wahenga  walisema 
akufaa e kwa dhiki ndiye rafiki…  
[Applause ] 
Nimesimama kuunga mkono mia fil mia kwa sababu Mh eshimiwa  Bomoa ama 
Mheshimiwa Ib rahim alisimama  na watu wa Mwakirunge muongo uliopita mpaka wakapata 
ECDE ya Digirikani ingawaje haijaisha kwa hiyo mimi pia nasimama kumuung a yeye mkono ili 
na yeye kwa wadi yake aweze kupata shule ya cheke chea vile vile n aomba B unge hil i yoyote 
kwake am baye hana nafasi ama  hana ardhi y a kujenga ECDE aje kule kwangu nimkodishie. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you  very much Hon ourable  Mwinyi Mtoto . Yes, 
Honourable  Samuel Mwaura , please make  your co ntribution ? 
Hon. Mwaura:  Ahsante s ana Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa na mimi niweze kutoa 
sauti ya ngu na maoni yangu kuhusiana na  huu Mswada . Kwanza niseme kwam ba nimesikit ika 
kusikia ya kwam ba hakuna shule hata moja katika eneo  la Wadi ya  Airport, mahali M heshimiw a 
Ibrah im Omondi anatoka  kwa hiyo kwa masik itiko hayo na simama kumuunga mkono kwanza . 
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 13 Pili, niseme kwamba kama ushauri mwingi uliotolewa na wale ambao ni viongozi na 
wamezoe a maswala ya Bunge hili ama wameku wepo kwa muda mrefu  hata na  mimi na taka 
kusema ya kw amba h atuwezi kuleta Miswada  yote ama maswa la yote yanay otuhumi za kule 
mashinan i tuyalet e kama Mswada  hasa yale ambayo yana  kitu tunaisha financial implication . Hii 
ni kwa s ababu tunaelewa ya kwamba kuna bajeti na  tunaelewa ya kwamb a kuna  mipango na  
makadir io yote n a yote  yanastahili kuing ia ka tika makad irio yanayo kadiriw a. Kwa h ivyo labda 
niseme  utekelezaji  wa mam bo kama haya inaweza kuwa tatizo wakati tunaelekea ku tekeleza  
lakini nataka niseme baadhi ya wale walio  chang ia kusema ya  kwamba Mheshim iwa Ibrahi m 
ahakikishe ya kwamba s wala  hili limeingi a katika ADP n dio hao ambao wameketi katika Kamati 
ya Fedha na inayohusiana na makadirio ya fedha na mipangilio ya jinsi fedha hizo zitakavyo 
tumika . Kwa hivyo nikisimama nataka ku zungumza  niseme Mwenyek iti wa Kamati ya Fedha  
yuko hapa pamoj a na  Kamati ya ke na  ninajua wamesikia hicho kilio na hawatategemea 
Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi akuje kusukumana sana ili swala hili liweze kuingizwa katika 
ADP kwa sababu wako na masikio na wamesik ia hicho  kilio n a pia ha o ninaami ni ya kwamba 
wanasikitik a kam a jinsi ya mim i nimesikitik ia ndug u yangu Ibrahim. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much. Y es, Honourable  Solomon Ngu gi, 
please make your contributio n? 
Hon. Ngugi : Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spi ka. Nitangulie kureges ha shukran zangu  kwa 
Mwenyezi  Mungu mwingi wa reh ema na nasimama kuunga mkono hoja ya ndugu yangu 
Ibrahim Oyugi Omondi , naunga mkono mia fil mia na ninachoomba nami pia wanapopata hizo 
shule za  chekech ea nina  ufahamu kamili kuwa hakuna shu le ya chekec hea za wa lemavu na 
anapop ewa pawe wanasema friendly to disability  apewe  na njia bora ya wale maana tunao ambao 
ni watoto wa umri wa chekechea ambao  ni walemavu ambao jina linaitwa autism . Mheshimiwa 
Spika na  ufahamu ip o shule ya Tom  Mboya ndiyo wa meweka kama y a walemav u lakini sio 
chekechea ya wale mavu ila naomba hizo zengin e zinapotengezwa wakumbukwe nao. Ni hayo tu , 
ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Solomon Ngugi . Yes, Honourable  
Kibwan a Swaleh ? 
Hon. Kibwan a Sw aleh:  Ahsan te Mheshimiwa  Spika. M heshimiwa Spika  sitoing ilia sana 
hoja ya ndugu yangu ambaye ni  jirani yangu  isipokuwa nimefikiria alikuwa Mwenyekiti wa 
kamati ya elimu h uko nyuma, miaka mitano halafu akapigwa chenga na saa  hii pia  ninaona  pia 
amekuja kulilia tena na fasi. Mheshi miwa Spik a nataka niunga ne na we nzangu waliosema 
kwamba hakuna mlango uliofungwa katika hali ya kupigania haki zao aidha haikuwa captured  
kwa  ADP ma m ahali pengine popote langu ni  huzuni yangu kubwa  kuwa ha ya mambo  huwa 
yanatakikan a tuyafanye wakat i execu tive wako  katika  public partic ipation tuweze ku  mobilize 
watu wetu ili waweze kuja kwa wingi katika public participation  kwa hali ya kutoa maoni yao ili 
pia sisi tukifika kama Kamati ya Fedha tukifany a our ow n public  participation  iwe pia wanaki li. 
Masikiti ko yangu Mheshimiwa Spika una enda kwa public participation  unapata hakuna 
wananchi wa hizo sehemu ambapo ameleta hoja kama hii ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa I brahim 
Bomoa  kwa hio  ningewashauri wenzangu ili tupat e kazi r ahisi kw a sababu pia chan gamoto 
kubwa tut aweza  kupitia Miswada hii huenda tukab adilisha hii ADP yote . Kwa hivyo ingekuwa 
vizuri ningesema kila miaka tunapofika katika mambo ya msururu wa bajeti  cycle tuweze  
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 14 kuchuk ua jukumu hili hata kama ni watu watatu au wan ne kutoka s ehemu ya ko waweze kufika 
pale kwa executi ve na pi a uhakiki she ku wa wamefika wak ati Bunge  limeenda hapo ili yale 
mambo yote ambayo umeyataja yanakiliwe.  Pili Mheshimiwa Spika lazima tuambiane ukweli 
Mheshimiwa Mwaka  amezungumzia jambo zuri twaweza k uwa hapa  twazung umzia kuhusu 
kujengewa ECDE ama ho spitali  lakini u tapata Wadi  hiyo amba yo inazun gumziwa hakuna ardhi 
ya serikali.  Kwa hivyo hakuna siku serikali ita weka pesa mahali ambapo hapana ardhi ya serik ali 
kwa hivyo changamoto zangu kubwa kwa wenzan gu ambao  tuko ha pa swala ardhi pi a tulitie 
maanani  wakati  tunapang a mipan go yetu ya mae ndeleo. K wa sababu hakuna mahali serikali 
itaweka fedha ambapo hapana ardhi ya serikali , kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi n aona ni 
Bunge  na ni  hoja nzuri Waheshimiwa kulet a na pia  tuhakik ishe kuwa tukimal iza budget cycle  
yetu ki la mtu am eweza k uleta maoni ya ke na si lazima eti kila maoni ya Mbunge yoyote lazima 
utayachukuliaje huenda kwengine umefanyiwa na kwengine hujafanyiwa . Hivyo basi  ningesema 
nampongeza ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa  Ibrahim  kwa hoj a yake na mimi ni  kama Mwenyekiti 
sisemi e ti imechu kuliwa tayari lakini ni kupitia Bunge  hili kupitia Kamati hii ndio tunaweza 
kutengeza ile mikakati yote ya serikali ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spik a.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Kibwa na. Yes , Honourable  
Eliud Kima ri, please  make  your contribution . 
Hon. Kimari : Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika . Nasimama kuunga mkono ndugu yangu 
Ibrahim , ni takriban muda wa miaka kumi na miwili tangu serikali ya ugatuzi ianze hapa nchini 
na k ati ya m iaka kum i na miw ili ni ha li ya kutamausha kuona kuwa Momb asa kuna Wadi  
zengine h azina shule ya chekechea na kati ya miaka hiyo kumi na mbili miaka mitano iliyopita 
katika ile awamu pili kat ika Bunge  la Kaunti Mheshimiwa amekuwa  Mwenyekiti  wa Kamat i ya 
Elimu. Akuba li kwanza  alifeli katika  kazi yake aliokuwa amepewa Mhes himiwa Spika ; hata 
kama tunasimama kumuunga mkono CIDP, ADP zote zilikuwa tangu  2017 na kama i likuwa 
kosa kosa si  kosa kosa ni  kurudia kosa ameona tatizo  liko wa pi na nd io hilo ndio anajaribu 
kulitek eleza. Niko ha pa kuunga mk ono Mswada  huu wake na Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia  
idadi  ya Mombasa kusema kweli iko juu ukiangalia kama Wadi  nzima kwa mfano ya kwangu 
Mkomani tuko takriban watu  elfu ha msini ku endelea  na utapat a kweng ine shule ya chek echea ni 
moja na sis i bado ni vi jana nguvu tunazo , kuzaa watoto ndio hao sasa tunazaa lakini itafika 
mahali h ata ile elimu ya bure hatuwezi  furahia . Kwa hivyo hii ni ch angamoto  serikal i ya 
Momb asa na Kamati ya Elimu ningeomb a watilie mkazo kama ni shule za chekech ea angalau 
hata kama ni  kila Wadi  ikipata hata kama ni mbili tatu itakuwa afadhali . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Eliud. Yes, Honourable  Ibrah im 
Omondi, please  reply to the Motion?  
Hon. Omo ndi: Mr. Speaker , first of all I am humbled and I want to take this opportunity 
to thank the Members who contributed toward s this particular Motion. Most ly, I want to thank 
the Members who all hear tily sup ported the Motion  owing to the importance of  going th rough 
this Motion ; I also want  to thank those Members who in the other way might have disagreed with 
this Motion because of som e factors.  Mr. Speaker , I would like to clarify an issue that we  are not  
discuss ing it today , we are not discussing ADP t oday , the matter tod ay was the Motion and 
some times I fail to understand the senior most Members of this House Mr. Speaker they start 
bringing that which is not supposed to be discussed here today.  Mr. Sp eaker,  I did a lot of 
research before I came to t his House, I  met the executive o n this matter, I personally met the 
Governor on this issue .  
June 7, 202 3                                 COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        40 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 15 Mr. Speaker , the Educat ion Chairman who is here as we  are s peaking there is a letter 
which has been w ritten to the  Lands C ommittee and the  Lands Committe e has alre ady compl ied 
on the issue of lan d. On the issue of CIDP , we were discussing a Motion here whether we pass  or 
we do  not pass it but still I want to thank those Members who disagreed in one way or the ot her. 
Mr. Speake r, it is with a gre at con cern that  we acknowledge the abs ence of the public ECDE 
centers at Airport Ward and even other Wards in this particu lar County and this lack of access to 
basic education and literacy for our young children h as sig nificant  implicat ion for their futu re 
academic an d social success. Mr. S peaker, we all know that early childhood education raises  the 
education for the child lifelong learning journey  shaping their cognitive Motion and emotional 
development  and I do not want to talk much . Having em phasi zed on tha t, I just want to say I am 
humb led for the opportunity that you have given my Ward and I want to also appreciate my 
brother here who spoke about the issue of last Assembly, yes, I was the Chair o f the sa me 
Commi ttee. Mr. Speaker  if yo u are leader,  it is importa nt to look at the child ren first, you do not 
take care of yourself and you leave the children , and  that is why Mr. Sp eaker I took the 
opportunity first of all to serve other Members before actually  I could  serve m yself, otherwise 
thank yo u and thank yo u Mr. Speake r. 
[The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) exited the Chair ] 
[The  Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Makarani)  took the seat ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Members . I now 
stand to put a question  that th e Motion by Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi on Est ablish ment of 
early chi ldhood  development centers in Airport Ward be adopted in this Hon ourable  House . 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ]  
 
Honourable  Members , the House stands adjourn until W ednesday  7th of June, 2023 at 
2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 11:49 a.m. 
 
          