May 31 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 31st May, 2018  
The House met at 2:42p .m. 
 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You may have your seats Hon . Me mbers. 
Hon. Members welcome to our today’s sitting. Yes, Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Good a fternoon Hon . Members;  
 First and foremost let me take this opportunity to thank God for seeing us through this 
second session that commenced on Tuesday 13th February , 2018.  Hon. Members;  the primary 
mandate of the County Assembly as per article 185 of the Constitution , 2010 is to legislate 
where our authority is vested in, to represent and to oversight hence protecting the interest of 
the people.  It’s my pleasure to re port to this A ssembly that we have been able to pruden tly 
and responsively perform the se functions as expected of us by the people of Mombasa.  
 Hon. Members;  we all belong to different C ommittees and it i s no doubt that we 
performed our mandates as per the  Standing orders effectively and efficiently. I sincerely 
express my gratitude to your devotion and determination.  Hon. Members;  we can all testify 
that the Motions passed and S tatements made in this House have gone a long way in making 
positive changes no t only in the lives of the people of Mombasa, but also Kenya at large.  
 Hon. Members;  the inductions and capacity buildings that we have attended have 
been of great importance. They have strengthened our skills and expertise to handle complex 
roles of legi slating, representing and oversight as a result enriching the lives of the people of 
Mombasa and solving the society’s most intractable problems.   
 Hon. Members on my part I want to assure you under my stewardship that I will 
remain committed to the people  and to you in discharging my duties whenever called upon.  
 Hon. Members .  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 

May 31 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  As I conclude allow me to wish you all Ramadan Kareem . Let us take this 
opportunity to s pread love and eradicate hatred; m ay the Almighty’s  immaculate grace and 
exceptional wisdom conquer your lives  as you celebrate this Holy M onth.  With those few 
remarks this Assembly stands adjourned until Tuesday 19th June, 2018 at 2: 00p.m. Thank you 
Hon. Members . 
 
The House r ose at  2:47p.m. 
 
 