June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 7th June, 2023  
Third Assembly – Fourty First  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:40p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Temporary Speaker ( Honourable  Abdulkadir Abdulkadir ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : You may all take your seat. 
Please take your seat as we are waiting for a quorum…  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Honourable  Members , I will like to recognize the pre sence of teachers and students from 
St. Thomas Girls Secondary School . I will read out their names:  
1. Alice Chari  
2. Rihanna K emunto  
3. Habiba Mohammed  
4. Mwanakombo Hussein  
5. Zubeda Mbwiya  
6. Lucy Charo  
7. Evelyne Kadide  
8. Emma Uhuru  
9. Maureen Chai  
10. Christine Kazungu  
11. Dorcas M ideye  
12. Saumu Mbongi  
13. Mwanaisha Mwaka  
14. Imm aculate Rehema  
15. Khaula Abdulrahman  
16. Zelda Kadii  
17. Maryann Kavinya  
18. Magdaline Dama  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 19. Claudia Mayaa  
20. Pauline Matsezi  
21. Serena Mramba  
22. Carolyne Zawadi  
23. Anail Ajab  
24. Saumu John  
25. Racheal Salama  
26. Malkia Kazungu  
27. Miriam Amisi  
28. Selina Bendera  
29. Maureen Katana  
30. Lkandida Okuba  
31. Elizabeth Karembo  
32. Valery Mahenzo  
33. Rose Jimbi  
34. Fridah Kwekwe  
35. Nuru Joha  
36. Grace Dama  
37. Judith Tatu  
38. Esha Gavuna  
39. Nuru Tinga  
40. Neema Kanze  
41. Laurinta Mnyazi  
42. Rehema Yongo  
43. Lucy Wanjiku  
44. Fatma Mwenyesa  
45. Yvonne Wawasi  
46. Lydia Pendo  
47. Jamila Nabat  
48. Shamsa  Bakari  
49. Philister Pili  
50. Joyce Mueni  
51. Tatu Kache  
52. Joyce Salma  
53. Jemima Nyadzua  
54. Racheal Pola  
55. Sylvia Rehema  
56. Juliet Nuru  
57. Marcy Oscar  
58. Mercy Daido  
59. Esther Wangui  
60. Peris Nyadzua  
61. Fatma Badi  
62. Wanyua Faith  
63. Philister Tinga  
 
We also have three teachers in charge; we have Mada m Kimani , Madam Monica and Mr. 
Odinga.  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 [Applause ] 
 
[The teachers and students of St. Thomas Girls Secondary School bowed]  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Thank you, you are all welcome.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Honourable  Members , now may ask Hon ourable  Mwi nyi Mtoto and Hon ourable  Patrick 
Mwavula to take this opportunity and welcome these students and our guest, please Hon ourable  
Mwinyi Mtoto from Mwakirunge Ward, please welcome them.  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Wanafunzi wote na walimu kar ibuni 
sana. Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Ahsante . Honourable  
Mwavula, please welcome our guests?  
 
Hon. Mbelle:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity to actually 
welcome our sisters and the mal e teacher that he is in plenary. Allow me to first of all 
congratulate them for making all the way from Kilifi to come and actually see what happens in 
the Mombasa County Assembly…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mine is to also congratulate you r proper decision to always re mains smart, remaining in 
school and focussing on what you think you are going to be benefit to yourself and to your 
parents back at home in future . At some point in our lives,  we were where you were we had a 
vision some of us we were to accomplish the vis ion, some of us we are on the way of 
accomplishing the vision but one thing I will tell you is never lose focus, never tire from 
delivering what you think is your goal and always put God first . We are proud of you , we are 
proud by the fact that you are lad ies and you have put the focus that one day you would either be 
here or in places higher than where we are right now. Thank you so much Mr. Speaker Sir and 
also allow me to thank the teachers for also making sure that these ladies are looking very nice , 
smart and beautiful , congratulation sana Mwalimu  and for all students going back home please 
take our regards to the people of Kilifi and when you go back home take our regards to your 
parents. Ahsanteni sana.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Thank you so much , of essence this is a Kiswahili trip by St. Thomas Girls Secondary 
School . 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 Now may I ask Hon ourable  Mohamed Hassan Ulher to formally welcome them in 
Kiswahili and address them, please do?  
 
Hon. Hassan Ulher:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii adhimu tena 
muhimu kuweza kuongea na ndugu zangu wadogo japo sioni kama naweza kuwa mzazi wa 
yoyote isipokuwa mimi ni mzazi pale nyumbani. Hamjambo wanafunzi ? Mimi kwa majina 
naitwa Hassan M ohamed , ni diwani katika kata ndogo ya Magogoni na mkiangalia ni diwani 
mdogo kabisa kwa umri pamoja na kimo lakini natangulia kusema maneno ambayo ndugu yangu 
ambayo tayari ameweza kutangulia kulisema Mheshimiwa  Patrick Mbelle ya kwamba maisha ni 
hatua na hatua hutofautiana isipokuwa hakuna anayepingwa katika kufikia malengo na azimio 
lake. Mimi nilikuwa mwanafunzi kama nyinyi na sote tulikuwa wanafunzi kama nyinyi lakini 
kinacho  tofautisha sisi na  wale walioko nyumbani ni bahati pamoja na juhudi. Juhudi 
inaambatana na bahati lakini bahati haiambatani na juhudi ikiwa una  bahati hauna juhud i basi 
Mungu  amekupenda zaidi lakini ukiwa na juhudi basi Mungu  atakuongezea bahati. Kitu ninacho  
waambia ni kwamba masomo ni muhimu na lazima kwenu nyinyi kwa kuapata kazi au ajira na 
hata kuangalia familia zenu sio lazima kupata kazi peke yake lakini kuw a yule mzazi anastahili 
ili mwanao atamani kuwa wewe.  Naomba muzidi kusoma kwa bidii mujenge nyumba zenu , 
muheshimu wazazi na kikubwa zaidi mumuabudu Mwenyezi  Mungu , haitegemei ni dini gani 
lakini ujue tu kwamba Mungu  anatuangalia na  tuheshimu sana hao amb ao wako nyuma yenu 
ambao ni walimu kwa sababu hao pia ni wazazi wa mtu yoyote ni  wazazi wetu sote karibuni 
sana katika jengo letu na leo mutaweza kushuhudia mawili matatu kupeleka nyumbani salamu 
zetu ziwafikie watu wa nyumbani ahsanteni sana karibuni wana funzi. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you so much 
Honourable  Ulher for Magogoni for your wise words , thank you very much Honourable  since  it 
is a girl’s school now,  I take the pleasure to ask Hon ourable  Mariam Baimu to also address them 
and welcome them. Give them a word of advice. Karibu , Honourable  Mariam Baimu . 
 
Hon. Baimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii . Mimi kwa majina 
naitwa Mheshimiwa mama Mariam Baimu nawakilisha Wadi ya Frere Town , eneo Bunge la  
Nyali. Mimi wasichana nitawaambia hivi; kawaida mtu yoyote ile azma ama ile ndoto yuko nayo 
akitia bidii Mwenyezi Mungu  humfungulia njia na mimi nimefurahi sana kwamba nyinyi ni  
wasichana tena ni wasichana warembo , tena mko smart . Kwa hivyo mimi nataka katika akili 
zenu mnaporudi kule shule ms ome kwa bidii zaidi ikiwa lengo lenu liwe ni moja kwamba in the 
end of it all  mtatoka kama m ume-excel  mnaenda kani ni university  mnaf uata zile faculty  mnataka 
kufanya ili kesho muwe watu wengine  katika jamii  nina imani kwamba inawezekana.  Tena kitu 
muhimu nyinyi ni  wasichana na kitu chochote kile msichana anataka kufanya anaweza kufanya ; 
nafikiri tukiangalia katika hili Bunge letu tuko kina  mama kadhaa hapa ambao tunawakilisha 
Wadi zetu na wengin e pia ni wale wamechaguliwa ni nominated  lakini all in all  ni kina  mama na 
na nafikiria huwa inasemekana kizungu what a  man can do  a woman can do better . Kwa hio  
mimi nawapa challenge , I would like some years to come  iwe siku fulani kumetoka wasichana 
kadh aa aidha ni huko Kaunti ya Kilifi ama Kaunti ya Mombasa ama wherever kule mtakuwa 
lakini nyinyi muwe katika Bunge  aidha hii ya Kaunti  ama hata ya national hata ikiwezekana 
munaweza in the near future  mpiganie uraisi si inawezekana si inawezekana vijana si 
inawezekana wasichana . Kwa hivyo mimi ninawapongeza na nawapongeza walimu ambao 
wameandamana nao karibuni sana Bunge  letu la Mombasa mujisikie huru msikilize yale 
mtasikia ili kesho mukiwa Bunge  muweze kuongea.  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 Ahsanteni na mbarikiwe sana. Ahsante Bwana S pika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Ahsante . Thank you so much 
Honourable  Members for words of wisdom and inspiration. I hope our visitors are inspired.  
 
STATEMENT S 
RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR STATEMENT BY FIRE OUTBREAK IN KON GOWEA MARKE T BY 
CHAIRPERSON COMMITTE E ON TRANSPORT AND INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
Honourable  Ibrahim , is there an issue? Hon ourable  Bomoa , Hon ourable  Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker . I stand to pursuant to Standing order 41 (2) c to ask a 
statement from the Chairperson.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Ibrahim , you want 
to issue a Statement?  
 
Hon. Omondi : Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Please  take your seat we have 
enough statements ; you will issue yo urs when we are done with the ones in the Order paper.  
 
Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Well, noted.  
 
[Loud consultation s] 
 
Okay yes Hon ourable  Hassan Mohamed , Chairperson Committee on Transport and 
Infrastructure , please respond to the statement. Do you remember the Statement? Please?  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed : Ahsante Bwana Spika kwa kuweza kunipatia fursa ya kujibu 
yale yanaambatana na maswali ambayo yaliweza kujengwa katika jengo hili . Kuambatana na  
maswala tofauti ambayo ninaona ni maswala takriban matatu, lakini hili lililoko mbele yangu ni 
kuhusiana na moto ulioweza  kuebuka pale katika soko la Kongowea ambapo baada ya idara 
husika ikiweko ni uchukuzi pamoja na miundo msingi yaani Transport and inf rastructure  
wamekuja na hoja tofauti za  kuweza kujibu kuweza kuulizwa . Mimi kama Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya idara hiyo na nitaweza kunukuu yale ambayo yameweza kuongelewa kwa sababu ni 
mengi na ninafikiri nitakuwa nimefikisha ile hoja ama majibu ambayo yanaam batana.  Hoja ya 
swala la moto ambalo liliweza  kutokea katika eneo la Kongowea basi katika  yale mapendekezo  
kwa sababu maswala ni matatu na ni  mengi nitaweza kujibu tu kulingana na mapendekezo  
ambapo wananukuu na kusema kwamba , ‘Earth works should be carrie d out prior to approval 
from the responsible agencies.  Fire marshals/fighters can always be informed and standby for 
fire precaution and prevention measures. We further recommend for prosecution for the person 
concerned. There are some authorities who are  aware of the activities but ignorantly fail to 
perform their duties and should be reprimanded.  The conclusion was made that; the cause of the 
fire was not accidental;  it was perceived to be due to negligence  and the owner should be 
charged for causing fir e due to ignorance.   
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika kuna  taarifa ambazo nimeweza kupewa kulingana na swala 
ambalo nina  jibu na yote yakitoka vile vile katika idara ya husika ni kwamba the probable cause 
of fire or the possible causes of fire is bitumen contain ed inside a drum  which was be ing cooked 
by one of the employees  overheated and  blew into flame s ignited nearby  combustible material s. 
The fire spread , fire was confined to its own risk  of origin . The method of extinguishing; the fire 
was extinguished using  one line of delivery hose from fire eight supplemented with water from 
KPA and Jaffer  fire engine and two other boozers from  Jaffery company used to extinguish the 
fire. On injuries , nobody was reported injured during the fire incident  and on losses ; none  was 
immediately obtained  but assessment is yet being carried out . Hayo ndiyo tulioweza kupokea 
katika idara husika na majibu kulingana na hoja ilioweza kuletwa katika jengo hili kuhusiana na 
moto ulioweza kutokea katika soko la Kongowea.  Ahsante Bwana Spi ka.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Samuel Mwaura , 
are you satisfied with the response from the Chairperson Committee Transport and 
Infrastructure.  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Thank  you Mr . Speaker and from the onset I must say from I am  not 
satisfied with the answer given by the Hon ourable  Member and the Hon ourable  Chair Member 
Committee of Transport and Infrastructure , why? Because in his address to what I asked he 
should have first of all address ed my major question , it was not what ca used the fire the re were 
so many other questions that have not been answered . Number one; what is our situation or what 
do they think about devolving the fire engines to the Sub Counties just to make sure that those 
big loses are not experience d anymore . How many fire stations or fire engines do we have in the 
County of Mombasa and how many of them are operational and why is it that we have so many 
that are not operational and another one  and what are the measures that the department is putting 
in place to ensure that there no so much loss that such us we are experiencing loss of properties 
and loss of lives, those one s have not been well addressed. I really hope he will be able to 
address them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahma n Abdulkadir) : Thank you so much 
Honourable  Samuel Mwaura . I have heard you Hon ourable  Hassan , please take note of the 
concern raised by the Hon ourable  Member from Kongowea Ward.  I do suggest that you go back 
to your Committee and perhaps invite the Hon ourable Member to your Committee deliberations 
so that you can sh ed more light on the issues please do so at your earliest convenient.  Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR STATEMENT ON  THE BLOCKAGE OF PUBLIC A CCESS ROA D NEAR 
KIEMBENI BAPTIST CHU RCH  BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON LAN DS, HOUSING AND URBAN 
PLANNING HONOURABLE AMRIYA BOY JUMA  
 
Do we have Hon ourable  Amriya Juma Boy ? 
 
[Silence ] 
 
Do we have the Vice Chair?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Is there any Member of Lands and Housing and Urban Planning Committee to respond to 
the statement?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker, I am a Member of the said Committee  and on behalf of my 
Chair who is not around with us today I would like kindly to request for more time so that we 
can be able to go through the  issue and the come up with a very comprehensive Report. Thank 
you. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Much obliged, you will 
response to this issue in our next sitting, Wednesday  next sitting. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPE RSON COMMITTEE ON TR ANSPORT AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE HONOU RABLE HASSAN MOHAMED ON SOIL EROSION BETWEEN  BANGLADESH , 
MKUPE AND STAFF AREA  IN MIKINDANI    
 
 Before we proceed to that , Honourable  Members ; our young leaners are here for Kiswahili 
trip so am suggesting  where possible all Members contribute in Kiswahili except for the Speaker 
who is excused, the rest of you please use Kiswahili. Yes , Honourable  Hassan Mohamed please?  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed:  Ahsante Bwana Spika . Kujenga majibu kulingana na maswali 
tuliyowez a kuulizwa sisi kama idara ya uchukuzi na miundo msingi ni ishara tosha kwamba 
Idara yetu ni ya utenda kazi , na ni idara ambayo kila Mjumbe wakati wa tofauti imeweza 
kumfikia, ikiwemo barabara, ikiwemo taa ambazo zimeweza kufikiwa . Kwa hivyo ni ishara 
tosha kwamba idara i nafanya kazi inayo stahili ; kulingana na yale ambayo nimeweza kuulizwa 
katika hoja hii nitaweza kunukuu Bwana Spika kwa kizungu kama vile ilivyoandikwa kwa  
sababu tukisema tunaingia kwa Kiswahili tutatoka saa kumi na moja sitaweza kuf uatilia yote 
kwa kina … 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Please just do it in Kiswahili, 
just translate , I will appreciate.  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed:  Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika yale ambayo tumeweza kuja  nayo ni 
kwamba ; sehemu ile iliyoko katika sehemu ya Mikinda ni, Mheshimiwa Spika umenipa wakati 
mgumu lakini tutaendelea hivyo hivyo …, ina ukubwa wa mmomonyoko wa udongo ama ipo 
katika sehemu ambayo jambo hili huweza kutokea kwa njia moja au nyengine bila kizuizi kwa 
sababu ni kitu ambacho katika maisha y a mwanaadamu ama sehemu za ardhi zetu huweza 
kutokea na  ni vigum u sana mtu kuweza kutarajia jambo hili kuweza kutokea muda wowote . Kwa 
hivyo , wakaazi wa eneo lile Mheshimiwa Spika wameweza kuombwa na kutahadharishwa 
kutoka ama kuweka makaazi karibu ya eneo  hili ili kuweza kuepusha yale ambayo mengine 
yanaweza kutokea maafa zaidi ya hili ambalo limeweza kutokea kwa sababu wanasema kwamba 
prevention  is better that cure.  Katika kukinga maafa ni vizuri k uweza kujiepusha zaidi kuliko 
kupata suluhu ama ile natija ; kwa hivyo vile vile kuna  haja ya serikali  ya Kaunti yetu na idara 
husika kuenda kutembelea sehemu ile na kuweza kuweka tahadhari zinazo hitajika kabla ya 
maafa ten a kuweza kutokea .  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika sitakuwa na mengi isipokuwa tunaomba wakaazi wa eneo 
lile kuweza kuepuka sana ile sehemu itaweza kuhatarisha maisha yao na vile vile sisi kama idara 
mimi Mwenyekiti  pamoja na Kamati yangu tutaweza kuzuru lile eneo na kuangalia ni jinsi gani 
engineers  wetu wataweza kuhakikisha wanatoa suluhu ya jambo lile na suluhu ya kupatikana 
kikamilifu. Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you so much . I want to 
believe whoever raised that concerned is satisfied . Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTE E ON TOURISM , CULTURE AND TRADE  
HON OURABLE ABDIRAHMAN ABDULKADI R ON HARASSMENT OF BOAT O PERATORS AND BEACH 
TRADERS AT BAMBURI P UBLIC BEACH  
 
I am well informed that that statement by Hon ourable  Abdirahman Abdulkadir , the 
Committee is yet to have a sitting to deliberate on that matter , so we will have a response to that 
statement in our next sitting. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS AND DRAINAGES  IN 
BAMBURI WARD  BY CHAIRPERSON  COMMITTEE ON TRANSPO RT AND INFRASTRUCTUR E 
HON OURABL E HASSAN MOHAMED  
 
Again , Honourable  Hassan Mohamed, do you have your response ready.  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Please take the floor.  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed:  Bwana  Spika nimeweza kuulizwa hoja ambayo imew eza kuwa 
donda sugu katika Kaunti yetu yote ya Mombasa,  ikiwemo ni barabara za kisasa ambazo sote sisi 
kama wajumbe tunazihitaji kuhakikisha kwamba tunaboresha maisha yetu kwa njia moja ama 
nyengine ikiwemo kukuza biashara na vile vile kuendeleza shughuli zetu za kila siku ambazo ni 
muhimu kujenga uchumi wetu . Kwa hiyo t una haja kuhakikisha kwamba tutapitisha yale ambayo 
tumeweza kujenga katika swala la bajeti ili mimi kama Mwenyekiti niweze kukaa pamoja na 
Kamati na mutatupatia motisha ama changamoto ya ya le ambayo yatakuwa ni kwetu bora zaidi 
kwa kila mmoja wetu licha ya kuwa upo ndani ya Kamati ya miundo msingi na uchukuzi ama 
upo nje ili yote yaweze kutufikia kama vile yaliyowez a kutufikia hapo awali baina yetu sisi . Kwa 
hivyo ni donda sugu kwetu sisi la kini tutahakikisha kwamba tutaweza kulichukulia hatua na 
hatua yenyewe hii ni kuhusiana na fedha Mheshimiwa Spika ambazo tuna imani kwamba 
zitatufikia na tutaweza kuleta suluhu la kudumu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahm an Abdulkadir) : Thank you Hon ourable  Hassan 
Mohamed and I also want to believe that the individual or rather the Hon ourable  Member who 
raised that statement is satisfied with it. Hon ourable  Patrick, you are not satisfied with it?  
 
Hon. Mbelle:  Mheshimiwa S pika, ahsante kwa kunipa fursa hii ya kuweza kutoa hisia 
zangu kuhusiana na yale Mheshimiwa Hassan ameweza kutujibu kuhusiana na  yale tulikuwa 
tumemletea katika statement . Mheshimiwa Spika , nina imani fika ya kwamba Kamati ya miundo 
msingi ina  uweledi na u juzi wa kujua kwamba katika bajeti iliyopita serikali ya Kaunti iliweka 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 kuweka kitita cha pesa cha  kuweza kushughulikia mikasa ama matatizo yanapotokea baada ya 
maswala kama vile ya mvua ama mikasa yoyote mengine inapotokea. Nilipoleta hoja ile 
Mheshimiwa Spika, ilikuwa ni kwa sababu watu wangu katika eneo lile la Bamburi wana  
changamoto kubwa baada ya mvua kunyesha , barabara nyingi ziliweza kukatwa na mvua na 
kuna  nyengine hivi leo madaraja ambayo yalikuwa katika sehemu ile yameweza kuvunjika na 
sasa hawan a uwezo hata wa  kupita kutekeleza shugh uli zao za kila siku . Kwa hivyo nilitarajia 
kwamba mwenzangu Hassan Ulher ataweza kunielezea labda kuna  uhaba wa fedha ama 
wanafanya mikakati ya kuhakikisha ya kwamba hata  kama hawatatengeneza kile kiwango 
ambacho twa hitaji sisi, lakini watafanya bidii kuhakikisha ya kwamba zile sehemu ambazo 
hazipitiki kabisa zinaweza kufanyiwa ukarabati hata  kama ni kwa nukta tano angalau tu watu 
wangu waweze kupita. Alafu mengine ambayo nasema, nina imani na najua kwamba tuko katika  
wakati wa  kutengeneza bajeti , zile barabara ambazo ningetaka mimi ziweze kutengenezwa, nina 
imani na nimeona katika ile ADP na CIDP ya kwamba Gavana ako na nia ya kuweza 
kuzirekebisha, nimeona kwamba kuna kilo mita elfu 15 za kuweza kuwekwa cabro , nimeona  
kuna kilo mita el fu arobaini na tano za kuweza kurekebishwa na kuna fedha zimetengwa . Kwa 
hivyo kwa siku za usoni nina  imani yatafanyika lakini kwa sasa kuna  shida kubwa ambayo 
yahitaji suluhisho la dharura na hilo ndio jambo n ataka kusikia kutoka kwa mwe nzangu na 
aweze kusukuma na kushurutisha department yake ama idara husika iweze  kunipa msaada katika 
wakati hii. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you so much 
Honourable  Patrick. Hon ourable  Mohamed Hassan,  I do suggest you also invite Hon ourable  
Patrick to your next Committee meeting so that you deliberate this issue, failure to which he has 
to come back to this House and re -issue his statement. Yes Clerk?  
 
REQUEST FOR STATEMEN T BY MEMBER OF COUNT Y ASSEMBL Y MEMBER (MCA) BAMBURI 
HONOURABLE PATRICK MBELLE ON THE STATUS OF LAN D OWNERSHIP IN KASHANI , BAMBURI WARD  
 
Yes, Honourable  Patrick Mwavula Mbe lle MCA Bamburi Ward please make your request 
for statement.  
 
Hon. Mbelle:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir, pursuant to Standing order 
41(2)c),  I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee on Land s, Housing and Urban 
Planning regarding the status of land ownership in Kashani after a group of individuals by the 
name , Thathini Development Company, claimed t he ownership of the 4 ,000-acre piece of land 
where the local reside under the stewardship of Gamaka settlement scheme Committee.  Mr. 
Speaker Sir, I request the Committee of Land s, Housing and Urban planning, to collaborate with 
the Governor who is actively  pursuing the matter with the area MP and find a fair and just 
solution that grants the people the rightful ownership of their land by issuing the m with the title 
deeds. I also seek to urge the people of Kashani to maintain peace as the matter is currentl y 
under control even as I am aware that they were highly provoked when a company that was 
contracted by the Thathini Development Company by the name of Business Security Limited 
pitch ed camp at the area to erect a barrier to collect cess from the people th at conduct m urrum 
mining business which again is a preserve of the County government as per the constitution and 
as per the law of this land. I must thank Mr. Speaker Sir, our Speaker Hon ourable  Aharub Khatri 
and our area MP Hon ourable  Rashid Juma Bedzimba , the Governor H is Excellency  Shariff 
Nassir for standing firm with us during that ver y trying moment as of yesterday.  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 I want to a ssure the people of Bamburi that we will use all means in line with the laws of 
the land to make sure they are safe, sound an d retain their ownership and home as per where they 
live right now.  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir and I thank you again.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you Hon ourable  Patrick 
Mwavula . The said concern ; just take your seat Hon ourable  Members , the said concern raised by 
Honourable  Patrick Mwavula is very sensitive, very thorny and as such, it is ruled that the 
Committee on Land Housing and Urban planning respond to this the earliest session possible, 
thank you. Yes, Honourable  Mwinyi M toto, are you up on a point of order?  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Point of Information !  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : You have to wait. The next 
response should be by Hon ourable  Amriya Boy Juma or any Member of the Lands Committee 
since I’m  sure they have not filled any response, will slot it for our next sitting as well. Before 
we proceed, there are two Members who are up to issue statements; I will start with the senior 
Honourable  Ibrahim, please make your statement.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : In Kiswahili.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker I plead with you, am down ! Mr. Speaker , it happened that 
Kiswahili reached my home land when it was already dead, the only thing we only d id to it was 
to bury Mr. Speaker and am not act ually able to transact or to give statement in Kiswahili 
Speaker. I plead.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : You are excused Hon ourable  
Ibrahim.  
 
STATEMENT  
REQUEST FOR STATEMEN T ON THE STATUS OF COMMUNITY HEALTH STRATEGY  BY MEMBER 
OF COU NTY ASSEMBLY (MCA) AIRPORT WARD HON OURABLE IBRAHIM OMONDI  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I stand pursuant to Standing order 
41, (2) c, to seek statement from the Chairperson Health services on community health, ah sorry 
on the Chairpers on Health Services on community Health Strategy, sorry Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to find out if the County government has a policy in place on community health 
strategy and if not what are the plans to have one.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporar y Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : That was very brief and I 
believe it is committed to Committee on Health I think we shall, do we have a response 
Honourable  Jacktone  Madialo, I want to believe you are a Member of that Committee, do you 
want to respo nd right away?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  I forgot I was a Member of that Committee.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Are you a Member of that 
Committee?  
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 Hon. Madialo: Yes, I am.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Okay please.  
 
Hon. Madialo: Give us three  weeks.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Three weeks ?! Next sitting, 
our next sitting please take note of that Hon ourable  Mwinyi  Mtoto please make your statement.  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speak er. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : In Kiswahili.  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Am sorry Sir. Am sorry Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : You don’t make it in 
Kiswahili.  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto: Yes. 
 
The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : You are excused.  
 
REQUEST FOR STATEMEN T BY MEMBER OF COUNT Y ASSEMBLY MWAKIRUNG E WARD 
HONOURABLE MWINYI MT OTO ON THE DEPLORABLE STATE OF ROADS IN MWAKIRUNGE WARD  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto : Mr. Hon ourable  Speaker,  pursuant to Stand ing Order 41, (2) c, I 
hereby request a statement from the Chairperson of the Committee on Transport and 
Infrastructure regarding the deplorable state of roads in Mwakirunge Ward. Hon ourable  Speaker , 
it has come to my attention that the roads in Mwakirunge  Wards have deteriorated significantly 
due to the recent heavy rainfall. Consequently, many of these roads have become impassable 
posing a great inconvenience to motor vehicle s and residen ts alike.  Therefore , I kindly urge the 
Chairperson of Committee on Transport and Infrastructure to provide clarification on action that 
the County government intend to take in order to address this urgent matter. It is imperative that 
immediate that measure is put in place to rectify the situation to ensure that affected r oad is 
restored to a safe and functional condition . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you, may I give …  
 
[Interruption]  
 
Honourable  Madialo , are you up on a point of information or a point of order . 
 
Hon. Ma dialo: I would like to read a statement.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : A statement, are you sure you 
have passed through the right procedure?  
 
Hon. Madialo: [Off mic rophone ]. 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Whose statement?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  [Off microphone] [ Inaudible ]. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Yes, please use the 
microphone.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  I would like to read the statement on behalf of the Honourable  Member, he 
has requested me to do so from Mwakirunge.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Pardon,  say that again you 
want to read a statement on behalf of  the Honourable  Member from Mwakirunge who is seated 
right next to you? ! 
 
Hon. Madialo:  He is not feeling quite well after  reading the first one.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Just take your seat , let us wait 
for Hon ourable  Hassan Mohamed to respond to the statement by Hon ourable  Mwinyi Mtoto.  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed:   Mheshimiwa  Spika nafikiri leo utaweka  kwenye kumbu kumbu 
zako na kunukuu ya kwamba nimeweza kuamshwa kwa za idi ya mara ya nne. Kwa hivyo 
tunapokuwa tunapitisha zile bajeti ama zinatofautiana muwe na subra na  muwe na moyo wa  
kutambua kwam ba tuna  kazi nyingi  sisi kama idara ya uchukuzi na miund o msingi ya kufanya 
zaidi ya idara nyingine, hili mwanzo naomba sana Waheshimiwa muliweke katika akili. Kwa 
hivyo kwa jambo ambalo tumeweza kusikiza kutoka kwa ndugu yangu Mwakirunge hii ardhi 
haipo sawia na haipo sawa sawa kama sehemu zinavyo tofautiana . Mwakirunge imekuwa na 
shida kuanzia dunia iumbwe, kuanzia Adamu na Hawa lakini kwa sababu idara ipo katika 
mikono salama, mimi kama engineer  niliweza kusoma shahada yangu miaka sita katika chuo 
kikuu cha Technical University nakwambia kwamba miaka mitano i takuwa salama na utaweza 
kuregeshwa katika ofisi yako baada ya kufanya kazi tunazo stahili. Sisi kama Waheshimiwa, 
tutakapo ga wanyiwa zile sehemu tutambue kwamba zipo sehemu zilizo na haja zaidi kuliko zile 
nyengine, hii ndio suluhu peke yake … 
 
[Interrupti on] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Kibwana, I 
demand Hon ourable  Hassan Ulher be heard in silence , please take your seat.  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed: Katika kitu ambacho kiko wazi nani kitu cha ukweli Bwana 
Spika sisi Waheshimiwa k utambua yale tunayohitaji zaidi na kile tunahitaji muhimu kuliko 
chengine. Ndugu yangu wa Mwakirunge unaweza ku mtetea kwa hilo na kusema kuwa bajeti 
ambayo im eundwa katika kuhakikisha kunaundwa barabara na kurekebisha zingine yeye ni 
miongoni mwa yule anah itaji zaidi kuliko hata yule diwani wa eneo hili hapa tulioko wa old 
town hii iko wazi zaidi kwa sababu hajafikiwa na miundo msingi kuliko mtu mwengine yeyo te 
ama sehemu zingine zozote, kwa hivyo mimi kama Mwenyekiti  wa miundo msingi nitahakikisha 
kwamba u sawa umefanyika kwa yule anaehitaji na nina  hakika kwamba sisi waheshimiwa 
tutaweza kuona ni nani anahitaji zaidi ya mwengine. Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman  Abdulkadir ): Well, noted Hon ourable  
Hassan Mohamed. Yes, you want to  issue a statement or you want respond to that as well.  
 
Hon. Mbelle:  Mr. Speaker , I am aware that the Member of Old Town is in this House and 
I don’t know if he is comfortable that he does not need roads ! I’m sure he needs more than just 
roads but in that  same infrastructure department …. I seek your  clarification on that. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you Hon ourable  
Patrick, your intervention is appreciated , however the Hon ourable  Member from Old Town w ill 
speak for himself when given the opportunity and which is not today. Yes Hon ourable  Madialo , 
please proceed in Kiswahili.  
 
REQUEST FOR STATEMEN T FROM MEMBER OF COU NTY ASSEMBLY (MCA) MWAKIRUNGE WARD 
HONOURABLE MWINYI MT OTO ON OVERFLOW OF MWAKIRUN GE DUMP  SITE 
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Give it a try.  
 
Hon. Madialo : I plead with you, I plead with you, I have not reprogramed my mind to 
read in Kiswahili.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman  Abdilkadir ): Clerks, please next time will it 
be an order to have these statements sometimes drafted in Kiswahili. Yes , proceed Hon ourable  
Madialo.  
 
Hon. Madialo : Well guided Mr. Speaker Sir. Hon ourable  Speaker,  in accordance with the 
Standing order 41, (2 ) c I request a statement from the Chairperson of the Committee on 
Environment and Solid Waste Management regarding the present status of the Mwakirunge 
dump site situated in Mwakirunge Ward.  Honourable  Speaker , Mwakirunge dumpsite has 
reached its maximum capacity and there  is causing obstructions on the road leading to the site, 
these deteriorating conditions not only present an unsightly appearance but also poses 
significant environmental and health risks to the surrounding communities. Hon ourable  Speaker , 
the residen ts and stakeholders are deeply worried about the persistent road blockage which 
impeach proper waste disposal which jeopardize public Health . Therefore Mr. Speaker , the 
Chairperson of Committee of Environment of solid waste management we urge him to inquire 
and provide a comprehensive report on the following matters.  
1. The current condition of the Mwakirunge dumpsite along with the detailed 
information on the plans in place by the County government of Mombasa to this pressing issue  
2. The proposed timeline for implementing viable solutions and any measures to 
prevent similar occurrence in the future.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Well, noted , Chairman 
Honourable  Mwalimu Kambi would you like to resp ond?  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika .  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 Mbali kama Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati ya Mazingira tutaleta majibu katika kikao kijacho  
Inshallah . Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay I think that  is 
acceptable ; we will have the response in our next statement hour , I believe we are done with 
statements? Perfect ! yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
APPROVAL OF LOAN FAC ILITY TO SETTLE PEND ING DEDUCTIONS  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya , Chairperson Committee on Finance , Budget 
Appr opriation please move the Motion.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , since we have students 
from Kilifi who have come for Kiswahili studies or tour and we know very well there is 
somebody who is very good in Kiswahili with due respec t allow me to ask the Leader of 
Majority to take over because I think the students need to learn and it  is very important when 
they appear here and go back again to Kilifi to learn the procedure and the process in this 
Honourable  House . So kindly allow use  your powers and allow Leader of Majority to read for 
me. Thank you.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Leader of 
Majority , please read the Motion on behalf of Hon ourable  Kibwana Baya in Kiswahili of course .  
 
Hon. Mw amwiri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ah sante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  
wa Kamati ya Fedha na Makadirio ya Bajeti  kwa hesh ima hii ya kunipa fursa kusoma hoja hii 
kwa lugha teule, lugha tanzu, lugha mama ya mji wetu wa Mombasa. Mheshimiwa S pika, 
niombe idhini ya mkopo kukidhia mikato baki ; Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kuleta hoja kama 
ifuatavyo ; 
 TUKIFAHAMU ya kwamba sh eria ya us imamizi ya fedha ya mwaka , 2012 inampea 
mamlaka Mwana Kamati  mkuu wa idara ya fedha katika baraza la Kaunti kuweza kukopa 
fedha kwa minajili y a ser ikali chini ya hali maalum ; 
 
TUKIFAHAMU zaidi ya kua ser ikali Gatuzi inapania kuomba ruksa ya Bunge  hili 
Mheshimiwa Spika kukidhia ruksa ya kuomba mkopo kutoka kwa banki ya Equity kwa 
kiwango cha sh. 505,106,025.55 kuweza kukidhia madeni baki ya mikat o ya wafanyikazi 
kwa awamu ya mwezi wa nne, tano, sita na saba mwaka , 2022 ; 
 
FAUKA ya hayo njia mbadala ziliweza kuangaziwa Mheshimiwa Spika lakini njia bora 
katika suala hili iliafikiwa ya kwamba ni kuweza kupata mkopo huu kwa kuweza kukidhia 
dharura hii;  
 
HIVYO BASI kukosa kulipa mikopo hii Mheshimiwa Spika itapelekea changamoto za 
kisheria kwa Serikali Gatuzi na vile vile kuweza kuharibu jina la Gatuzi na wafanyikazi wa 
Gatuzi  letu kwa washika  dau wengine hivyo  basi niombe Bunge  hiki kuamua kama 
ifuatavy o; 
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 1. Bunge hili la Mombasa liweze kuidhinisha mkono kutoka banki kuu ya Equity kwa 
kiwango cha Sh.505,106,025.55 ili kulipa mikato baki tunayodaiwa ; 
 
2. Serikali  Gatuzi  kwa mujibu wa sehemu 140(1) sehemu ndogo ya Kanuni za 
usimamizi wa fedha ya mwaka 2012, kuh akikisha ya kwamba loni na kanuni zake ziweze 
kuafikiwa kwa kuzingatia ikiwemo sehemu ya 142 ya kanuni za us imamizi wa fedha na 
majukumu yake na pamoja na us imamizi za maswala ya fedha na maudhui yake na vile vile 
mipango na makadirio ya ser ikali Gatuzi ya  masuala ya madeni na mipango ya kus imamia 
madeni . 
 
3. Serikali Gatuzi  kuhakikisha wakati mwafaka asikukengeuka katika kulipa mkopo 
huu wa kiwango katika wakopo huu kwa kiwango cha kila mwezi cha 91,745,455.05 
nitaregelea Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Athman 
Mwamwiri, no Member shall read a speech but a Member may read short extracts from read and 
printed papers, are you reading from the printed papers? You not allowed to read … 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mw amwiri): Mheshimiwa Spi ka, sijadili hoja nasoma 
hoja! 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): You are moving a Motion . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mw amwiri): Sijapata hata wa kuniunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): You are moving a Motion . 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mw amwiri): Najenga hoja nipate wa  kuniunga mkono 
ndio nitaingia hoja.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): And that way you  are not 
allowed to refer.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mw amwiri): Na Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna vile utajenga 
hoja kwa kutokisoma ulic hokiandika katika hoja yako inapokuja kuchangia . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): It is only with the permission 
of the Speaker . 
 
The Leader of Majo rity (Hon. Mwam wiri): Inapokuja kuchangia ndio ni suala la kwamba 
unachangia pasi na kulisoma lakini Mheshimiwa Spika hii hoja ni hoja ya  kiser ikali ni hoja 
yenye uzito na hakuna vile utaweza kua na kumbukumbu ya makadirio yaliowekwa hapa pasi 
kua na nukuu sahihi kama ilivyoandikwa vinginevyo tasoma tutasema mambo tofauti na 
yalioandikwa na itakuja kutufunga kama Wabunge  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): And the Standing order 76(2) 
says; the Speaker may allow a Member …! 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mw amwiri): Kwa ruhsa yako Bwana Spika. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): You are allo wed.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mw amwiri): Mheshimiwa Spika sehemu;  
3. Katika ombi la hoja hii Mheshimiwa Spika tunaomba ya kwamba serikali Gatuzi 
baada ya kupata idhini hii ili Wabunge  waweze kulipa deni la mkopo huu kwa wakati unao 
stahiki kwa makadirio ya Ksh. 91,747,455.55 kwa  kila mwezi kama ilivyo b ajetiwa  kwa mapato 
yalioko ; 
 
4. Wizara ya fedha Mheshimiwa Spika ibebe jukumu la kus imamilia na kupeana 
taarifa na Ripoti  za mkopo huu na matumizi yake kwa Bunge  hili. 
 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nimuombe Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa Fedha aweze kuafiki 
hoja hii. A hsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): This Motion belongs to 
Honourable  Kibwana , so I suggest you choose another person to second it Hon ourable  Athman 
Mwamwiri. 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mw amwiri): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mhe shimiwa 
Spika , nimu inue Mheshimiwa ambae pia ni Mwana Kamati katika Kamati ya Fedha na 
makadirio ya b ajeti Juma Mwalimu  Kambi kutoka  kata ndogo ya Shika Adabu mpaka wa 
Mombasa na Gatuzi  la Kwale kuweza kuunga mkono hoja hili.  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Mheshimiwa  Spika, nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii . Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Much obliged . Honourable  
Members , I now propose the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Kibwana Baya on approval 
of loan facility to settle pending deductions be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same 
terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Baya please now make your contribution. Your personal 
contributions.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon ourable  Speake r. Allow me to support the Motion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and also share the statements that is being carried in this Motion, the issue h ere is very simple ; 
the pending payments or statutory deductions belonging to Members , that is staff of the County 
government under the leadership of Hon ourable  Abdulswamad Sheriff Nas sir through  the 
financial department is seeking to have a loan repayment  that is totaling amount of 
Sh.505,025.55 and the money  being paid is pending in the month of April, May, June, July , 
2022 . So those are the four months and Hon ourable  Speaker if you look at the Motions very 
clearly the Assembly will be given updates and r eports which is very important because you 
cannot approve money if they are not going to give us reports in future then we will not be able 
to approve borrowing . So, Mr. Speaker I ask my colleagues here just to support the Motion so 
that our staff who are still having problems meeting their needs so that to get these facilities and I 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17 hope that the County government will keep her promise which is that the government to pay 
every month Sh.91,745,455.05 which must be budgeted within the budget timeline . So in short 
I’m happy that once we pass this Motion, our staff will be able to get their money in time and 
make the daily means and also to improve their livelihood. So , I support and ask my colleagues 
to support this Motion. Thank you.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Ahsante . Now may I ask 
Honourable  Juma Mwalimu Kambi , the seconder of this Motion to make his contribution . 
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Ahsante sana Bwana Mwenyekiti  kwa kunipa fursa hii . Mimi 
nimesimama kuweza kuunga mkono hoja hii m ara ya pili na vilevile nitoe changizo zangu ya 
kwamba wafanyikazi na washika  dau tofauti wako na madeni ambayo wanadai katika Kaunti 
yetu kwa hivyo itakua  vyema watu waweze kukopa ili kutimiza madeni kama tunavyojua dawa 
ya deni ni kulipwa. A hsante sana B wana Spika.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you . Yes, Honourable  
Hamida Vice Chair of Committee of Finance , Budget and Appropriation.  
 
Hon. Noor : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity and I want to welcome 
the gi rls school from Kilifi . As Iam standing here I am the Vice Chair of Finance and I welcome 
you all.  Mr. Speaker , I do support this Motion because as you are well aware that we have a lot 
of pending deductions for the staff and since that we have asked from equity to give us the loan 
and which is going to be spread out that we are going to be paid within four months and which is 
going to have a total of Sh.91,745,455.05 . I think that will be very good now that our staff will 
feel that their actions will be go ing through smoothly as they are being deducted from their 
salary,  I do stand here to support the Motion . Thank you very much.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you for your 
contribution . Yes, Hon ourable  Fadhili Mwalimu Deputy Sp eaker please make your contribution.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kunipa fursa hii kuchangia yale yal io yangu ambayo yaambatana na hoja hii ikiwa mbele yetu . 
Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa hakika inas ikitisha sana k uona kua unakatwa pesa alafu una pesa zile 
mwisho kwa kuisha iwe huoni faida yake . Mheshimiwa Spika nasema hivi kua kuna watu ambao 
hukatwa kwa mfano tuseme vile NHIF na wanapokatwa pesa zile alafu waende mahospita li 
wakose huduma kwa sababu pesa ile haija fikishwa kule ambako kuna  stahiki, kusema kweli 
hapo inakua hatua haitendei haki wananchi wetu, ndipo  saa na nash ukuru viongozi waliof ikiria 
kuleta hoja hii twaelewa kuwa serikali  kuu inach ukua mda kuleta hazina yetu ya Kaunti  huku 
chini ser ikali za ugatuz i zinapata tabu na hoja ilivyo imeelezea wazi mp aka mipangilio ya 
vyenye ambavyo Kaunti itahitajika ama Gatuzi  letu la Mombasa litahitajika kulipa pesa hizi 
ambazo tunataka kuomba kwa manufaa ya watu wetu .  
Mheshimiwa Spika , nataka ieleweke ku wa pesa hizi a mbazo zinaombwa kama ilivyo 
kwenye hoja ni pesa ambazo si za  kutufaidi sisi ama si za kufaidi Gavana  ila zitaenda kufaidi 
watu wetu wa Mombasa hususan wale wafanyikazi kwa sana . Kwa hiyo mimi nawaomba 
Waheshimiwa wenza tuweze sote kukubaliana ili tuweze ku tatua shida ambayo watu wetu 
wanapitia ikiwa Bunge  hili litaweza kukubaliana na tuelewe ku wa Mheshimiwa Spika hizi si zile 
pending bills  hizi hatulipi wale wana  kandarasi,  wala hizi hatujilipi sisi Waheshimiwa , wala hizi 
hatulipi wale wafanyikazi wetu ila zinaenda kuwafanyia huduma ama zinaziba yale mapengo 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 18 yalikua ili waweze kupata shughuli zao waweze kupata huduma bila matatizo . Mheshimiwa 
Spika , mimi namuunga mkono  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti aliyefikiria  iko haja ya kuleta hoja hii 
mbele ya Bunge  letu kuweza kuwasaidia watu wetu kuweza kuwatendea haki wananchi wetu wa 
Mombasa . Mimi nawaomba Waheshimiwa wenzangu tuweze kupitisha hoja hii na vilevile 
Mheshimiwa Spika tunaomba maadamu tumesoma hapa kuwa ser ikali ya ugatuzi iweze kulipa 
kwa miezi minne  kama ilivy osemwa hapa na iwe itakuwa inalipa Sh.91,745,455.05 tunaomba 
serikali  Gatuzi iwe itafuata haya matakwa yatakuwa  yamewekwa hapa,  iwe italipa madeni haya 
kama ilivyosemwa ili Mheshimiwa Spika vilevile tuweze kutendea watu wetu haki kwa sababu 
ikiwa serikali  itachelewa kufuata haya maagizo yamewekwa hapa tutakuwa tunajiweka katika 
pahali ambapo tutaweza baadae  kwenda kulipa  interest  ambazo hazina faida ila itakuwa ni 
hasara kwetu .  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba kupitia kwa Mwenyekiti  wa hii Kamati k uwe 
kutakuwa na ufuatilizi wa uhakika na wa  kisawasawa  ahakikishe ya kwamba kama 
tulivyopitisha hii hoja hizi pesa ziwe zitakuwa ni zenye kulipwa hio benki tutakuwa tumeenda 
kupata huo mkopo kama inavyoturuhusu PFM Act Bunge  hili la Kaunti ndio linaweza k upeana 
ruhusa wa Gavana aweze kuchukua mkopo . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba tuwe 
tunafuatiliza uhakika kuhakikisha kuwa deni hili linaenda kulipwa ili tusiwe tutakuwa ni wenye 
kuingia kwa hasara ya baadae . Kwa hayo mengi mimi naomba wenzangu tusim ame pamoja 
tuunge mkono.  Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable Members , because 
of time and we have another Motion to debate let me take…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
Honourable  Patrick , you have already made your contribution somewh ere. Now I give the 
opportunity to Hon ourable  Frankline Makanga and then I will give to Hon ourable  Madialo and 
then we will finish it up with Hon ourable  Mwaura.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii na pia tuwakaribishe 
wageni wetu kutoka Kilifi, kwamba hapa ndio nyumbani, kitovu cha Pwani … 
 
[Interruption ] 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Ibrahim , you seem 
agitated, is there an issue bothering you? Please rise up ? 
 
Hon. Om ondi:  Mr. Speaker I am not here to go against what you have said but, I had a 
very important point to pass through Mr. Speaker through your omission Mr. Speaker when Hon. 
Member has done and his deliberations then, I would request that you allow me to give  a very 
important and sensitive towards the motion thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Well,  noted . Your agitations 
are valid ; however,  the Speaker reserve s the right to choose whoever speaks yes, please proceed.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika umeongoza Bunge hili kwamba tujaribu 
sana, ikiwezekana leo tuonge e lugha ya nyumbani ambayo ni Kiswahili, na tunashukuru kwa 
mwongozo wak o.  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 19 Kwa utangulizi Mhe shimiwa Spika niseme naunga mkono hoja hii, lengo lake likiwa ni  
kutatua tatizo ya ile mikato ambayo huwa inakatwa Mhe shimiwa Spika, alafu inakosa 
kufikishwa walengwa ama ofisi ambazo huwa zimelengwa . Lakini Mhe shimiwa Spika, naomba 
uniruhusu ili tuweze kupata ujumbe zaidi kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti ya kwamba tumeambiwa 
tunaomba Ksh s Millioni 505, 50 … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members hold on, 
Honourable  Leader of Majority what seems to be making you giggle, please share with us. We 
are in the middle of a very important contributi on by Hon ourable  Frankline Makanga, so I 
suggest that he be heard in silence, proceed.  
 
Hon. Makanga: Ndio Mhe shimiwa  Spika ; kwamba hapa tumeona zile pesa tunazokopa 
zikiwa Millioni Kshs . 505, 106, 025 na labda ni mapeni ama sumni lakini tutajua tukiendele a 
kwa sababu Mswahili  yuko hapa na Mhe shimiwa Spika ukiangalia yale malipo ambayo 
nimes ikia ikisemekana italipwa kwa mda wa miezi minne, ukipiga hio hesabu haitoshei  Kwa 
hivyo labda Mwenyekiti atuongoze kama italipwa elfu milioni  91 kwa miezi minne Mheshim iwa 
Spika hazifiki … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, just hold on . Yes, 
Honourable  Mwamwiri are you up on a point of information?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Mheshimiwa  Spika katika ombi la tatu la 
hoja hii imetaja tu  ya kwamba kuwa itakuwa ikiregesha mregesho wa banki tuliyokopa kwa 
kiwango sawa cha milion Kshs 91,145.455.05 pasi kutaja idadi kamili ya miezi, kwa hivyo 
kukifikia kile kiwango tulichokopa atajumulisha kivyake, lakini hakuna mahali tu menuk uu miezi 
minne Mheshimiwa Spika  Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): We do appreciate your 
information,  however let us avoid unnecessary interjections. We will give the mover of th e 
Motion an ample time to respond to all this yes, proceed please?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa sababu ya m wongozo 
wako nafikiri hio ya mda gani italipwa imesemeka hapa na iko katika rekodi za Bunge hili, ndio 
maana nimeweza ku  note na nime weza kuha kikisha kwamba imes ikika ili tu pate ujumbe wa 
sawa. Mhe shimiwa Spika pia katika hali ya kuomba fedha hizi na hapo nyuma tumekuwa na 
Mswada kama huu ama hoja kama hii na  tukaelezewa kinaga ubaga kama kutakuwa na ada ama 
interest ambayo itaweza kulipika . Kwa hii hatujaelezewa hii pesa ina poombwa katik a benki ya 
Equity, italipwa kwa interest  gani, i li pia sisi kama Bunge tufanye wajibu wet u wa kuju a, jee hii 
interest  ambayo inalipishwa iko within the limits or the regulations that are there  kufikia sas a 
Mheshimiwa  Spika. Nyingine ambayo pia  hatujaelezewa ; je labda kwa sababu ya uhusiano wetu 
mzuri sisi na benki ya Equity , je Kaunti yetu ama s erikali yetu labda imepewa ule mda unaitwa 
moratorium  mda ambao kabla tuanze kulipa tutaweza kujipanga . Kwa sababu tunajua serikali 
yetu bado haijakuwa na uwezo wa kukusanya mapato ya kutosha  Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa 
sababu nimetangulia kusema mimi naunga mkono, nataka niunge mkono kwa sababu hii licha ya 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 20 kwamba hii inaonyesha ni maswala ya fedha ambazo hazikulipwa mwaka jana mwaka 2022,  
athari kama vile Mhe shimiwa  Spika alivyosema ya pesa hizi kukatwa na kukosa kulipwa kule . 
Ni kwamba kuna wakati watu wanalipwa mishahara, lakini ule mshahara wanashindwa kuufikia, 
kwa sababu wale wenye benki mahali watu walichukua mikopo wanazuia zile pesa , kuna watu 
ambao w alichukua bima ama insurance premiums , lakini ikafika mahali haiwezi kufika maturity  
kwa sababu haikuwa inafuatiliziwa ama haikuwa imetimilika kulingana na vile ilivyokuwa 
inatarajiwa kulipwa. Kwa hivyo zoezi hili ambalo ni lakuweza kuondoa hii shida ambay o 
imekuwa donda sugu, donda s ugu Mheshimiwa Spika huwa halitibiki. Kile unafanya  inaitwa 
palliative care , ile tu kutibu maumivu ukiendelea na ugonjwa wako.  Kwa hivyo hii Mheshimiwa 
Spika nafikiri ni njia ambayo itatusaidia sana kuweza kuleta suluhu ya mat atizo ambayo 
tumekuwa nayo na kwa sababu sisi kama Bunge pia tuna haki ya kupeana mwelekeo … 
 
[Inter ruption]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Frankline please?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Namalizia kwa dakika moja Mhe shimiwa  Spika . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): One minute it is.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ndio, kwa sababu sisi pia kama Bunge tun a haki ya kupeana mwelekeo 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni kwamba hii ilifanyika hapo nyuma labda kabla uongozi uliopo. Kile 
tungeomba ni kwamba Mhe shimiwa  Spika hapa tulipo kwenda mbele mishahara ya wafanyikazi, 
ilipwe kama gross -salary  na sio net salary , hii itama anisha kwamba katika makadirio yao 
watakuwa na uwezo wa kulipa hizi deduction bila kuzichelewesha ili tusiweze kuleta hizi shida 
ambazo zim ewakumba wafanyi  kazi wetu.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you Honourable  
Frankline , I believe your concerns have been well captured by the Chairman who will respond to 
it. Yes, Honourable  Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo : Bwana Spika kwa  sababu ya mda sitachangia lakini naunga mkono.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you so much . Yes, 
Honourable  Samuel Mwaura?  
 
Hon. Mwaura: Mheshimiwa Spika , nami pia naunga mkono kwa sababu ninaelewa yale 
ambayo wafanyikazi wetu w anapitia, ila na mimi nilikuwa na swali kama mwenzangu kuhusiana 
na hizi fedha zinaonekana ni za mwaka 2022 … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Kibwana , those 
question s are directed to you ... 
 
[Interruption]  
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 21 Honourable  Samuel , just wait ! Honourable  Kibwana , those question s are directed to you. I 
want you to take note on them, so that you respond to them yes proceed now.  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Ahsante M heshimiwa  Spika . Nasema kwamba hata nami ninaunga mkono 
ikizingatiwa y a kwamba wafanyikazi wetu wa Kaunti hii ya Mombasa wanapitia hali ngumu ; 
mateso mengi, hususan wakati wanapoenda kwa hospitali na wanaambiwa bima zao hazijaweza 
kulipwa . Kwa hivyo hawawezi kutibiwa, unashangaa mfanyikazi ama daktari kutoka kwa 
hospitali ye tu ya Makadara ama C oast G eneral, anakosa kutibiwa kwa sababu premium  zake 
hazijaweza kulipwa . Hio ndio sababu kubwa ambayo inasab abisha tuunge huu M swada mkono 
ila Mswada huu Mheshimiwa  Spika tunaona fedha zinazodaiwa kukopwa ni za mwaka 2022  
fedha , hizi ni hakika ya kwamba fedha hizi zilikatwa lakini maelezo ya kwamba zilikatwa 
zikakosa kufikishwa mahali zilistahili, yalikuwa ni ya muhimu yawe yakieleza hili Bunge kwa 
sababu tunahitaji accountability  ama tunahitaji katika kila shillingi inayotoka katika f edha za 
Kaunti hii zijulikane kwa nini hazikufika na ni kwa nini zilikosa kulipwa na pia tuulize ya 
kwamba kama ni za mwaka 2022, jee kufikia sasa huu wakati tulioko zimeendelea kulipwa ama 
bado zingali  zimebaki kwanzia wakati huo ! Tusije tukawa tunalipa y a miaka hio ambayo imepita 
na mkopo na ili  hali za wakati huu pia hazijakuwa ama hazijaweza kulipwa.  Mheshimiwa Spika , 
kuna haja sana ya sisi hata kama tunapitisha tuweze kuelewa maswala haya,  kuelewa hii mikopo 
kama vile Mheshimiwa ameuliza, hii mikopo i tatuathiri vipi kwa upande wa interest na mambo 
mengine . Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you for your 
contribution, now I will give this opportunity  to Hoourable . Ibrahim who seems to have very 
pressing concerns.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): I think you will be the last 
person to contribute . 
 
Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker for opportunity.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdul kadir ): Yes, pardon ! Just take a 
minute ...Yes, Honourable  Nyota you have an issue with my decision? Okay yes Hon ourable  
Ibrahim.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity . As I have said, Mr. Speaker 
you have heard some of the Hon ourable  Memb ers who have spoken before me ; Honourable  
Hosana  and Hon ourable  Mwaura , Mr. Speaker respectively, they have tried to poke holes on this 
particula r Motion that  is here today.  Mr. Speaker , I would like to be given … 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Ab dulkadir ): You want my attention?  
  
Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker kindly , please . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): You have it, considered it.  
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 22 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker it’s true and that one comes search lik e question comes;  you 
know we are dealing with a sensitive matter here Mr. Speaker. When we are talking about money 
amounting to over five hundred million, it’s a very sensitive matter that we cannot just come 
here and just say yes Mr. Speaker, no! We need to ask deeply to go through the document I 
understand, you have heard the senate some of them have said that the MCAs do not do their 
oversight up to date, that some of us we don’t know our mandate, that we go to bed with our 
executives, they talk a lot of nonsense and that is why it ’s very important that such a motion is 
laid in the House is very important we have to discuss it in comprehensive ly. So I am supporting 
the M otion , moreover ; I would like to urge the Chairman of this particular C ommittee next time, 
it is very important to  have a session with Members especially when it comes to these matters, so 
that Members should understand deeply . You have heard some questions that has been asked 
here and they are very important, so that after that Members can be very much well informed and 
then such question can be avoided Mr. Speaker  Thank you , I support.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Very contradictory remarks by 
Honourable  Ibrahim ! There is  no need of us having consensus , we are here so that we can have 
differen t issue s, different views and everyone is allowed to make their contribution so you are 
also allowed to ask and poke questions where you want to seek clarification. L astly on this 
Motion , I will give the opportunity to the Leader of Majority to make contri bution and I want 
him to be very brief.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika yale yote nimp ongoze Mheshimiwa  Gavana kwa kuja na pendekezo hili ; ifahamike 
kwamba ni wajibu wa serikali kurithi yale mazuri na ka dhalika kurithi yale mabaya. 
Mheshimiwa Spika , serikali yetu ya awamu ya tatu imerithi baadhi ya madeni ikiwemo mikato 
ya wafanyikazi  na ni wajibu wetu kuafiki kama Bunge kupeana ruhusa hazina yetu ya gatuzi 
kuweza kuingia kwenye mkato baina ya be nki na ha pa imepe ndekezwa E quity kupata pesa 
kukidhia haja  hii. Mheshimiwa  Spika , wajibu wetu sisi ni kuidhinisha kama ilivyo katika ibara 
ya  mia moja arubaini sehemu ndogo ya kwanza ya usimamizi ya fedha ya mwaka 2022.  
Mheshimiwa Spika, baada ya idhini yetu hi i, hapo ndipo hazina itashuka chini kwenye sehemu 
mia moja arubaini, sehemu ndogo ya kwanza (a) ambayo inazungumzia ya kwamba, sehemu mia 
moja na kumi na mbili ya katiba inapeana maelekezo nini ikafanyike ikiwemo ile mikataba 
kuingiliwa.  Sasa hivi Mhe shimiwa  Spika hoja hii isingeambatana na  mikataba kabla hatujapeana 
idhini ya waziri kut ekeleza hilo . Kwa hivyo baada ya hapo Mhe shimiwa  Spika Waheshimiwa 
wako sahihi kuomba mkataba ulioko na zile riba ambazo zimeitishwa kupitia kwa Mwenyekiti 
katika hilo.  Vile vile Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tunakubali ya kwamba kuna changamoto ama 
makosa yalifanyika katika utangulizi, kwa sababu sh eria ya uajiri i nasema , ‘Mu ajiri ana ruhusa 
ya kukata mkato wa mfanyikazi na kubakia nayo kwa takriban siku tisa kabla kuufikisha katika 
taasisi zinazostahiki.’  
Mheshimiwa Spika katika hili s erikali iliyotangulia na hata hii sasa tumekuwa na 
changamoto ya kupata mgao kutoka kwa serikali kuu na hii imechangia wakati mwengine watu 
kuunga unga kutekeleza wajibu wa mshahara na yale mikato inayo stahiki kwenda kukosekana 
kwa wakati unaostahiki na tunashukuru ya kwamba limewekwa katika mizani hili na 
linawajibikiwa ya kwamba yale madeni yote ya wafanyikazi waliokatwa waweze kukidhiwa ili 
na wao wawe katika mazingira sahihi na katika sura pendekezi ama sura inayopendeza katika 
taasisi kuhusika. Binaf si Mheshimiwa  Spika naunga mkono swala hili kwa niaba ya 
Waheshimiwa wenza kuweza kuunga mkono ili kuweza kukidhia changamoto ya wafanyikazi 
wetu . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 23 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Ab dirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you . Now may I ask 
Honourable  Kibwana, may I ask you now to respond to the specific issues raised by the 
Members , especially Hon ourable  Frankline and Hon ourable  Samuel Mwaura, be specific in your 
response please.  
 
Hon. Kibwana S waleh:  Honourable Speaker , I think my colleague was speaking in 
Kiswahili so translating the words in English is a problem to us, but shortly Mr.  Speaker I think 
all Members are supportin g this M otion. It’s only some issues that have been raised are valid , 
one; you know that this is a short -term loan and supposed to be paid within one year, so it 
doesn’t mean you have to mention the months that we are going to pay the loan. Hon ourable  
Speaker , secondly it is clear that we are going to receive a report from the executive once we 
pass this M otion. So , I think we will be at the right moment when we will receive the reports, the 
monthly report from the executive which I have said here they should bring to us, and then we 
will be able to capture the issue of the interest and other agreement. So I think Hon ourable  
Speaker , with those few remarks I think this is a genuine issue, these are money that we have 
spent that is only going for pension issue, knowing any other amount that is going to 
development. I think we will have an opportunity to even go for PAC if we can wait the issue of 
why we have not been sent previously the PAC can take that initiative eliminating those iss ues 
thank you Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulk adir): Honourable  Members , I now 
put the question that the M otion by Hon ourable  Kibwana Baya,  on approval of Loan Facility to 
Settle Pending Deductions be ad opted by this Honourable  House in the same terms as moved ? 
 
[Question put and  agreed t o] 
[Appla use] 
 
Yes C lerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri , Leader of Majority Party please move the Motion  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika, niombe ridha a ya kwamba Bunge hili liweze ku ahirisha vikao vyake kwa m ujibu ya 
kanuni ya ishirini na nane, sehemu ndogo ya kwanza, kwanzia leo hadi tarehe ishirini na na saba, 
mwezi wa sita mwaka wa elfu mbili na tatu.  Nimuombe Mhe shimiwa  Fadhili Mwalimu 
Maka rani Mwakilishi wa Kata ndogo ya Port  Rietz aweze kuunga mkono hoja hii . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes Hon ourable  Fadhili 
Makarani , Deputy Speaker?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika na mimi 
nimes imama kuunga mkono hoja hii iliyol etwa mbele yetu na Kiongozi wa wengi.  
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 24 Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members , I now  
propose the question that the Motion, please may I have your attention. I now  propose the 
question that the Motion by H onourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri, on the adjournment of the 
County Assembly be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms as moved ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes Hon ourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri MCA Likoni Ward Leader of Majority Party 
please make your contr ibution to the Motion.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika ni utamaduni wa Bunge hili na Bunge zote ulimwenguni ya kwamba kutekeleza 
majukumu vile vile pia kuwe na wakati wa kuhairisha vikao, ili wawakilishi waweze kute keleza 
majukumu mengine yenye umuhimu ya serikali yao na vile vile ya waajiri wao wanaowakilisha 
katika maeneo husika. Mheshimiwa Spika , yako mambo lukuki ambayo yametukabi li kama 
wawakilishi ; mbali na yale binafsi yanayo  tukodolea macho yakiwemo maslahi yetu kama 
wawakilishi, lakini pia yako maslahi ya wananchi wetu ambayo ni lazima tuyatekel eze na katika 
likizo hii ama ku ahirisha vi kao hivi vitatupatia fursa moja, kupigania yale yetu yanatusibu sisi 
kama wawakilish i.  Lakini pia Mhe shimiwa  Spika , ni fursa kwetu sisi kuwez a kurudi nyanjani na 
kuwajibikia yale ambayo pia yanawakabadhi wananchi wetu na tutakapo pawa tutapata nguvu 
mpya , ari mpya na kasi ya kuwatekelezea majukumu yao tutarudi hapa tukiwa na nguvu ya 
stahiki Mhe shimiwa  Spika ya kukabili ya le yote ambayo wananchi wetu  wanastahiki na sisi 
tutakuwa tuko katika mazingira tukiwa tumepata mapumziko, lakini pia kupigania yanayotusibu 
kuweza kutekeleza kwa haki nao kwa mujibu wa katiba kwa yanayostahiki.  
Mheshimiwa  Spika tunarudi tarehe 27, hapa tunazo sik u kadha katika kutekeleza hayo 
yalioko katika usoni mwetu, lakini zaidi nikumbushe tu Waheshimiwa wenza ya kwamba likizo 
hii haimaanishi ya kwamba tuzime simu zetu na kukimbia waajiri wetu. Pia Mheshimiwa Spika 
katika likizo hii  tumeahirisha vikao ili iwe ni wenye kupatikana kwa wakati unaostahiki kwa 
sababu pia Bunge lina mamlaka iwapo kutakuwa na dharura ya jambo lolote la Wawakilishi 
Wodi kuitwa katika vikao na  kuja kutekeleza misingi ya ile wajibu tuliokula kiapo kwayo .  
Mhesh imiwa Spika , kwa hiyo nitakie Waheshimiwa likizo hii yenye heri na fanaka na yale 
ambayo tunayaendea Mheshimiwa Spika yawe ni yenye mafanikio kwetu na vile vile yenye 
baraka tele katika maisha yetu. Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika na niombe Waheshimiwa wenza 
kuwez a kuunga mkono kuahirishwa kwa vikao kwa muda huu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  
Milka Ngare , please make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chan ce to make my contribution 
on the adjournment Motion and am here to support the Motion and to thank the  Majority Leader 
and the House leadership for thinking of adjourning this Assembly for the purpose that is 
intended . We would also like to say that we are  adjourning in order to also stand in solidarity 
with the other County Assemblies that are adjourning so that we can attend to other issues , I 
support the Motion. Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for giving me the opportunity.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdir ahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. May I give the 
opportunity to the smartly dressed, elegant lady Hon ourable  Pamel a please make your 
contribution . 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 25 [Applause ] 
 
Hon. Arwa:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity also to contribute 
towards the Motion  brought in this House from our Majority Leader Hon ourable  Athman 
Mwamwiri.  I also stand to support the adjournment of the County Assembly ; I know at this time 
we will be able to meet our electorates on the ground and share the views so when we come back 
I know w e will come when we are fresh and ready to continue serving our people . Again, the 
problem Mr. Speaker that we are going for this short recess but as you are aware the pocket is 
empty so from your good office I know that...  
 
[Interruptio n] 
 
The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Pardon, please say that again ?! 
  
Hon. Arwa:  The pocket is empty... ! 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Whose pockets? ! 
 
Hon. Arwa:  The Hon ourable  Members pocket s are not as good and the condition  you are 
aware you know we are being deducted the loans and what we are earning is not enough for our 
Honourable  Members . So we kindly request your good office also to consider and what we are 
earning is not enough for our Hon ourable  Members so we kindly request your g ood office also to 
consider us with something small if you do not mind. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Okay thank you Hon ourable  
Pamela and I want to believe the message is home, my office shall respond to that after the 
recess. Now may I give Hon ourable  Nyota to make his contribution? You have been raising your 
hand now you have been given the opportunity to contribute . 
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for noticing me . I support the Motion 
brought by Major ity Leader of this House for the adjournment of the House to stand in solidarity 
with our colle agues the 47 County Assemblies as we fight for our welfare. I just support thank 
you. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes Hon ourable  Frankline 
Maka nga make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na ninasimama kuunga mkono Mswada huu 
wa kuliahirisha Bunge letu hili na kama alivyotanguliza Kiongozi wa Wengi kwamba tuweze 
kuangazia yale majanga ambayo viongozi wawakilishi w a Wadi wanapitia yale masuala ambayo 
yameweza kuangaziwa na ambayo kwa sa sa yamejenga mazungumzo katika Taifa la Kenya ya 
kwamba ugatuz i uko mikononi mwa wawakilishi Wadi na endapo wawakilishi Wadi 
hawatawezeshwa inavyostahili na kama hawatapewa rasilimali  za kutimiza ahadi walizofanyia 
wananchi wao basi linafanya lengo lile la Ugatuzi lililowekwa Katiba yetu Mwaka , 2010 
linabaki kuwa ndoto tu.  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 26 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kama alivyotanguliza Kiongozi wa Wengi kwamba kuna 
yale yametukodolea macho na sisi kama  viongozi tunasimama kama Jumba tukisema tuko 
pamoja kabisa na Gatuzi zote 47 tutasimama kuhakikisha lengo lile lililokusudiwa limeafikiwa.  
Nyengine Mheshimiwa Spika katika muda huu huu sikushughulikia tu masuala yanayolenga 
viongozi lakini pia tunalenga kw amba tuweze kuwezeshwa kama viongozi kupata ile pesa 
inayoitwa Ward Development Fund  ili tuweze kuleta mashinani tuwafanyie kazi wananchi na 
tuweze kuhakikisha kwamba tunapokaa katika jumba hili basi tunafikisha malengo yakupitisha 
sheria zinazostahili.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama mimi binafsi roho yangu na 
kila kitu changu pamoja na wale wote walionipi gia kura pamoja na Wawakilishi Wadi wote zaidi 
ya 2000 ndani ya Jamhuri ya Kenya kusema naunga mkono uahirishwaji rasmi wa vikao vya 
Bunge hili.  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Before we wrap it up , I will 
give the opportunity to Hon ourable  Patrick to make his contribution . 
 
Hon. Mbelle: Mheshimiwa Spika naomba niungane na wenzangu wengi katika Bun ge na 
Mabunge mengine mengi katika nchi yetu ya Kenya kuweza kuunga Mswada huu mkono wa 
kuweza kuahirisha vikao vya Bunge hili na mahsusan najua ni kwa sababu ya kuweza kutumikia 
mwananchi na kuhakikisha kwamba kile ambacho tunakipigania ni kuhakikisha kwa mba huyu 
Mwakilishi Wadi ambaye ni Patrick Mwavula na wengine wengi katika Bunge hili wameweza 
kupata kitita cha kuweza kushughulikia mahitaji ya wananchi katika Kata Ndogo ambazo 
tunawakilisha wananchi wetu.  Kwa hivyo tumeenda katika likizo fupi kuweza ku washughulikia 
matakwa yao ili pia nao waweze kupata huruma, ingekuwa hivi leo hii sina haja ya kuja 
kusukuma Mswada ama Hoja ya kuweza kuomba barabara zangu ziweze kutengenezwa iwapo 
ingekuwa nina uwezo ya kuweza kuja kutoa katika kitita kile cha Ward Deve lopment Fund  ili 
kushughulikia yale matatizo madogo madogo. Kwa hivyo huu ni msukumo wa wana wawakilishi 
Wadi ya kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba Serikali nayo inaweza kutupa nguvu kuweza kuhudumia 
mwananchi na kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba masuala ambayo anahitaji katika sehemu yake 
anayoishi yameweza kutimizwa kwa wakati na njia ambayo inafaa. Kwa hivyo nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hoja hii na niwashukuru Wawakilishi Wenzangu wengi katika nchi ya Kenya 
kwa kuweka msukumo huu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Yes Ho nourable  
Bishop Jacktone Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for granting me this opportunity . I would like 
to very sincerely thank our Majority Leader for bringing and moving this adjou rnment Motion , I 
would like to join the many Members of the County Assemblies (MCAs) all over t he nations and 
many County Assemblies who have adjourned their Assemblies and those that are on their way 
adjourning . We stand together in solidarity as we s aid that Members of the County Assemblies 
(MCAs) deserve better, we deserve better so that we may be empowered to be better legislators, 
better representatives of our people so thank you so much I support this Adjournment Motion. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Well, noted. Last  but not least 
the wise man Hon ourable  Ibrahim , please make your contribution?  
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 27 Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , first I would like to thank the 
leadership of this County  Assembly to have  agreed today this adjournment Motion originally 
from the Association of Members of the County Assembly (AMCAs) , that is the Association of 
Member of County Assemblies to ensure that the resolution that we actually passed comes to see 
the light of the day.  I would also like to thank you Mr. Speaker for also allow ing this Motion to 
be discussed ; Mr. Speaker is only a blind man who cannot be able to see what the MCAs are 
undergoing in our Country. Mr. Speaker, we have tried several times to ma ke our voice heard to 
the authorities but all the time we have failed , I can say that in Kenya this is the way to go and 
this is the way to be heard somebody somewhere will blame us but to me we are blameless, we 
say that where you failed to get your right s by discussing a matter you always come up in 
another way Mr. Speaker Sir and that is why an English man says there is very many ways of 
killing a cat.  Mr. Speaker Sir , I want to start by talking about the issue of financial autonomy, we 
need financial aut onomy , we need it and we need it for all County Assemblies in Kenya, we need 
it like today so that we can be able to plan, execute and make sure that we get what is good for 
the County Assembly and for the people of Mombasa. Number two , briefly Mr. Speaker is about 
the salary , when you look at the Members of the County Assemblies especially me I have always 
been referred in my Ward as 1GB, Mr. Speaker you will find that even women they have that 
energy just to carry me meaning that Mr. Speaker I am not...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Carry you to where 
Honourable  Ibrahim? ! Carry you to where exactly? ! 
  
Hon. Omondi:  They can carry me up Mr. Speaker, yes ? 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman A bdulkadir ): You mean lift you up?  
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Women , with the little energy they have...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): They lift you up ? 
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes, they lift me up, thank you for that correction. Mr . Speaker , MCAs go 
through hell and that is the truth ; when I talk about the issue of  salaries, th ey go through hell .... 
Salaries and Remunerations Commission (SRC) to take a decision to even deduct  and tamper the 
salaries of the Members of the Count y Assemblies (MCAs) , that was a mistake and we are 
pointing a finger to  them that they need to listen and correct us before it comes to us. Mr. 
Speaker , even the people; the salary of an Member of the County Assembly is Kshs. 86,000 and 
that is the truth of the matter , let us not speak about this and hide let us be open, what can Kshs. 
86, 000 do to the present life Mr. Speaker and am proud to walk tall in my village and my Ward 
that am a Member of the County Assembly who is presiding over the chairs  who are even getting 
more than me, presiding over the head teachers who are earning over Kshs. 190, 000 . Mr. 
Speaker , I think that one even God himse lf cannot allow , it is a big sin ... 
 
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 28 [Applause ] 
 
And therefore, the SRC should take th is seriously  and we are sending a warning that we are 
yet to do but we are sending a warning, a very serious warning Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , the 
(MCA) is the only person who is near and in contact to mwananchi  and I do not know what other 
MCAs undergo but  I know about the same situation , I need just somebody to come and just 
protect me as am having problem s when I wake up in the morning I find people that I was not 
with the previous night sleeping in my sitting room...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
It is ve ry serious Mr. Speaker and I cannot blame them ; with the salary of Kshs. 86,000 all 
those people have g ot problems, a line of problems ; there are  those ones who want to be taken to 
the hospital, others who want you to take care of the burial, t hose one s who their houses need 
rent, all of them have been piled on an MCA.  Mr. Speaker , an MCA cannot escape from 
mwananchi , you cannot run away ! Mr. Speaker, a  Member of Parliament (MP) get s a salary 
around of Kshs. 1M illion  but you find that the Member of the Parliaments (MPs) can escape and 
even hide themselves in Nairobi, th ey are not always on the ground . May the Almighty God 
listen to our prayers for this particular time and liberate  us from this Mr. Speaker , I support the 
Motion Mr. Speak er... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
But, today am a sad man am crying as an MCA Mr. Speaker I do not get valued of what I 
was elected for when we go through election we go through hell, we use a lot of money Mr. 
Speaker some of us are even beaten Mr. Speaker and look at t he situation where we are today. 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): I think all our sentiments have 
been aptly summarized by Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi , so may I give Hon ourable  Leader of 
Majority to reply to the Moti on. 
  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mheshimiwa Spika , nishuku ru kwa yale ambayo Waheshimiwa wenza wameweza kuchangia 
kwa hili niwaambie tu Waheshimiwa ya kwamba umoja wetu ndio ngao yetu na nia  safi ni ngao 
tosha . Mheshimiwa Spika , vile vile pia tukumbushane ya kwamba katika mchakato huu ni 
wajibu kwetu sisi binafsi kuweza kujituma sababu Kamisheni ya kupanga mishahara almaarufu 
SRC wameanza kufanya ziara  Gatuzi  mbali mbali na tupatapo fursa pia ni wajibu kuhudhuria 
vikao vile na kuweza kujiongelelea binafsi kama wawakilishi kwa yale yanayotusibu.  Pia 
Mheshimiwa Spika nisihi Waheshimiwa wenza wanapopata fursa katika vyombo vya habari 
tuweze kwenda na taarifa inay ostahiki na kujieleza kinaga ubwaga ,  vyenginevyo tutahukumiwa 
visivyo na wananchi kwa nia njema yetu tulionayo katika kutekeleza majukumu yetu . Kwa hayo 
mengi , Mheshimi wa Spika nishukuru Waheshimiwa wenza na nina imani ya kwa mba ni bayana 
kuangalia hali halisi ya Bunge hili Waheshimiwa wapo katika hali tete na kuahirisha vikao vya 
Bunge ndio njia mwafaka katika kupeleka mawasiliano yetu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na 
shukrani kwa Waheshimiwa Wenza kwa kuchangia.  
June 7, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 29 [Applause]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Hon ourable  
Members , I now put the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri on 
Adjournment of the County Assembly be adopted by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms 
as moved ? 
 
[Question put a nd agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Lastly , may I take this opportunity to thank the students from St. Thomas Girls for being 
very attentive and well -mannered . I wish you safe j ourney back home and Hon ourable  Members 
this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 27th June, 2023 at 10:00am. Thank you.  
 
The House rose at 4:35p.m.  
   
 
      
 
 