May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 8th May, 2019  
The House met at 3:10p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  
 Yes, C lerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM TH E CHAIR  
APPOINTMENT OF HON . ALI MOHAMED SHOMARI A S THE DEPUTY CHIEF W HIP 
 
 Hon. Members, I stand on a letter from the Chief Whip of the County Assembly of 
Mombasa on th e appointment of Hon. Ali Moham ed Shomari as the Deputy Chief Whip…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The M embers of Mombasa County Assembly of the ODM party sat for a meeting on 
Tuesday the 7th May, 2019 and passed a resolution that Hon. Ali Moha med Shomari be 
appoin ted to be the Deputy Chief Whip. S o congratulations , the Deputy Chief Whip Moha med 
Shomari.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
GARBAGE , THE DECENTRALIZATION  OF SOLID WASTE REMOV AL AND DISPOSAL  
 
(The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ) exited the Chair)  
(The Temporary S peaker (Hon. Bwire took the C hair)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Ath man Shebe?  

May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  
 Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speake r Sir I beg to mov e the 
following Motion:  
 
THAT AWARE  that the C ounty government is manda ted by the Constitution, under 
Fourth S chedule part 2 (g) to handle refuse removal, refuse du mps and solid waste Mr. 
Speaker;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that the County g overnment  in its endeavors to restore the glory of 
Mombasa has come up with various environmental initiatives including monthl y clean up 
exercise within the County Mr. Speaker;  
 
COGNIZANT with the philosophy , ‘Mji wetu wajibu wetu’ a slogan that the C ounty uses 
to promote solid waste management focuses on a people driven process;  
 
CONCERNED that solid waste management including collection is centralized and h ence 
people involvement at the W ard level is absen t or rather limited Mr. Speaker;  
 
NOTING that people involv ement in the solid waste collection will ensure that 
community based groups at W ard level are empowered as solid waste collectors will be a 
source of livelihood to the groups and thus reduce vices such as theft, drug and substance 
abuse within the C ounty M r. Speaker;  
 
Mr. Speaker I therefore urge this Hon. Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
  
1. The CEC, Environment, Waste Management and Energy to come up with 
structures that will enable solid waste to be coll ected at W ard level Mr. Speaker;  
 
2. That the Community Based O rganizations to be employed  by the County 
government at W ard level to collect solid was te within the W ards Mr. Speaker;  
 
3. That the County g overnment to come up with in itiatives recognizing the best 
Ward in terms of solid waste management be established Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Who will second the Motion Hon. Member?  
 
 Hon. Athuman Shebe : I wish Hon. Nyiro to second my Motion Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 Thank you.  
 
 Hon. Nyiro: I Second your Honour.  
 
 The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you.  Hon. Members I now  propose 
the question that the M otion by Hon. Athuman Shebe be considered by this Honourable  House in 
the same term s as moved . 
 
May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  (Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Athuman?  
 
 Hon. Athuman Shebe: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti. P ili ningependa 
kuwashukuru W aheshimiwa wenza vile vile pamoja na Kamati yangu ya kimazingira katika 
mpango mzima wa kuchangia hoja hii ya leo , labda tu niwapongeze na kuwaambia kuwa 
mumekuwa mchango mkubwa sana katika suala la mazingira husus an mashinani waheshimiwa 
wenza.  
 Hoja hii ama M swada huu niliokuja nao hapa leo ni katika changamoto ambayo 
tunapitia hususan kama viongozi kule mashinani na katika mpango mzima wa mazingira hususan 
katika masuala ya taka. Mheshimiwa Spika tumekuwa na cha ngamoto kubwa sana ukiangalia 
upande wa ukusanyaji wa taka na vile vile pia katika mpango mzima wa mazingira na wizara 
husika imekuwa na changamoto kubwa kuhakikisha kuwa inaweza kuridhisha kila mkaazi, kila 
mwa nanchi ama kila W odi kule mashinani na hii im ekuwa bayana kabisa Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kuwa mzigo umekuwa mkubwa ndiposa kuja na hoja kama hii kuhakikisha vipi 
tutaweza kugatua; kugatua yal e majukumu na kugatua ile rasil mali tuhakikishe kuwa yule 
mwananchi kule chini mashinani anaweza kujumuishwa na kuchangia na kubeba majukumu 
ambayo atakuwa anasaidiana na serikali.  
 Kuna makundi mengi sana ambayo yanajihusisha na mazingira ambayo tunaita CBOs 
na yanafanya kazi kubwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na hoja hii ni kuhakikisha kuwa serikali sasa 
itakuja na mika kati na mipango kabambe ya  kuweza ku tambua vile vikundi vya wanaharakati na 
wakere ketwa wa mazingira katika kila W odi kuhakikisha kuwa wanapatiwa majukumu , 
wanatambuliwa kiserikali katika utenda  kazi mzima na biashara nzima ya taka Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti.  
 Hivyo mimi nafurahi kwa W aheshimiwa kuniunga mkono katika hoja hii na hizi tu ni 
baadhi y a changamoto ambazo tunazopitia, k wa hivyo ningependa kuwashukuru wote ambao 
wameniunga mkono na vile vile pia tuangalie vipi tutakuja na mbinu za kuweza kuhakikisha 
kuwa mazingira yetu yataweza kubakia nadhifu na safi ili taswira yetu ya Mombasa iweze 
kubakia na sifa zake vile vile ilivyotazimiwa hapo awali Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti. Nasema 
ahsante  sana kwa W aheshimiwa wenza.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank y ou. Yes Hon. Members now the 
floor is open for the debate. Any input? Yes Hon. Deputy Chief Whip?  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Chief Whip (Hon. Ali Shomari) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
kwa kunipa fursa hii kuweza kuchangia Hoja hii. Kwa kweli mimi nach angia mia fil mia hoja hii 
kwa sababu mimi mwenyewe ni mwana mazingira na zile changamoto tunaziona huko 
mashinani jinsi vikundi vya usafi vinavyopata shida. Kwa hivyo ni ngeomba Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti jambo hili liweze kutiliwa maanani sana kwa sababu hivi vikundi vitakavyopewa 
nguvu nina imani usafi utakuwa umekithiri katika eneo letu la Mombasa.  Mimi kama MCA wa 
Wodi ya Magogoni niko na kikundi ambacho mimi mwenyewe nilikuwa Mwenyekiti na 
nimeacha bado wanaendelea kuzoa taka . 
May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4                Kwa hivyo tunaomba sana serik ali gatuzi  iwape nguvu kwa sababu wana uwezo wa  
kufanya sorting  na kupunguza msonga mano wa taka katika K aunti yetu ya Mombasa. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Deputy Chief Whip. Yes 
Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro: Thank you Hon. Chair maybe I should start by conveying my 
congratulations to th e newly appointed Deputy Chief W hip, my brother Hon. Shomari...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 We are really appreciating the changes that are taking ove r this Assembly. Coming to 
the M otion I also want to congratulate my Chair…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Is a newly elected Deputy Chief W hip. 
 
 Hon. Nyiro: Thank you Chair for the guidance.  
 
(Laugh ter) 
 
                …Going to the M otion which I also want to s ay congrats to my Chair , Waste and 
Management and this one has been long overdue  because being a Member of the C ommittee on 
Environment we have had negotiations and tal ks with the CECs and the whole D epartment and 
the biggest problem and challenge that hav e been facing is the lack of m anpower  and through  
decentralization or decentralizing the issue of waste management  I think  the County will have 
cut to the cost of employing staff managed by the C ounty payroll by introducing the fact that  
there som e many groups in the W ards who are managing the waste management issue .                     
            My input on the same will be the group s that are working on the waste  because the mover 
is talking of employing in his prayer number two ; that the County (??)  organizat ion be employed 
by the C ounty government . Maybe my sugge stion will be as I support the M otion they are 
contracted for may be a period of some years since  employment now will also have again impact 
on the County Public Service Board and all the issues but  if we contract them then it will b e a 
direct delegation from the Department . 
            This is  because the D epartment can delegate its responsibility to the groups but when it 
comes to the issue of employment then County Public Service Board must be involved . So we 
will be going a longer route, therefore  if we are going to identify the groups and then contract 
them using the budget th at is already allocated in the Department of Environment it  is going to 
be easie r to manage and run the process.   
            So I am for the  issue of having this be cause there are so many groups ; including in my 
Ward doing the waste manageme nt but sometimes if the people collecting the waste from do  not 
pay them  they will end up leaving the garbage on the doors of these clients who do n ot pay, but 
when we have a well managed system then will be sure garbage will be collected and many 
groups will be coming up to do the business because it will be a business that the County has 
invested in .  
May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5             Therefore  it is a noble issue that touche s on every Ward , and therefore  I expect every 
Member to support this because the issue of unemployment has been a bitter pill to swallow on 
all the Hon. Members . So if we get these organized groups atleast two or three  groups who ar e 
going to manage waste in the W ards who are going to be recognized and contracted by the 
Department of Environment  then will have created employment on some youth s and it will be 
the easy way come 2022 to the Hon. Members. Thank you.  
 
               The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Milka Ngare?  
 
               Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for according me this chance to contribute to 
the Motion and before I do let me also add my voice to saying that congratulations are in order to 
the newly ap pointed Deputy Chief Whip Hon. Shomari . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Many congratulations and we assure you of our support and we hope that you will work 
closely with the Chief Whip to provide better services to this Assembly.  Secondly I also want to 
congratulate the Cha irman of Environment Hon. Shebe for b ringing a very well thought up 
Motion on garbage, the decentralization of solid waste removal and disposal. I am especially 
impressed with prayer number two ; also just like my MCA from Bamburi has stated  I am aware 
of groups of youth from an area called Kiembeni and Bombo who are doing garbage collection 
but they have a  lot of challenges, so if this prayer is met they  will be able to do their work well, 
and get paid and vehicle provided by the County to do the garbage c ollection and of  course it is a 
health hazard to have the garbage all over sometimes I see it stays the re for many days and form a 
heap.  
             So if the County government comes in to assist according to the three prayers I think we 
are goi ng to have a very clean County, one that is health y, a healthy nation a he alth County is a 
wealthy County . Therefore  I fully support this Motion, 100  per cent  support it and am sure that all 
my colleague s who are here are also in support of the same because it is straight forward, very 
benefi cial to us and to the citizen s of Mombasa County. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause)  
 
               The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Milka . Yes Hon. Naliaka?  
 
               Hon. Naliaka:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii nami kuongeza sauti 
yangu kwenye mada hii. Mwanzo nikumpongeza Naibu wa Kiranja wa Bunge  ambaye tumeweza 
kumpata leo hii  Bwana Ali Shomari Mheshimiwa wa Magogoni tunakupa pongezi na tuna imani 
kwako ya kuwa utaenda kufanya kazi nzuri.   
  La pili ning ependa kusema hivi ; kupeleka huduma hii kwenye vijiji au kule kwenye 
Wodi  zetu itakuwa ni vizuri lakini ningeomba kuwe na mpangilio muafaka ambapo kutakuwa na 
supervision   maana mara nyingi hii kazi imekuwa ikitendeka kule mashinani lakini hakuna yule 
wa kufuatilizia na kujua kwa nini hizi taka zimekwama barabarani, kwa nini hazipelekwi mahali 
ambapo panafaa.  Kwa hivyo mimi ningependa tu kuomba ya kwamba iweze kufanywa kwa 
mpangilio ambao utakuwa wenye  manufaa kwa sisi sote .  
               Jambo l engine ninge penda kusema ya  kuwa hivi vikundi vitengezwe kwa misingi ya 
kuwa ni wale vijana ambao wataweza kuwajibika vilivyo, maana mara nyingi tutawapa watu kwa 
May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 sababu labda tunajuana nao na unapata vijana wengine wengi ni wale ambao pia  ni watundu kiasi  
hasa wanaom ba kazi lakini kuwajibika ni balaa.   
  Kwa hivyo lazima pia tupige msasa ni kikundi kipi ambacho tunakipa hiyo kazi? Na je 
kiko tayari ama kiko na rasil mali ya kuweza kujikimu? Na kama kina mahitaji pia kieleweke ili 
kiweze  kusaidia jamii  kwa hayo machache nasema ahsante Bwana Spika.   
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Naliaka. Yes Hon. Fatuma 
Mote ? 
 
 Hon. Fat ma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Kwanza 
kabisa nampa kongole Mheshimiwa ndugu yangu, rafiki yangu Mhes himiwa wa Magogoni…  
 
(Applause)  
 
  Nina hakika ataweza kufanya kazi kama Mheshimiwa wangu wa Nyali anavyoifanya. Pili 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kama Naibu Mwenyekiti wa Afya nampa kongole Mheshimiwa Shebe ...  
  
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa sababu takataka na afya n i vitu viwili ambavyo havishikani  lakini kwa sababu 
ameleta jambo la muhimu kwamba anataka mazingira yawe safi sina budi kumuunga mkono na 
vile vile nataka kumwambia Mheshimiwa vijana ambao wataweza kuajiriwa manake si kazi 
rahisi mtu aende akazoe uchafu s isi wengine tulipitia huko huko Mheshimiwa, pesa zao waweze 
kulipwa haraka iwezekanavyo ni hayo tu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes thank you . Yes Chief W hip? 
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyek iti. Mimi nitazungumzia 
machache tu kulingana na hoja ya leo, kwanza vile vile nimuhongere Naibu wangu Mheshimiwa 
Ali Shomari ... 
  
(Applause)  
 
 Natumai kwamba tutafanya kazi kwa ushirikiano bora zaidi katika miaka iliyoweza 
kusalia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Vi le vile katika hotuba ya Gavana katika Bunge letu aliweza 
kupatia kipao  mbele masuala ya vijana ya kwamba waweze kupatiwa kazi Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti na leo hii mimi nashukuru ya kwamba hoja hii imetoka kwa mhusika zaidi yeye 
ndiye Mwenyekiti wa Idara na Kam ati ya Mazingira Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti .  
            Kwa hivyo imeingia kwa njia inayostahili hivyo basi  uwajibikaji na vile vile utimilifu na 
huduma mashinani kuhakikisha kwamba hoja hii imefikia wananchi na kuweza kuelewa zaidi 
kwa sababu sisi tunafahamika bora kama Bu nge kuweza kupitisha hoja lakini je wale 
wanaofanya utekelezaji ni kina nani? Ni idara, na idara Waziri  wetu ni nani katika Bunge hili 
letu? Ni Mheshimiwa Shebe Athman Salim . Hivyo basi tuna imani na wewe kuhakikisha 
kwamba muda ndani ya mwezi mmoja kwamba t unaona tofauti i dara imeanza kwenda 
mashinani, Kamati imeingia mashinani, vijana waweze kupatiwa vifaa, sare waweze 
May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 kutambulika kama Likoni watakuwa wanav aa rangi hii, Nyali ivae rangi hii watu watambulike ili 
idara iweze kwenda mbele na vijana wetu wa weze kupata kazi zaidi. Ahsante sana.  
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Chief Whip. Yes Hon. 
Rosemary?  
 
 Hon. Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , looking at the mood of this House I think  this 
Motion has already passed …  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Let me also applaud my brother Hon. Shomari for being appointed as the Deputy Chief 
Whip of this Assembly. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Members and before I put a 
question allow me also to congratulate the  newly elected; he was elected by the Majority Party 
Members in the County Assembly…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Ali Shomari for the new assignment and we look forward to see your office doing 
wonders.  Now Hon. Members allow me to put a question that the Motion by  Hon. Athman She be 
Salim be adopted by this Honourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no any other business the House stands adjourned until 
Thursday 9th May,  2019 at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The Hou se rose at 3: 38p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 8, 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           41 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for info rmation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  