September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 22nd September, 2020.  
The House met at 2:58p. m  
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes, Clerk  please ? 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Your Excellency Hon. Hassan Ali Joho, Governor of Mombasa County, Hon . Members, 
ladies and gentlemen,  good a fternoon.  I give thanks  to the  Almighty God for enabling us to 
assemble here today on this auspicious occasion. I a m also grateful for the good health that we 
have all enjoyed since we all are aware that the year , 2020 has been one where many people have 
lost their live s due to the Covid-19 pandemic. We do  not take this for granted, and I trust that it 
has made us be m ore appreciative to sound health, freedom of a ssociation, freedom of movement 
and availability of food amongst others.  Who would have thought that in this century  there  
would come a time where the world’s operations would be stalled by a disease ? It is ind eed the 
grace of God that normalcy is gradually coming back.  
 I take this early opportunity to sincerely thank and applaud His Excellency the Governor, 
Hon. Hassan Ali for the timely steps he took, including bringing on board other stakeholders and 
non-state actors to fight the pandemic. Through his leadership, our able Governor was among the 
leading light in Kenya in implementing clear and working strategies in the fight against 
pandemic. He provided leadership in ensuring the residents abided by the WHO Covid - 19 
protocols and we sincerely commend him for the prompt interventions. This played a major role 
in ensuring that Mombasa County which was a hotspot for the pandemic had cases of C ovid-19 
reducing  and at the moment the curve is almost flattened.   
 Your Excellency;  today, we are greatly honored  as a County Assembly to welcome you 
to deliver the annual State of County Address. We look forward to this day as it would not only 
set the development agenda for the C ounty but also guide the legislative agend a for the year.  
Your Excellency, today’s state of the County address would not have come at a more opportune 
time, our expectation is that through this address, issues of loss of livelihoods occasioned by the 
negative effects of Covid and tangible strategi es of revamping the economy will be top of your 
agenda.  

September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Section 30 (2) of the County Government Act, 2012, requires the Governor to address a 
special sitting of the County Assembly once every year and at any other time.  Further, Standing 
Order No. 18 of t he Mombasa County Assembly  states that the Governor shall address a special 
sitting of the County Assembly  once every year. Accordingly, this sitting is properl y convened as 
per the relevant l aws.  Your Excellency, as a legislative body we assure you of ou r support by 
providing the necessary legislations where needed so as to complement the E xecutive arm of the 
County. We shall also play our rightful constitutional roles of oversight so as to ensure residents 
of Mombasa enjoy the fruits of devolution.   
 Your Excellency,  it is now my honor , pleasure and privilege to invite you to make the 
annual State of the County A ddress to the Assembly. Thank you . 
 
[Applause]  
 
ANNUAL STATE OF THE COUNTY A DDRESS  
 
 The Governor (Hon.  Hassan  Joho ): Ahsante. Thank you Mr. Spea ker. Speaker of the 
County Assembly, Deputy Speaker, Leader of Majority, Leader of Minority,  Hon. Chairpersons 
of var ious County Assembly Committees,  Hon. Members of the County Assembly, Clerk  of the 
County Assembly , distinguished g uests in the House, ladies and g entlemen ; in accordance with 
Section 30 of the County Government Act  it is my singular honor and pleasure to address this 
Hono urable House today on the State of the County under the theme , 'A Socio -Economic Rebirth 
for County 001' . I wish to thank you most sincerely  Mr. Speaker Sir  for this opportunity 
bestowed upon me, on behalf of the people of M ombasa on whose mandate I lead. I therefore 
humbly request for your permission to deliver this State of the County Address.  
Mr. Speaker, with the promulga tion of the Constitution a nd the birth of Mombasa County 
government  we have made tremendous progress in the growth and development of our County. I 
wish to take this opportunity to present in detail my key achievements as the first Governor of 
Mombasa and what we have done to bring services closer to the people of Mombasa.  Before I 
proceed  please allow me, Hon . Speaker to thank His Excellency t he President, Hon . Uhuru 
Muigai Kenyatta  and t he former Prime Minister of the Republic of Kenya, the Right Hon . (Eng.) 
Raila Amolo Odinga, for their bold leadership in the Bui lding Bridges Initiative (BBI)…  
 
[Applause]  
 
 This initiative seeks to create a new dawn of Peace, Unity, Stability and Shared 
Prosperity for the people of Kenya.  As Governor of Mombasa, Mr. Speak er Sir, I wish to declare 
my unequivocal support for the BBI process, and its expected outcome, as contained in the 
Memorandum submitted by the Coastal Counties and r ead during the Mombasa r ally held on 11th 
February , 2020.   
Mr. Speaker, the BBI has create d a National Reform Movement in which we are 
convinced as a people shall create an opportunity to realign this Nation to the hopes and 
expectations of the people. We expect to take deliberate ac tion towards providing a better life 
and secure f uture for the  citizens of Kenya; w e cannot afford to lose another opportunity of a 
lifetime to restore hope and confidence in t he leadership of this beautiful n ation.  I therefore urge 
the people of Mombasa  and the greater Coastal region  to join me in ensuring that this  process 
comes to a successful conclusion.  
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon. Members, the d evelopment plans of the County g overnment of Momba sa are guided 
by its long -term development b lueprint, the Mombasa Vision 2035 (MV2035) which was born 
out of the Integrated Sustainable U rban De velopment (ISUD) Plan of the year , 2015. This 
remains the driving  force and engine of our growth, t he MV2035 is fully aligned to the National 
Vision 2030 and the B ig Four Agenda of the national g overnment. We are therefore fully 
integrated with the n ationa l economy and are moving in harmony towards the achievement of the 
country’s overall goals and objectives, as envisaged by the Constitution and the d evolved sy stem 
of governance in Kenya.  
Mr. Speaker Sir  in our planning process  we have taken note of the ch allenges facing our 
beloved people, the scarcity of resources and the desire to deliver a better County given the 
circumstances. We have therefore invested heavily in the use of data and informatics to drive 
change and transformation in Mombasa.  Hon. Membe rs, the recently released Kenya National 
Bureau of Statistics (KNBS)  census Report shows that Mombasa rests on a 229.9km2 area of 
land and as of 2019 had a population of 1,208,333 people. Also, worth noting is the fact that it  is 
characterized by more male s than females and a total of 378,422 households with an average 
house hold size of 3.1.   
Population statistics globally form a critical planning tool and are a key determinant of 
resource allocation and distribution so a mongst the six (6) Sub Counties in Mombasa, Kisauni is 
the largest, with a size of 87.7km2 and a population of 291,930 people, followed  by Likoni,  
Jomvu, Nyali, Changamwe and finally Mvita in that order. In terms of population density 
however, Mvita Sub County has the highest number  of peop le per square kilometer which is at  
10,543 (M aking it one of the most densely p opulated Sub Counties in Kenya)  followed by Nyali, 
Chang amwe, Likoni, Jomvu and Kisauni  are in that order.  What do these numbers speak to us 
about Hon . Members? They speak  volumes about the level of effort and dis tribution of resources 
required  in these  Administrative  Units.  
Our people require services that are commensurat e to their needs and situations; w e have 
a responsibility as leaders to ensure that every citizen of th is County has access to goods and  
services like any other Kenyan  as it is envisaged in the Constitution . It is therefore our  
responsibility to ensure that we respond to the clarion call of our people and deliver the promise 
we made at the ballo t to every r esident of Mombasa , so therefore  I take this opportunity Mr. 
Speaker  to assure you of my highest commitment to this course.  
The Economy of Mombasa remai ns a critical component of the n ational growth agenda 
for Kenya; b etween 2013 and 2017  our economy grew at an average of 4.7  per cent  in terms of 
the total Gross County Product (GCP). This is the second highest share of growth contr ibution  
among Counties in Kenya ; it is also worth noting that Per Capita GCP growth for our County 
over the same period, was hig her than the national average. This implies that on average, 
incomes of residents of Mombasa were higher than the average income for all Kenyans in the 
Country. This is directly attributed to how we have supported businesses and investments in 
Mombasa Coun ty, c reated jobs and livelihoods and  with the  support of the  
national g overnment provided a decent  standard of life to our people and  I am c ommitted to 
sustain this trend Mr. Speaker, despite the myriad of challenges that have engulfed our home 
County ove r the past decade.  
Mr. Speaker, the C ovid-19 pandemic  further compounded the problems facing Mombasa. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) on March 11 declared C ovid-19 a pandemic pointing to 
the over 118,000 cases of the Corona virus illness in over 110 co untries and territorie s around the 
world, at the time  and the sustained risk  of further global spread.  
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 This pandemic was based on the global prevalence of the Sub -Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome Virus Corona (C ovid-19) and the rising incidence rate now confirm ed in over 132 
countries around the world. Kenya so far has 36,981 confirmed positive cases (and 650 reported 
deaths) as at 20th September , 2020 t he total number of recoveries stands at 23,949 nationally. In 
Mombasa, we ha ve so far recorded 2,675 cases having tested 51,380 as at 20th September , 2020.  
Reported deaths now stand at 72, while 1,013 patients are admitted and 520 are under home 
based care. Another 43 7 people are on self -quarantine; t otal recoveries for Mombasa stand at 
1,220. Based on the above n umbers Mr. Speaker Sir, am confident to report that my  
administrati on has diligently managed this d isease and successfully on the verge  of  flattening  
the curve over the six months period that we have been on this course.  
By way of example Hon . Members, t hrough various County Directives, Presidential 
Executive Orders and by coordination wi th other branches of government the County 
government of Mombasa took quick measures t o mitigate the effects of this p andemic in  
Mombasa. We directed the use of various o utbreak management measures including  
quarantine, contact tracing, surveillance and monitoring, social distancing, isolation and 
treatment of the population. To further r estrict the progression of the p andemic, to reduce the 
exposure of most at risk groups  and to reduce the disease burden on publ ic health  
services, the County g overnment ensured continuously enhanced measures to curb the spread of 
the pandemic.   
As a County  Hon. Members, I am proud to report that Mombasa has set the pace  
for the Country at la rge in terms of the level of preparedness, mobilization of resources  
especially from the private sector, inclusion of youth, women, persons with disability and the  
elderly  in planning and execution of the designed interventions. For purposes of ensuring  
sustainability of the effort put into this process, the County C ovid-19 Emergency Re sponse 
Committee  chaired my myself and co -chaired by the County Commissioner  has cemented  
its relationship with cri tical partners including the national g overnment, developm ent 
agencies, p rivate Sector, Civil Society and A id Agencies to design projects and programs  
that will have a medium to long term intervention nature on our people … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Some of these projects include  the food relief and nutritio n support program s, provision 
of clean water and delivery of health services; i n addition to these, we are now rolling out Cash - 
Transfer Programs through support received from various partners. This support is further 
expect ed to expand into a full scale financial graduatio n model that will convert the cash receipts 
into savings mobilized for assets purchase, investment and business start -ups… 
 
[Applause]  
 
 Mr. Spe aker Sir, I can boldly proclaim  without fear of contradic tion that Mombasa was 
the fir st and the only County in Kenya  and by ext ension, the only City in Africa  that was able to 
roll out an immediate comprehensive food relief and nutrition support program … 
 
[Applause]  
 
 That has successfully covered more than 110 ,000 House holds during the most pressing 
period in our post-independence  history.  
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  This we have achieved through private sector support, having  mobilized about Ksh. 
200M illion  in cash and in kind donations  and buttressed by the County’s own contribution of a  
similar amount  for which I most sincerely thank Mem bers of this Hono urable House, for the 
approval that you gave us … 
 
[Applause]  
 
 Towards a total Socio -Economic Transformation of Mombasa Mr. Speaker, and as the  
leader of this County, I have directed my people to devise ways and means of reviving the 
econo my of Mombasa. This is an urgent and important matter that we must embark on with the 
serio usness it deserves. The County g overnment of Mombasa has therefore dra wn up a  
plan, under my guidance  in the form of an Economic Stimulus Program (ESP)…  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Whose key objectives are as follows:  
1. To set the County on an economic recovery path by investing in short to medium  
term solutions to challenges  facing the economy of Mombasa;  
2. To expand economic opportunities for employment creation thus increasing  the 
disposable income of Mo mbasa citizens and subsequently  boosting their purchasing 
power;  
3. To promote local economic development f or equity and social stability;  
4. To expand access to, and build ICT capacity to expand economic opportunities a nd 
accel erate  economic  growth;   
5. To improve infrastructure and promote business and private sector investment  
in specific sectors of the economy such as; the Blue Economy, Tourism,  
Manufacturing, Agribusiness and Value Addition, Light Industries, Entertainment,  
Renewable Energy and Transport and Logistics wit h a focus on Promoting Exports…  
 
[Applause]  
 
6. Invest in the conservation of the e nvironment, f or sustainable d evelopment; and  
7. Undertake comprehensive investment climate reforms, utilize ICT and  
digitizat ion, as well as support innovation, research and d evelopment and knowledge 
management, to buttress all these efforts.  
The E conomic Stimulus Programme;  ladies and gentlemen  is further supported by the 
Program for Urban Value Chain Innovations and Technology  (PRU VIT), which  targets to 
allocate  upto a Billion  shillings o f County resources and mobilize;  from financial institutions, up 
to Ksh. 10  Billion to support the Sectors identified above.   
These sectors, Mr. Speaker  have been identified as high i mpact, lo w investment and 
quick  turn-around  areas that will trigger revival of enterprise activities, create jobs, generate 
incomes, improve living standards of the populace, increase disposable incomes and purchasing 
power, lead to increased economic activities, r educe unemployment numbers and by extension 
improve safety and security in our peri -urban homes.  
 
[Applause]  
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 This Honorable House will recall that I have over  time made critical pronouncement s that 
were aimed at transforming the city of Mombasa. Today I w ish to update you Hon . Members 
about the progress I have made so far and the key achievements, despite the various challenges 
that we have faced as a County.  We have diligently planned, budgeted and complied with legal 
and regula tory requirements and timel ines on matt er of Public Finance Management. A s a result 
our own source revenue have grown from about Ksh. 1.3Billion in 2014/1 5 to Ksh 3.7Billion in 
2018/19 financial y ears... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 We are now soaring high targe ting Ksh. 5Billion in the next two ye ars and growing 
towards full potentia l of collecting as much as Ksh. 10billion per year. These efforts are 
buttress ed by automation of revenue collection system s; most of our payments are now online, 
sealing loopholes for leakages and under decl aration of r evenue collections. Our commitmen t to 
good financial stewardship  Mr. Speaker  has earned Mombasa County  
accolades at various platfo rms; by a qualified audit opinion from the Auditor  
General for the Financial Year 2016/17 and 2017/18. Having said that, we re main cognizant of 
the challenge and responsibility of meeting our debt obligations and complying with  
National Treasury directives to settle all pending bills. I am happy to report to this Hono urable 
House Mr. S peaker  that I constituted and g azetted a Pend ing Bills Committee mandated to settle 
all obligations by end of June , 2020. A clear strategy for this has since been p roposed and 
adopted.  
Ladies and g entlemen, the backbone of a wo rking system is its people. My g overnment  
has therefore embarked on a Publ ic Service Transformation Agenda aimed at a total turn -around 
of the culture and practice of wor k and operations in the County g overnment of Mombasa. This 
will, in essence increase efficiency, effectiveness in service delivery, employee productivity, 
custo mer satisfaction and revenue mobilization, reflecting a service driven system that is focused 
on meeting the needs and aspirations of our people.  To sustain the mom entum and accountability 
in my public s ervice, I am happy to report that I have created the Mombasa County Leadership 
Forum where I will hold my top leadership staff accountable for pe rformance and ensure 
continuous reporting  on effectiveness in service delivery.  
  
[Applause ] 
 
 The staff involved (T he Leadership Team) will include H.E The Deputy Governor, The 
County Secretary, The County Attorney, County Executive Committee Members (CE Cs) and all 
Chief Officers.   In order to ensure that the County g overnment is responsive to the needs of its 
citizenry  and the pr ivate sector  as key drivers of the e conomy, I have revived the Governor’s 
Private  Sector Round T able designed as a quarterly forum where the private sector, representing 
investors and busines ses operating in Mombasa County  can discuss their needs and  
expectations with H.E The Governor, and a lso make commitments on what they will offer  
the County and the pe ople of Mombasa in return…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Further, in accordance with Section 54 (2) of the County Government Act, the County 
has established the County Intergovernmental Forum, which I chair .  
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  This comprises  all Heads of Departments of National Government Units rende ring 
services within the County, t he Deputy Governor and County Executive Committee Members or 
their n ominees are part of this Forum. The main objectives of this f orum are: Harmo nization of 
services rendered in the County;  coordination of developm ent activities in the County; 
coordination of interg overnmental functions; and any other functions as may be provide d for by 
or under any law. Taking cognizance of the enormous support re ceived from our development 
partners,  my government has also created the Development Partners Round Table, where all 
resour ces received in cash or in kind  are well planned, aligned to County prioritie s through a co -
creation process  and accounted for in an efficient and transparent manner. This has enabled us 
regain the much -needed confidence and credibility to mobilize more resources and undertake 
public investments in the County.  
Hon. Members, you will agree with me that this is a holistic view and appr oach aimed at 
ensuring that my a dministration remains fully accountable to the people who have given us the 
mandate to le ad and offer them services.  Mr. Speaker, I now take a more sectoral app roach and 
wish to update these H on. Membe rs on specifics as follows : Education i s the backbone of every 
society; as a government  we have t aken time, resources and action  knowing only too well that as 
Herbert Spencer put it, “The great aim of education is not knowledge but action”. Elimu Fund 
has been mobilized as a powerf ul tool for economic empowerment. The kitty has grown to serve 
over 60,000 beneficiaries and disbursed a t otal of Ksh. 600million to date…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Making an impact on every household in this County. We also have the “Tukuze 
Vipawa” Prog ram which has offered over 2,400 Scholarships to Youths joining Mombasa City 
Polytechnics.  We rolled out the School Milk Feeding Program, doing over 32,000 children per 
day,  five days a week  since 2014. Today, this remains the number one attraction and retainer for 
school going children. Talent, knowledge and workforce development have been prioritized and 
comprehensively addressed. Youth polytechnics have been rebranded to city polytechnics taking 
up a higher responsibility, hinged on a commitment for demand driven ski lls development for a 
modern day city. Modern and state of the art ECDs have been constructed in your Wards Hon . 
Members, employing over 250 teachers, and many more will continue to be rolled ou t before the 
end of my term in o ffice… 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Collectiv ely, Hon . Members  these efforts have mobilized our children out of their  
homes and into the classrooms, transformed lives, given hope to parents and guardians, provided 
a promise for a better futu re and sustainable livelihoods away from the current state o f poverty, 
unemployment and despair. The future of Mombasa now looks brighter. Ou r people, having been 
empowered  will be able to participate actively in national discourse and make a contribution to 
the shaping of their own destiny through taking up space on the decision making table and 
playing an active role in the direction that Kenya takes as a Country.  Looking into the future Mr. 
Speaker, we want to get into partnerships to develop transformative youth capacity in 
entrepreneurial skills and apprentices hip, ahead of the opening of the Special Economic Zone in 
Dongo Kundu and the Miritini Industrial Park … 
 
[Applause ] 
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  We are fully aware that the local and international enterprises established in these 
facilities  will require state of the art expertise and  globally recognized skill -sets that can provide  
technical services within the zones and p arks. We cannot afford to have our people left  
behind. For starters, we target to train at least 2,000 youths in technical courses such as  
masonry, carpentry and wood  work, painting, welding, electrical works, mechanics, among  
others. These will give us a good head start of capacity when the industrial parks and SEZ 
are ready for takeoff.  
Hon. Speaker, a griculture remains the heartbeat of the Kenyan ec onomy;  however, i t has 
never been fully tapped as a transformational resource for growth and development of the city  
Counties. Mombasa is therefore  going a ll out to change this landscape; a s a starting point, we 
will establish Product Consolidation Center s in Mombasa  where  farm produce can be collected 
from all our neighboring Counties and value can be added here in Mombasa, targeting export as 
well as local  and regional consumption … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 To sustain this model  Hon. Members, Mombasa will use its  strategic location a s the 
gateway into Kenya and as a l aunch  pad for exports to the region and beyond, to mobilize all 
Counties under the umbrella of Jumuiya ya Kaunti za Pwani (JKP) to pull together resources of 
the region and showcase our regional potential to the world. We  have the social and economic 
strength and comparative advantage to play a leading role in JKP governance and economic 
leadership and we shall deploy ourselves to support the agenda for growth and development of 
our region for the sake of our people … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 It is very clear, l adies and gentlemen that if Mombasa succeeds, the region prospers.  
Already we have noted that thro ugh several efforts made by my g overnment, the proportion of 
Mombasa County residents who are food poor has greatly reduced. From a staggering 50  per 
cent plus, these numbers have now come down by more than 10 percentage points. The 
promotion of agricultural developmen t and value addition, therefore  will attract investments in 
the sector, create employment, feed our people while ensu ring their nutritional requirements are 
met, and open up a new value proposition for export growth and foreign exchange earnings for 
the County and Country at large. Mr . Speaker Sir, I can assure you that Mombasa can feed 
Kenya! We have now aligned all our  ducks in a straight line, and we are ready for takeoff … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mr. Speaker , we shall continue to purchase seedlings for our farmers, deploy our tractors and 
plough at subsidized rates, optimize utilization of the fishing boats procured and also cons ider 
empowering the existing B each Management Units (BMU s) to acquire more deep sea fishing 
boats. Rain water harvesting through water pans shall be strengthened, targeting use by farmers 
for horticultural purposes in Mwakirunge, Jomvu and Likoni. These ef forts will open up huge 
employment and livelihood opportuni ties for the people of Mombasa.  
 
[Applause ] 
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9  My Administration, Mr. Speaker, has taken drastic meas ures to address the problem of 
climate c hange; t hese efforts include increased activities in mangro ve tree planting and 
rehabili tation of water catchment areas  as well as enforcement of solid and liquid waste disposal 
regulations, among others. There are also concrete plans to establish a solid -waste recycling 
plant in Mwakirunge area of Kisauni Sub -County as a measure to tackling the solid waste 
menace. So far, we have finalized development of legislation to promote investment in solid 
waste recycling and involvement of private sector in solid waste collection. The growing of 
drought tolerant crops has also been adopted as a strategy to mitigate crop failure as a result or 
erratic rainfall. Hon . Members, there is a lot d onor support in this sector, and my g overnment has 
what it takes to mobilize  funding to support Mombasa’s Green A genda.  To spur growth o f the 
Blue Economy, my g overnment had directed the creation of a Blue Economy Projects 
Implementation Unit to co -ordinate the exploration of the  sector’s programs and projects  as well 
as mobilize local and internati onal resources and partnerships  towards t apping the rich coastal 
and marine resources with a huge potential for the development of the Blue Economy.   
 Hon. Speaker, Mombasa is going blue! Blue tourism, blue sports, blue energy, blue 
extractives and resource exploration, blue trading and investmen ts, blue bonds and financing 
mechanisms, are all at our disposal as new revenue streams for the Government and employmen t 
opportunities for our people…  
[Applause ] 
 
 Developm ent Partners have also expressed  interest in supporting Mombasa’s Blue 
Agenda. We w ill therefore pursue investments at a global scale in the areas of shipbuilding and 
repairs, dry -docking, port infrastructure development, water transport, and technology adaptation 
to support  deep -sea fishing among others.  Mr. Speaker, water access and qu ality remain a major 
challenge to the people of Mombasa. This h as been the case for many years; s anitation covera ge 
in the County is also wanting, y ou are aware that we have taken steps to address these challenges 
comprehensively and systematically. I have  directed the Department of Water to take measures 
to ensure that the water issue in Mombasa is holistically addressed and challenges fixed.  
 Under the leadership of my Administration, Mombasa Water and Sewerage Company is 
now under new management and is on its way to recovery and self -sustainability. The company 
has developed a medium to long term strategy to address water and sanitation challenges 
including the redevelopment of the physical infrastructure network, reducing the non revenue 
water, improvin g water quality, identification of new sources of bulk water supply to supplement 
current volumes reaching Mombasa  and also a clea r sanitation management system. Among the 
key new sources of water is the Mwache Dam which  is expected to supply an additional  
80,000M3 per day, by the year 2025.  
 Other efforts include water desalination, with discussions underway with potential 
partners. Also that is not captured here is the Mzima II which I can say officially signed for 
funding that probably will happen in the next two or three  years or so. We are therefore confident 
that the people of Mombasa will soon enjoy this precious commodity, which is a c onstitutional 
requirement and basic human right. Our only plea, Mr. Speaker, through the support of this 
Honourable House  is for a concerted effort  in reaching out to our people in imploring on them to 
respect the rule of law, avoid undertaking illegal connections and destruction  of our pipeline 
infrastructure  among other vices which will expose all of us to dangers of low water quality, 
infections and related diseases and the possibility of a total lack of access to this valuable natural 
resource.  
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 Hon. Members, on matters of Land, Physical Planning, Housing & Urban Renewal, we 
adopted the Mombasa Integrated Str ategic Ur ban Development Plan (D ubbed the Mombasa 
Vision , 2035) as our long -term development planning tool. We also developed th e Mombasa 
Gate City Master Plan, t hese planning tool s have enabled us to have a coordinated and structured 
long-term view of the future o f Mombasa.  Our planning is now more sustainable, taking into 
consideration growth of the population of Mombasa, influx of people coming i n through rural -
urban migration  as well as urban to urb an movement from other Counties  in search of a better 
life, amon g other key considerations. This  planning model, Hon . Members  has opened our eyes 
to ensure that the projected population of Mombasa, estimated at 2.4million people by the year 
2040 will be fully housed, connected to water, electricity, drainage and sanita tion facilities, 
provided with adequate security, enabled to access a clean environment free of pollution and 
generally assured of a better standard of life than is the case today.  
[Applause ] 
Mr. Speaker,  we have rolled out e -Construction, e -Valuation, e -Registration of land titles  
among other electronic innovations, which have fully transformed our  Lands Department and 
Customer e xperience for l ands matters. We have also  digitized our land records, formalized 
informal settlements and improved efficiency and  effectiveness in facilitating local and 
international invest ors setting up shop in Mombasa. This is in line with the Sustainable 
Development Goals and the new Urban Agenda that African cities, which are now called Cities 
of the Future  are adopting and com mitting to deliver to their people. Efforts are also underway to 
house the residents of Mombasa in a decent and affordable manner. We have entered into 
partnerships for rebuilding our major estates in the County;  starting with Likoni, Buxton and 
Changamwe,  among others, aimed at creating ov er 30,000 houses over the next three  to five 
years ...  
[Applause ] 
 Mr. Speaker, this promise is a key delivery for my legacy and I assure you that I am fully 
committed to leave Mombasa better than I found it ... 
[Applause ] 
In line with the Big Four Agenda and the promise for Universal  Health Coverage, Mr. 
Speaker, my g overnment was able to take the bold step of renaming and making the Coast 
General Teaching and Referral Hospital semi -autonomous through Executive Order No.1 of 
2019. As a result,  we have earned a lot of p ublic and development partner  confidence that has 
enabled the construction and equipping of new state of the art facilities at the Marimani, 
Vikwatani, Mtongwe and Shida Adabu. We have renovated existing ones and engaged partners 
to build the capacity of our health personnel to deliver world class health services to not only 
Mombasa residents but also the nation, th e region and the world at large  as we now gear up 
towards medical tourism, riding on our world cl ass facilities, services and expertise. We have 
already received accolades globally for our specialized health care services at the Coast General 
Hospital and its satellite facilities, for offering cardiac, plastic & neuro surgeries; oncology , 
Intensive Ca re Unit ( ICU) & renal dialysis; laparoscopic & en doscopy surgeries,  among others…    
[Applause]  
 
 So therefore any of you who feel they want to change their faces…  
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11 [Laughter]  
 
 They know where to go.   
Mr. Speaker, we are however deeply concerned about the r ecent developments in the  
health sector with regards to the new C OVID  - 19 Pandemic. We do not want to take this  
lightly and  expose the lives of our people; w e also do not want to panic, instead, we prefer  
to take precautionary measures as directed by our health exper ts at both County and  
National g overnment levels and manage the new way of life with this disease in our midst.  
Hon. Speaker, on matters of transport and infrastructure, we have invested  
adequate resources in ensuring we maintain our facilities  and existing stock of what we have  
built over the years. This is usually a challenge especially where Development Par tners  
support Counties to build  but leave facilities to be r un by the Counties themselves.  
We have also been able to manage traffic th roug h creativity and innovation; o ur popular  
“Happy Hour” and the newly launched “001 Express” have been a major success,  
attracting private  sector support and assistance…  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Going forward, we will complete the development and thereafter adopt a com prehensive  
Master Plan for roads and infrastructure development for Mombasa County. Wor king 
closely with the National government;  we will seek pri vatization  of the rehabilitation and  
design enhancement of the Mombasa - Jomvu highway, Mtwapa highway, desig n and  
implementation of the second Nyali Bridge even though I must acknowledge we have negotiated 
for more investments even this one Nyali Bridge after my meeting with the President and 
yesterday we have agreed that we will move forward on the building of the Second Nyali by a 
way of conc ession … 
 
[Applause]  
 
 And also we finally secure d funding through the National g overnment on the famous our 
Mwakirunge Road as well…  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Also design and implementation of the Likoni Bridge to complement t he existi ng ferries 
plying the Likoni channel. The Mwakirunge road will also be developed to support our people, 
enhance  food production and linkages to markets. Further, design and implementation of the  
Northern and Southern bypasses will also be undertaken to red uce traffic flow into the  
island and Central Business District ( CBD ) hence providing a  conducive business and 
investment environment.  My government will channel resources towards the development of 
infrastru cture to support and encourage non -motorized t ransport. Our people must  learn to walk, 
cycle and jog along our roads so I ask you to support me on that one course…  
 
[Applause]  
 
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12  Over and ab ove these ventures, Mr. Speaker my g overnment is fully cognizant of the  
ongoing discussions and plans towards develo pment of Dongo Kundu and Miritini Special  
Economic Zones. These are major economic drivers and industrial infrastructure facilities  
that will catapult economic growth and development for the County, the Country and the 
region at large. Through a t ripartite  arrangement b etween ourselves, the National  
government and private s ector investors, we will mobilize support and resources for the  
development of offsite infrastructure in readiness for these zones. Roads, energy, social  
infrastructure and utilities such  as drainage and sanitation, fiber connectivity, electricity and  
water, security, hous ing, schools and hospitals  are among the priority facilities that must be  
developed in preparation for full operationalization of these investments. Mombasa County  
is on the front line to ensure that this is undertaken seamlessly, timely a nd to international  
standards.  
In T ourism, Hon . Members  we are fully cognizant of the effect of the economic  
slowdown caused by a myriad of factors. Mombasa has, however, traditional ly be en a  
destination of choice; w e are ready to pick up our pieces and rebuild our brand. A holistic  
regeneration of the Jomo Kenyatta Public Beach will pave way for a total transformation,  
which will also extend to the Old Town, Mombasa Airport, and other k ey sites within the  
County…  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Resources have been allocated to support this program, beginn ing the second quarter of 
this financial y ear. Hon. Members, I am proud to inform you that our Youth, Gender, Sports and  
Culture Department has run ahead o f time with energetic momentum and speed to create a  
platform for our youth, women, people with disabilities and children to have access to renovated 
social halls; modern playgrounds such as Uwanja wa Mbuzi and Bomu grounds;  
access to funding for business and investments through the Mombasa County Revolving  
Fund which has grown in size and coverage since inception. We have also empowered more  
than 20,000 through entrepreneurial trainings. These are critical preparatory steps in laying a  
firm foundation for our people to effectively participate in econom ic activities in this  
Country.  
Mr. Speaker, our approach towards rebuilding the econo my of Mombasa has been 
holistic and unique. We are focusing on attracting local and international investors through 
creation  of an enabling investment climate and business environment. The process of starting a  
business has been simplified and shortened. License applications are now online. Technical  
support is always on standby to assist new entrants in the investment sector a nd facilitation  
is available for both local and foreign entrants into our  economy and investment space.  
Our national and global ranking on matters of investor attractiveness has greatly 
improved. Mombasa is seen as a strategic investment destination f or almost all economic sectors. 
Riding o n this dividend, therefore, my g overnment will not le t go any opportunity to attract a 
new investor into Mombasa ; working closely with the national g overnment, I want to  
consider the creation of Mombasa as a Free Trade Zo ne, in harmony with the Free Port  
Concept discussions currently underway. This will be the first of its kind south of the  
Sahara, aiming at providing special non -fiscal incentives to investors, supporting export  
growth and raising the foreign exchange pote ntial for the Country as a whole … 
 
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 [Applause]  
 
 Beautification of Mombasa is also ongoing, opening up more prospects for local and  
international appetite for residing and working in Mombasa. As you are already aware,  
Kibarani dumpsite was closed and rehabi litated into a recreational park. This has opened up  
space for our people to enjoy the serenity of a clean and renewed City. Mwakirunge will also  
be transformed into a world -class facility able to showcase global standards in management  
of waste and harnes sing energy out of waste. .. 
 
[Applause]  
 
 We are also exploring the greening concept in Mombasa, where we shall ensure a 
sustainable recover y out of the current recession.  Proposals have be en developed to encourage 
green  roofs  on all public  buildings  in Mombasa, energy saving construction and development, 
investment in renewable energy, recycling among other innovations. To achieve all these, Mr. 
Speaker,  we are relying  on our faithful  and hardwo rking  human resource. Our staff  are our 
strength, i  offer  my commitment  to all staff,  that my Administration shall take care of your 
needs … 
 
[Applause]  
 
 I am fully aware that the journey has been steep and uphill, however, it is always darkest 
before dawn. The sunrise moment for all of us is now  and at  hand. Let us  not despair. We will do 
our very to support the much deserved promotions, re -designations, trainings, exchange 
programs, sports and other extracurricular  activities that will provide an incentive and great 
motivation to the people who make things happen.  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Technology will also be deployed to support the total transformation envisaged and also  
address the digitization requirements presented by the post C OVID -19 era.  
Ladies and g entlemen, as a people united in our ambitions, let  us agree to move  in 
harmony a nd ensure that within the next three  years, we will have made a significant  
transformational impact on our people, in a manner that will ensure:  
• No single individual remains food poor in Mombasa. We must be able to feed  
ourselves and ensure food and nutrition security for generations to come;  
• The rate of growth of our economy surpasses population growth rate and the National  Gross 
Product  (GDP ) growth;  
• No young person shall remain without gainful employment;  
• Our training centres will be  offering tailor made courses required by the industry and  
focused on meeting the needs of the econom y; and  
• We will optimally tap a griculture and the Blue Economy as transformational  
resources that will propel the growth and development o f the County to the next  
level.  
 
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14 Hon. Members, for us to achieve these targets,  we need  a concerted effort from all of us. 
As a County g overnment, we have proposed several Bills, which have, since been  
presented before the House, and others are on the way. Please expedite the clearanc e of 
these…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 We also call upon you, Hon . Members, to develop legislations that will support  
our course and strategy towards self -reliance and susta inability. We need to mobilize o wn 
source revenues that will be adequate to fund our  operations and delivery of services to  
the people of Mombasa. This must be supported by adequate legislations. We also need you  
to mobilize your constituents towards active participation during stakeholder sessions that  
we will  hold continuously. This is a constitutional right that must be embraced and respected.  
Towards the national g overnment, we call upon your co ntinued support for matters of  
national s ecurity, a critical element for our tourism sector and prosperity for our businesses  
and investment environment. We need to work together in matters of infrastructure  
development, driven by our needs and growing demand for the same, by our economy.          
 The resource allocation to the County of Mombasa should also take cognizan ce of the 
fact that we a re the second largest c ity in Kenya and an economic powerhouse, for not only the  
Countr y but also the region at large. With  this in mind,  Mombasa  needs  to be sufficiently  
resourced to tap into the virgin sector of the  Blue Economy,  integrated  tourism,  mode rn 
agriculture and value addition, as well as innovations and  technology  adaption  for development. 
The Mombasa Regeneration Project was a good starting point.  Further  resource allocation  for the 
renewal of the economy  through  the Economic  Stimulus  Progr am will be of high value  to our 
people. I call upon our development p artners to continue with  their concerted  efforts  towards  
rebuilding Mombasa and pus hing the reform agenda forward.  
            As a County,  we are committed to ensuring structures are in pla ce for sustainabi lity of the 
programs,  knowledge  transfer, transparency and accountability for resources deployed. It is in 
our interest  to ensure that the support received opens up opportunities for further engagements. 
We have  already written to most of you, seeking further support on our priority areas. We call 
upon you to  walk  with us in this journey . 
To our Business Community, receive our sincere reassurance that we shall endeavor to  
support the creation of an enabling business and investment environme nt in Mombasa. We  
need to attract more investments, both local and international, and for that reason we shall  
focus our priorities around your needs and expectations. I make a clarion call for a new  
dawn, a new beginning and a platform for dialogue and fr uitful engagement that will  
bring out the best in you for the sake of prosperity and development of Mombasa  
and the socio -economic transformation of ou r people. Mombasa is your home, you 
cannot run away from home.  
It is our expectation  that you shall supp ort us in this course  and that you shall be 
committed to abide  by the rules  of the game  and regulations  provided.  Let us all respect the rule 
of law and ensure that  our operations  are within  the dictates  of reason  and accountability  for 
ourselves  and for generations  to come.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15 Kwa watu wangu wa Mombasa na Jimbo  lote la Pwani kwa ujumla, serikali yangu  
itawajibika  kuwapa mazingira yanayostahili; m azingira ya kikazi, kiafya, kiuchumi, na  
kadhalika. Tushikane miko no sote kama wakaazi wa Mombasa, t usimame kidete, tufanye  
kazi pamoja. Nyinyi ndio waajiri wetu, kwa hivyo basi sisi lazima tujitolee mhanga  
kuwapigania haki zenu ili kuhakikisha  ya kwamba ndoto zenu zinatimia , wadogo kwa  
wakubwa, nyote mna haki sawa mbele yetu, nasi twawahakikishia ya kwamb a utendakazi  
wetu utakuwa wa manufaa kwenu na kwa kila mwananchi na mgeni aingiae na kutoka katika mji 
wetu mkuu wa Mombasa … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Nawashukuru nyote kwa heshima kuu mlio nipa niwapiganie.  
Nataka kuwahakikishia ya kwamba mtapata huduma bora zinazo s tahili. Tutawafungulia  
nafasi za biashara na ajira,  ili muweze kujimudu kimaisha. .. 
  
[Applause ] 
 
Ladies and gentle men, as I had committed in my ten point  agenda at the beginning of my  
term in o ffice, I assure you that we are on course and I shall endeavor  to deliver quality  
education; af fordable health care, a 24 hour economy,  a safe and secure County , 
modern infrastructure , an ef ficient waste management system, fresh and clean water,  
a vibrant tourism industry,  support th e youth and sporting activities  and women  
empowerment. .. 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Let us therefore, commit ourselves to the goals that we have set. We should not trim our  
vision for fear of the fact that this will stretch us to the limit, but rather cast our sights on  
the horizon, understanding that the realization of these goals will have paved the way to a  
future, bright and hopeful, for the people of Mombasa. This is our ultimate goal and  
responsibility as servants of the people. We hold our people’s future, not only in our hands  
but also in our h earts. Indeed, this is “A Socio -Economic Rebirth for County 001” … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Finally Hon . Members, the world at large needs to know that Mombasa has come of  
age and its people have matured in politics and leadership. Our people are now focu sed on a  
Coun try that respects devolution, the rule of law and economic s tability. Our people are  
hungry for vibrant and energetic leadership that is focused and informed by the realities of  
the lives of its peo ple. I stand before you today, ladies and g entlemen, and a ssure you  
that Mombasa is ripe! Ripe to produce a leader of that caliber. Ripe to chart a course that is  
prudent, clear and practical in addressing matters that are at the heart of the Kenyan People.  
My brothers and sisters, let us therefore give a chance to a promise of total transformation  
of our socio -economic status for a better future and for gen erations to come.  
 
September 2 2, 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
16  Mr. Speaker, H on. Members, ladies and gentlemen, I submit that the State of the  
County of Mombasa is one of hope, full of promises and conf idence to its people and the  
people of this great N ation, Kenya. .. 
  
[Applause ] 
 
 As it  is writ ten here it says I rest my case but I  just want to also inform you that I am 
looking forward to having a produ ctive , insightful  and knowledg eable exchange  during  our 
retrea t between the Assembly and the E xecutive which  should ha ppen in the ne xt few  days. I 
thank  you all! 
 
[Applause ] 
[Members stood]  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated . Thank you your 
Excellency  the Governor  for the annual sta te of the G overnors address . Hon. Members  just a 
reminder in our S tanding order 20( 5) and 6 which states ,  
5)That wheneve r the Go vernor delivers an address a Member may as soon as practible 
thereafter lay the address on the Table of the C ounty Assembly fol lowing the reading of 
such address,  
6) A M ember m ay give a Notice of M otion that the thanks of the County A ssembly be 
recorded for the ex position of  public policy contained in the address of the Governor but 
the debate on the M otion shall not exceed four  sitting days . 
 So Hon. Members I hope you take note o f the S tanding order and we should have 
discussion on the state of address of his Excellency the Go vernor within the four sittings. Yes, 
 Clerk, next order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House stands  adjourned until Wednesday 23rd of Sep tember , 2020 at 
10:00a.m.   
 
The House r ose at 4: 20p.m.  
    