June 19 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           4 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 19th June, 2018  
The House met at 2:47p.m. 
 
(The Deputy  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats.  Yes Clerk ? 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon. Members, I trust that you’re all well this day.  First and foremost let me start by 
thanking the Almighty God for protecting us through the recess period and enabling us to 
assemble here today to continue with the second session of this Assembly. Permit m e to 
officially welcome you back to the second part of the second session of our Assembly. The 
recess has served as a break from the rigorous Assembly duties and it is my hope that we are 
well rejuvenated and ready to embark on the journey of transforming the lives of residents of 
this great County of Mombasa.  
Hon.  Members during the first part of the second session, you worked diligently and 
shown dedication while discharging your roles of representation, legislation, and oversight. 
This can be attested b y the sittings which have been taking place as scheduled, the cordial 
and vibrant debates in the Assembly  and the numerous committee meetings conducted.  
However, I commend you for the zeal and commitment that you have displayed over  time in 
undertaking you r constitutional and statutory duties; I want to challenge each of us to do 
more than we have previously done.   
Hon.  Members as  you are all aware; key among the activities during the recess was 
the budget process which is still on course. The Committee on  Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations has conducted public participation and we await it ’s report and the passage of 
the budget estimates as well as Mombasa County Appropriation Bill , 2018 by 30th June, 
2018.  
Hon.  Members, I am also aware that the C ommittee activities have been going on for 
the better part of the recess period and it is my hope that various C ommittees used this 
duration valuably to dispense off any pending activities. I am convinced that the deliberation 
coming out of the C ommittee activities  will form part of our legislative agenda moving 
forward.  

June 19 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           4 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 My office is committed and shall continue to str engthen the C ommittees and 
individual MCA´s through continuous training programmes, benchmarking and attachments. 
This will be done in order to stren gthen the capacity of the M embers so that you can 
constantly update your skills and expertise while acquiring the requisite exposure to better 
handle your work.  
Hon.  Members, t o enable you to have an informed debate and contribution before the 
Assembly, I  wish to urge everyone to develop a habit of continuous interaction with the 
Standing Orders and other requisite laws which govern the business of the Assembly. It is my 
appeal that you develop interest on all matters deliberated in this Assembly, research  on the 
same with the aim of making substantive contribution both at the plenary and the committee 
level.  
Hon.  Members, as we embark on the second part of second session, I would like to 
politely.. .  
 
(Technical hitch ) 
I would like to politely remind you o f the significance of your work as Hon.  
Members ... 
(Technical hitch ) 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
Hon.  Members as the technicians are working on the technicalities of the microphones 
I will continue with my message.   
Hon.  Members, as we embark on the second part of the second session, I would like 
to politely remind you of the significance of your work as Hon.  Members . This Assembly 
exists primarily for one reason only, and that is to solve the problems and meet the needs of 
our people. In order to do that, we nee d to constantly remind ourselves of what this Assembly 
expects of us as Members. It is my sincere hope that we continue to portray Mombasa County 
Assembly with decorum and decency it deserves while remaining focused in our quest to 
deliver to the constitue nts we represent.  
Hon.  Members , in closing I wish to reiter ate that  as Members we have the 
responsibility to improve the role played by this important organ of the Mombasa County 
Government, as mandated by our Constitution. Both our individual and collecti ve efforts will 
contribute towards making this Assembly a critical pillar in the development of our County. 
This County Assembly must act as the voice of the people and an important platform for 
monitoring the implementation of the policy programmes of the  County Government.  
Once again, may I take this opportunity to officially welcome you all and wish you 
fruitful engagements and deliberations as we c ontinue with the second session.  
Thank you and may God Bless Mombasa.  
 
(Applause ) 
 Yes Clerk?  
MESSAGE  
NOMINATION OF CHIEF OFFICERS  
Hon. Members we have a message from H.E The Governor of Mombasa County 
Hassan Ali Joho.  
June 19 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           4 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 (The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) read H.E The Governor’s message)  
According to the powers conferred to me by the County Government Act , 2012 
Section 45, I hereby forward the names of the nominated Chief Officers for vetting 
and approval before appointment to the position of Chief Officers as follows.  
1. Tourism   - Mr. Innocent M. Mugabi  
So I commit the Committee concerned Trade, Tourism and Inv estment to start the vetting 
with immediate effect.  
(Applause)  
Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
RE-ALLOCAT ION OF  UNUTILIZED APPROPRIA TED BUDGET VOTES AND  FINAL SUPPLEMENTARY 
APPROPRIATION BILL FOR FY 2017/2018  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I wish to table the 
following Motion ; 
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy move d the Motion ) 
THAT AWARE that the County Government is authorized to make re -allocations of 
appropriated budget votes to be approved by t he Assembly pursuant to section 135 of 
the Public Finance Management Act, 2012;  
FURTHER AWARE that the County Government prepared a Mombasa County 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2018 in March , 2018 that was approved by the 
Assembly;  
CONCERNED that there  are many un utilized votes which left unused will negatively 
influence essential services to the public;  
NOTING that....  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Hatimy due to the technicalities of our 
microphones just step forward ...  
(Inte rruption)  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Okay . 
(Loud Consultations)  
June 19 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           4 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): No the gadget is very far. Okay then you can 
proceed.  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy  moved the Motion ) 
NOTING that the financial year is coming to an end in a weeks' time by  June 30th 
2018;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
 
The County Government be hereby authorized to re -allocate unutilized appropriated 
budget votes and final Supplementary Appropriation Bill for FY 2017/2018 be 
approved.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speake r, I wish to move the Motion . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Who is your seconder?  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): I second.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): It has already been seconded. Members I 
now propose a question tha t the Motion  on approval of the re -allocation of unutilized budget 
votes for the FY 2017/2018 be debated in this Hon orable  House . 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Applause)  
 
Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika hap a 
tumekuja mbele ya Nyumba  hii kuomba ruhusa ya Nyumba hii kama tulivyosema kwenye 
Mswada  ya kusema kuwa section 135 inaruhusu kufanya re-allocation . Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwa ufupi ni  kusema kuwa tunataka kuangalia zile votes ambazo hazikutumika, ziweze 
kutumi ka na  kutengeneza supplementary budget  yetu ili tuweze kutumia kwa njia ile 
inayotakikana.  
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba Members  waunge mkono  ili tuweze kufanya mambo yetu 
kwa njia ambayo inatakikana. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Amur?  
Hon. Amur:  Ahsante Bwana Spika nataka ku unga mkono  Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa 
kuna votes  ambazo hazijatumika basi ni muhimu kwamba ziwe reallocated  ili ziweze 
kusaidia katika mahali ambapo kuna  upungufu na hiyo itakuwa ni kuwezesha Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa kufanya kazi zake na kujikimu sababu kuna umuhimu wa ku re-allocate  pesa hizi 
ili ziweze kufaidi watu wa Mombasa katika kutekeleza majukumu yetu. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes the Leader of Majority?  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika pia n ingependa 
kuunga mkono kwa huu M swada ulioletwa na Mwenyekiti wa Fedha . Kama unavyojua 
Bwana S pika tumebakia na wiki mbili tu  huu mwaka wa kifedha wa serikali u ishe, sasa zile 
vote ni vizuri tukiweza k uzi re-allocate  kwa pesa itakayokuwa ipo kwa kuweza kumaliza 
miradi m ingine ambayo bado zangoja h uu mwaka wa kifedha .  
June 19 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           4 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Kwa hivyo ni kitu kimoja cha muhimu sana pia namshukuru sana Mwenyekiti  kwa 
kuweza kuileta kwa huu mda ambao umebaki wa wiki mbili kwa sa babu itakuwa si vyema 
baada ya mwaka ipatikane kwamba pesa zimekosa kutumika zikaweza kurudi na huku kuna 
miradi ambayo imeweza kusimama kwa sababu ya hizo vote. Hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nampa kongole M wenyekiti kwa sababu amefikiria kwamba kuna umuhimu  wa jambo kama 
hili kwa sababu ya watu wa Mombasa si kwa sababu ya si si kama W aheshimiwa, kwa sababu 
ya watu wa Mombasa kuweza kupata huduma zao vyema. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  
Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Mwanzo nashukuru kwa kunipa tia fursa hii niweze 
kuchangia M swada huu. Mheshimiwa Naibu Spika pia mimi sina budi kuunga mkono kwa 
vile kama kuna miradi ambayo haijaisha, ni vizuri pesa ziweze kuwa reallocated  ziweze 
kumaliza hizo kazi, kw a vile sioni haja 30th ikifika zile pesa itabidi zirudi ni vizuri ziweze 
kutumika vizuri, zi  reallocatiwe  kwa vitengo vy engine ndio ziweze kufanyika vizuri , kama 
zitafanyika vizuri hilo nasisitiza. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Tobias?  
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity, at least when 
the reallocation is done is for the good interest of the citizen s of our County and the timing of 
course is necessary , genuine and the mover of the Motion  could have just be more elaborative 
we are reallocating from this kit to the other one, it should not be left more open like that , 
now we should be aware where it is being re -allocated to ! But the timing itself is good, but I 
wonder if now there is money to be re -allocated but we’ve been having problems of money, 
next time I would request if we have money we should also be let known that there's money 
so that at least we may have time to spend the money rather than now we are rushing to re -
allocate , otherwise  I beg to support the Motion . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Thoya?  
Hon. Thoya:  Bwana Spika nachukua nafasi hii kuweza kukush ukuru nikiweza kutia 
pondo kwa M swada huu tunafahamishwa kwamba kuna pesa ambazo h azijatumika na ikiwa 
hatutapitisha M swada huu zile pesa zitarudi kule na hatimaye zile ambazo tutaletewa itakuwa 
ni kidogo kwa sababu watu wa Mombasa hawatumii pesa, haitakuwa vizuri ni vizuri tupitishe 
tuzitumie lakini hata hivyo pesa hizi tunazitumiwa kw a wiki moja ni kama ambaye 
tunazitumia kwa fujo, Mswada huu ulik uwa uje mape ma zaidi kwa sababu wengi wa 
Waheshim iwa walioko hapa wamekuwa waathiriwa, madeni ya kila aina ambayo watu 
wameenda ku  benchmark ama watu wameenda ki safari rasmi mpaka sasa hii ha tujui hatima 
hiyo na kuna pesa ambazo zilikuwa zitumike kutulipa, basi kama ni hivyo ipitishe na ifanyike 
sasa hii tuione heri na ni funzo kubwa kwamba huu mwaka ambao tunaenda kupitisha bajeti 
tumakinike zaidi kwa sababu inatakikana zile sehemu ambazo zil e pesa hazitum iki kikamilifu 
tuzilete kule ambako tuko sawa, tuko na mambo meng i. 
Jumba letu hili tunaloliona lina dhiki zake, inasikitisha hata hi cho chombo unatumia 
saa hii lawaka ? Tuone!  Mitambo  ina matatizo hapa, nafikiri hiyo yote ni shida ambayo 
inahitaji pesa twazungumza twaziwakisha lakini nimeona afadhali niizime, zima tukisema  
inarekodi kitabu tabu na mimi nafikiria kama kuna pesa basi zikatolewe zikanunuliwe 
mitambo mipya hii inakuwa ni aibu ya hali ya juu...  
 
(Applause)  
June 19 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           4 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 ...ukirudi tukienda huko Chumba cha mikutano, Committee room  ukiita wageni 
kunanyesha unaweka ndoo, ni aibu ambayo imetuzonga Bwana Spi ka na sijui tutaipitisha 
wapi? K ama kuna pesa mimi nataka a ngalau  mununue mabati mutengeze kile chumba cha 
mikutano  tu angalau zile aibu tunazoweza  kuzificha tukazifiche na mapema . Ni vizuri 
tuyaseme uchi ukiuficha hutazaa, tuuseme vile ulivyo kama kuna pesa zikatolewe tuangalie 
wale ambao kidogo walienda safari za bench marking  tulipwe, kama kuna mahali ambapo 
twaweza enda tukapate masomo zaidi  twend e kuliko hizo pesa zirudishwe huko, zikipelekwa 
huko hazikosi kazi ndugu yangu, huko juu kazi zimejaa tele, leo tuziregeshe tutaonekana 
kweli hali yetu ni ngumu kiakili lakini mimi ningependekeza siku za usoni tuhakikishe zile 
sehemu ambazo zina matumizi m akubwa ya pesa tunazipangia kikamilifu ... 
  
(Applause)  
Si vizuri zile sehemu ambazo zinahitajika sana mapeni tuzipangie mapeni hafifu 
halafu tu  hang  ama tupepee juu kwa sababu hatuna lolote acha nimalizie hapa lakini hii aibu 
ya leo imepita kiwango.  
(Appla use) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mwalimu?  
Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nachukua nafasi hii 
kuweza kumshukuru Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha kwa kutuletea hoja hii katika Bunge 
letu tukufu ili tuweze kupitisha hizi pesa  ambazo zimebakia bakia ziweze kutumika . Nafikiri 
katika Jumba hili kuna mambo mengi sana ambayo sisi twayahitaji lakini kumbe kuna pesa 
ambazo zimekaa mpaka hazitumiki.  Kuna  shida muhimu sana ambazo sisi W abunge wa 
Kaunti ya Mombasa ni masikitiko na watu wengi wana chuki kwa sababu ya ukosefu wa pesa 
kwa mfano sisi mikopo y etu ile amba yo ilikuwa twatarajia tuipate hatujaipata sijui pengine 
pesa hizi haziko katika vote pengine yafaa sisi W aheshimiwa tuweze kupata mikopo hii. S isi 
kusema ule ukweli tumefurah i kuona kwamba Mswada  huu uliweza kuletwa katika Jumba 
hili liweze kupitisha pesa zitumike lakini tunaomba Jumba hili kuwe na uwazi kwaonekana 
kuwa kuna  matatizo mengi ya pesa ambayo W aheshimiwa wanahitaji, watu wengine hawana 
raha, huyu hampendi huyu laki ni kumbe pesa ziko.  
Kwa hivyo naomba Jumba hili tukufu la Mombasa Kaunti tuweze kupitisha hizi votes 
lakini kuwe na uwazi na pia tujulishwe kwamba hizi pesa hizi ziko vipi? Ziko  wapi? Na kwa 
nini zimebaki? Zimetumika  kwa njia gani? Kwa hivyo kwa hayo mach ache Mheshimiwa 
Spika nashukuru kwa kupata nafasi hii narudia tena kumpatia tena Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya 
Fedha kwa kuleta huu M swada. Ahsanteni.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members unless there's somebody opposing 
but if you are all in agreement I w ill ask the Mover of the Motion  to put his input. Yes Hon. 
Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Use your microphone . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nikushukuru Members  kwa kuweza 
kuuunga mko no huu Mswada  kwa sababu wameona umuhimu wa jambo hili. Mheshimiwa 
Spika mwanzo kama tunavyojua kuwa watu dakika ya mwisho wameanza kusafiri, watu 
wamesafiri na kusema hivi pia kuna mambo mengine kuweza kufanyika na utasema kuwa hii 
nafasi kwa wale waliosa firi ambao hawakusafiri pia wote wapatiwe nafasi wote wasafiri...  
June 19 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           4 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 (Applause)  
Kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Spika kuna maneno mengi ambayo tunazungumza 
zungumza wanaona kuwa pengine Hatimy amefanya hivi ama ni nani amefanya hivi, unajua 
viongozi wako kwenye hii Nyu mba na kila mmoja anajua kiongozi anafanya kazi yake . 
Nataka kusema Mheshimiwa Spika kuwa tusipofanya jambo hili Auditor General  atatuletea 
query  ya kusema kuwa sisi tunatengeneza bajeti ambayo hatuwezi kuitekeleza kwa hivyo 
kukaingia hatari pengine tu kaam biwa zile pesa zetu tunazope wa tukatiwe kwa sababu 
hatukuweza zile tulizozitengeneza hatukuweza kuzitumia.   
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kwa uchache wa maneno nasema shukrani  sana na 
naomba muendelee kuunga mkono huu  Mswada sio mwisho wake mpaka ikishapita n dio 
tuseme kweli imepita na tuweze kufanya yale mambo ambayo yatakikana sisi tufanye . 
Nataka kuwaambia Members  kuwa hizi pesa huwezi kuongeza jambo lolote kwa 
supplementary  isipokuwa pesa ni zile zile itakuwa tu zimetoka kwa group A  zimeingia B na B 
kwenda  C lakini pesa ni zile  zile kwa hivyo pesa hizi ambazo zilikuwa za mikopo zimetoka 
kwa mikopo  ndio zinatumika kwa mambo mengine Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
 
(Applause)  
Pesa tulioweka shs 87M ilioni  ambazo kwamba ilikuwa tuchukue mikopo  lakini 
mwaka tarehe 30 ukifi ka itakuwa hakuna tena zile pesa kwa hivyo ni afadhali kusema kuwa 
sisi tuzitumie hizi pesa kwa njia nyengine ambayo itafaidisha hili Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Ahsanteni sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Hati my and the rest of the 
Hon. Members I now stand to put a question after seeing the mood of the House , it's as if all 
are in agreement. I put a question that the Motion  on Approval of Re - allocation of an utilised 
budget votes for the Financial Year 2017/20 18 be approved in this Hon. House . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members there being no other Business the House stands adjourned unt il tomorrow 
Wednesday 20th at 9:00a.m. 
The House rose at 3:18p.m.  