March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 30th March , 2016  
The House met at 9:10a .m. 
(Mr. Speaker ( Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Members  you may have your seats, yes Hon.  Nzai.  
 Hon.  Nzai: Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa S pika, nimesimama asubuhi na mapema kwa 
sababu kuna jambo ambalo limetokea na nikaona kabla hatujaendelea kwa ruhusa yako ili 
niweze kuyajadili haya ambayo nataka kuyasema. Mheshimiwa S pika asubuhi ya leo nimeweza 
kupita Changamwe  nilikuwa katika eneo la Jomvu  na nikapita Changamwe  nikapita katika ofisi 
yetu ya pale kitu cha kunishangaza nikiwa kama kiongozi tukiwa na Mheshimiwa Ibrahim 
tulikaa pale nje tukiulizana leo hii eneo la Jomvu  ama eneo la Changamwe kukatokezea moto ni 
lipi lile am balo tunaweza kusema kuwa tumejitayarisha vilivyo ya  kuweza kusaidia wat u wetu.  
Nimeona ni jambo ambalo linaweza kuangaliwa kuweza kuchunguzwa na liweze kupewa 
suluhisho maana ni Bunge  hili ambalo lina  kuwajibika na  kuhusika katika maisha ya wananchi , 
najua kwamba tuko na M wenyekiti ambaye ana uwezo mkubwa na ninajua amejaribu 
kuyashughulikia mambo haya na mambo haya ni kama kwamba yamewekwa katika mahali pa 
kusahau . Ndiposa asubuhi ya leo ninaomba utupatie mwelekeo na  umpatie nguvu Mwenyekiti 
ambaye ana husika  na disaster management  kuona kwamba leo hii janga likitokea ni lipi ambalo 
tunaweza kuokoa , ni vipi ambavyo tunaweza kuokoa watu wetu . Hatuwezi kuomba mabaya 
lakini kwa mfano sasa hivi majanga makubwa zaidi kwa mfano watapigwa mawe kwa sababu 
wame fika kuchelewa na labda wameenda kuomba kwa KPA ama tumeomba fire kwa watu  wa 
Airports authority , lakini sisi kama K aunti tuna uwezo mkubwa sisi wenyewe ya kw amba 
tunapaswa kujali maslahi ya watu wetu . 
 Mheshimiwa S pika nimeona niweze kulileta jambo hili m apema ili tuone vile ambavyo 
tunavyoweza kuchangiana na tunaweza kutoa suluhisho la haraka ili tuone ya kwamba tunaweza 
okoa  watu wale. Vile vile M heshim iwa S pika kuna kitu ambacho kilitokezea juzi wakati Miritini 
watoto wameenda kuogelea imetulazimu zai di ya siku mbili  ndio mtu kupatikana na hapa 
nikisema hivyo ni kwa sababu nilitaka Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya majanga  apewe nguvu za 
kuona hili jambo ambalo limeweza kuchukuliwa kwa haraka hiyo Kamati  ihusike vilivyo na 
apewe uwezo wa kuamua vile ambavyo inaw eza kuonekana . Jomvu ni mahali ambapo hakuna 
bahari,  Miritini  kuna bahati kuna bahari watoto inapofika wakati wa mapumziko hutaka 
kujifunza kuogelea kwa maji ya chumvi ; imetulazimu kwamba wazazi waweze kuzuia watoto 
wasiende kuogelea kule kwa sababu kama Kaunti hatuko tayari za  kuokoa wana nchi. 
Mheshimiwa S pika nimeona tuna mambo yanafaa kuangaliwa ili tuweze kupata suluhis ho kwa 
watu wetu. Ahsante sana M heshim iwa S pika kwa kunipea fursa.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Madundo?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Madundo: Yangu Mheshimiwa S pika ilikuwa ni taarifa  kulingana na 
maongezi ya Mheshimiwa K arisa Nzai;  mimi taarifa  ni ya Shika Adabu , huko pia juzi 
kulitokezea matatizo ya fire sehemu ya Ujamaa  kulikuwa na askari ambaye amekodisha nyumba  
hapo kwa bahati mbaya mtoto w ake kulik uwako na ile tear gas  ikabidi ule moto atoe pin ya  
katika ile tear gas  kukatokezea moshi mwingi sana mahali pale sasa watu wakahofia kuwa hii 
nyumba imeshika moto , baada ya kupiga ripoti fire station  Shika Adabu  ikaja ile gari ya fire,  
gari ni m bovu tukijua hiyo gari iko sawa,  imekaa hivyo kwa sababu ilikuwa siku kuu ni wakati 
wa kupumzika wao hawa kushughulika ile gari kutengeneza na wakati shida ikitokezea haijui 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 mambo ya sikukuu . Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa S pika kuongezea kwa nguvu za mwenzangu 
Mheshimiwa Nzai mimi naona majanga  ni muhimu sana, Kamati  ya kushughulikia majanga 
ingawaje  walikuja kwangu Shika Adabu na tukazunguka yale matatizo yako pale Shika Adabu ni 
makubwa sana . Hivyo basi  Bwana Spika  ningeomba hili jambo la  majanga  tulifuatilizie k wa 
makini sana  na wale wahusika kama M wenyekiti awe akifuatilizia kwa muhimu kwa sababu 
ikiwa wakati jambo limetokezea sasa kama hiyo ilikuwa ni tear gas  ingekuwa hiyo nyumba 
imeshika moto , nyumba nyingi zingeungua manake ilibidi gari ipigiwe simu itoke Mo mbasa 
upande wa pili wa pale F erry huwa kuna matatizo . Mheshimiwa S pika ningeomba h ili swala 
lichukuliwe kwa uzito sana, a hsante.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Well that is just information by Hon.  Nzai that I would not 
want us to dwell much on i t but is important to realise that as a House  we had actually passed 
Motions in regards to those particular issues that both Hon.  Members  have raised , so it’s  actually 
upon and within the powers  of jurisdictions of the House  that the Committee on I mplement ation 
to move with speed and expedite whether those particular issues are being implemented .  
Otherwise we have done what is required of us by law and within the powers of the  House , what 
remains is the implementation  to be expedited as soon as possible so that we avoid any other 
tragedies.  Clerk?  
(Interruption)  
(Hon.  Mwidani st ood) 
 Hon.  Mwidani, why do we have so many interruptions before start of business?  
 Hon.  Mwidani:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, you know it is fair to inform the House  
whatever you have said ; now is cor rect but actually I would like to tell the House  that the 
Committee is still on , the same issue in fact we have collected information we have seen from 
Likoni,  Changamwe now we are waiting to go to the centre of the economy here in town Mvita 
so that we co mpile the whole information I come up with a very comprehensive report of which I 
would like this House  also to give me support because we have seen a lot of problems but 
actually it’s not my time to say it until I come with that report . This is what I wa nted to inform 
the House , that issue was brought by Hon.  Jimmy Odari but  actually the C ommittee is now on  its 
toes preparing that report , thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Thank you Hon.  Mwidani. Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Ladies and gentle men there is an invitation here ; all C hairpersons have been invited to a 
consultative meeting , that is capacity building on devolution . If you know you are a C hairperson 
it is important that you attend this important meeting I can see , I believe you have r eceived this 
particular invitation and so if you receive it please make sure that you avail yourself so that you 
can listen to whatever the partners have to say and even th ough the letter is written 9.00 am but 
we had made a proposal that this particular me eting be held as from ...(??) 
 Next?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
CENSUS OF DRIVERS IN TRANSPORT COMPANIES  
 Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu?  
 Hon.  Mwalimu: Thank you Mr. Speaker , I wish to move the following M otion.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir,  I beg to move the following M otion:  
(Hon.  Mwa limu move d Motion)  
 THAT AWARE that there are many transport companies providing employment to 
people as driver s, mechanics and other occupations;  
 FURTHER AWARE that these transport companies employ locals and foreigners as 
drivers in different capacity Mr. Speaker;  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  CONCERNED that the number of foreign drivers has increased tremendously to the 
disadvantage of local job seekers;  
 I therefore urge the County A ssembly to RESOLVE that;  
 The department  of the County government of Mombasa to conduct a census of  all drivers 
in transport companies , to determine the ratio of local versus foreign drivers.  
 Mr. Speaker this will be a benefit for our youth s and our local people … the ratio and Mr. 
Speaker before I proceed I would like Hon.  Saad t o second the M otion.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Ahmed?  
 Hon.  Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I rise to second the M otion on census of drivers in 
transport companies, thank you.  
(Question put)  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : I will put it to question that motion on census of dri vers in 
transport companies be debated as moved?  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 Hon.  Mwalimu: These are private companies they have got their own management but 
Mr. Speaker for the benefit of local mwana nchi and more p recisely the people of Mombasa 
County w ho reside in the C ounty I think it is time as the C ounty government to act upon this 
issue because this mat ter has or the management of these  companies are saying that they are free . 
Mr. Speaker I think the rat io of foreigners employed in the se transport companies is high than 
local people seeking jobs , roaming around in town we have our youth s that are unemployed and 
we are seeing people being brought  from other parts outside this C ounty or outside Kenya and 
are being employed and yet our people are not b eing employed . Mr. Speaker for us to solve this 
we have to at least look for employment for our youth s, we have to put more effort and we as 
leaders it is our duty to find means and ways of how the issue of unemployment or how we are 
going to reduce the i ssue of unemployment and leave a leeway of pe ople to come from outside 
this C ounty or if we do not put or take any strong measures this issue will continue and it is to 
the disadvantage of our people . There are many companies which I and the other Hon.  Members  
can name many companies that are in our C ounty,  companies that reside in our C ounty that are 
employing people from their origin where the management of those companies come from . 
 Mr. Speaker I beg the Hon.  Members  in this Hon.  House  to strongly suppo rt this Motion 
because it is going to at least  create or give importance to our people yet we are going to conduct 
such an exercise  because am sure there are many companies that they have got questions to 
answer as to why the locals are not employed yet th ey are employing people from  outside the 
country . Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Karisa Nzai Munyika . 
 Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker i stand to support t he M otion that has been brought 
by Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu very strongly. Hon.  Speaker first and foremost you cannot give food 
to the neighbour while yourself you are not satisfied, we know they are so many companies, 
transport companies that have come and hav e been established in our Count y, we h ave people 
who are within this Count y and fro m outside the Count y they are coming from they know they 
should employ some people from wherever they are coming from into this country. But some of 
the investors from where they are also causing insecurity because you cannot employ for eigners 
and the pe ople of this C ounty are looking ; mind you Mr. Speaker the youths will hire some of 
the audience to their work and they will go to work every morning and they will not get 
anything , actually they will wait until you get your salary and they will rob you or they will wait 
until you get your salary and they will wait for you .  I totally con cur with Hon.  Fadhili for these 
measures to be taken and the measures to be taken very carefully so that the percentage should 
not pass the originals and today Hon.  Speaker if we do it very clearly to see the number of the 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 companies and the trucks that are within our areas for instance in Jomvu alone there are more 
than 1500 trucks if they take 20  per cent  or 30  per cent  they will move the percentage of our  
unemployed youths  from where they are and this is the only area Hon.  Speaker where even drop 
outs can have the jobs , it is not like the other jobs which needs a degree this is a different job. 
Mr. Speaker i con cur with Hon.  Fadhili that the census to be taken and action should be moved 
with speed so that our youth s should be employed. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ahmed Saad Faraj . 
 Hon.  Faraj : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker as part of the County g overnment 
mandate we should actually be motivating foreign investors  but the same time the essence of 
having foreign investors opening up companies in our locality or County it is to actually provide 
an opening of job creations and job opportunities for our local people. Mr. Speaker there's a 
policy that allows the inves tor to carry that any g overnment that allows investors to carry  has 
policies which are in place that looks into the welfare of the local people and i believe they are 
first priorities of a company , and it  is to look at the numbers of our local people who have been 
employed in such companies and second the part of the policy they also look at the generation of 
the investors, it portray s for us as a Co unty g overn ment or rather as the national g overnment 
which is the one that deals directly with the labour is sues does not have such kind of polici es to 
do a follow up . Mr. Speaker if we consider there  sources that this company ...(??)  if you look at 
the road and infrastructure, if we look at the sewage systems it is all paid by the local people, the 
taxation is  taxed by the local people while the employment is given to the foreigners who are not 
giving any single cent to this County. Mr. Speaker i suggest that rather than just going there 
doing an inspection and looking at the records we must do a head toes of  all those particular 
companies so that we can come up with a proper report which will include the issues on the 
ground . 
 Mr. Speaker we must come up with the big industries and show balance in terms of 
employment but in reality if you look on  the reality it is open that these people are violating all 
labour l aws and they are not abiding by the standards that have been set in terms of employment 
of the local people. So Mr. Speaker if you look at the jobs that are mentioned by Hon.  Fadhili in 
this M otion ; the drivers, the mechanics are the majority in Mombasa and in Kenya. Mr. Speaker i 
fully support the M otion and i will urge my fellow Members  of the County Assembly to support 
the M otion for the benefit of our people, we've been having  complains on and o n in regard to 
unemployment, in regard to County g overnment not being able to create jobs to our people 
which is very true and this is not an issue that is only in Kenya but unemployment c uts across the 
whole world . Mr. Speaker therefore i call upon my br others and sisters who are here to support 
this so that they can have an opportunity to create jobs fo r our people. Thank you so much . 
 Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Rajwayi) :  Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa nafasi niweze  
kuchangia M swada ulioletwa katika Bunge  hili na Mwakilishi wa Wodi ya Port  Ritz 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuun ga mkono moja 
kwa moja mswada am bao umeletwa katika Bunge  hili lakini pengine nitaomba ninapounga 
mkono mswada huu niunge mkono pia kama itawezekana ni ufanyie marekebisho.  Kwa sababu 
kampuni nyingi ambazo zinafanya kazi twashukuru ni kampuni ambazo zinaleta faida kubwa 
katika Kaunti yetu lakini kwa wale tunaowaita wageni  asilimia yao ni a silimia ndogo na we ngi 
wa zile k ampuni ambazo zinafanya kazi katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa zina wageni katika 
maeneo ni hap a hapa n chi yetu ya Kenya lakini maeneo ya vibanda vibanda ukilingani sha na 
wale ambao wako juu pia k ampuni zile ambazo mimi nazijua na nazifahamu vizur i katika Kaunti 
yetu ya Mombasa ambazo zinahusika na masuala ya uchukuzi utapata ni kampuni inafanya kazi 
Mombasa lakini pengine ma kao yake makubwa yako Nairobi, k ampuni inafanya kazi Mombasa 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 lakini makao yake makuu yako Eldoret . Utakuta Mheshimiwa Spika idadi kubwa ya wale 
waajiriwa wa kampuni kama zile pamoja na kwamba wanafanya kazi katika maeneo ya 
Mombasa lakini wanakuja na malori yao, wanakuja na wafanyi  kazi wao na wanakuja na kila 
kitu chao wanafanya kazi katika Kaunti yetu halafu mwisho wa kwisha inakuwa ni biashara 
wanayofanya lakini hakuna faida yeyote ambayo tumeweza kupata kutokamana na vijana wetu . 
 Kwa hi o ningeomba kama itawezekana kwamba iwapo tutaweza kuangalia ni idadi au 
kiasi gani cha wale watu wanaofanya kazi kama hizi katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa tusiangalie 
tu wale vijan a wa makampuni ambayo yanatoka nchi za n je bali hata makampuni ambayo yako 
katika maeneo mbali mbali katika n chi yetu ya Kenya lakini zinafanya kazi katika Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa . Kwa sababu suala hili ni suala amb alo ni la kikatiba , migao ya ajira yako katika 
maeneo hasa katika maeneo ya Kaunti pia , kampuni ambayo inafanya kazi katika Kaunti yetu ina 
asilimia fulani ambayo ni lazima wafanyi  kazi waweze kutoka katika maeneo yetu si kwa zile 
kampuni tu zinazotoka nje  bali hata kwa zile zinazofanya kazi kwa maeneo mbali mbali ya 
Kenya na kama zinatoa ajira basi ziangalie kazi ambazo zitawasaidia vijana wa Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi naunga mkono mia chini ya mia.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Ahmed Omar Ebrahim . 
 Hon.  Ahmed Omar Ebrahim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to 
support this motion which was brought by Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu in this House  concerning the 
census of the transport companies. Mr. Speaker we as Mombasa County we really invite 
investors to come and invest in our County but whenever the investors come to invest it is a 
benefit for our County as we get the revenue and also there's a source of job creation but we as 
the legislators of Mombasa i ur ge this House  that if we can set an example to other Counties by 
establishing that whenever a company is operating concerning the employment rate maybe we 
say any company that needs to operate in Mombasa must employ 70 or 60  per cent  of labour 
from Mombasa  County and 30  per cent  from whatever they want . Mr. Speaker Sir there are very 
many t ransport companies ; especially the trucks which operates in Changamwe area , some of the 
companies are owned by the foreigners and we have some which are owned by people  from 
Congo or Uganda and it is very sad to see that most of the drivers in these  companies are coming 
from Uganda, Congo, Rwanda while they are very many truck drivers who have valid licenses 
from Kenya and Mombasa that are jobless while these companies o perate in Jomvu which are in 
Mombasa, they are taking employees from their countries. Mr. Speaker there's a company that 
was i ntroduced last week known as Uber Taxis, the company is also worldwide it has started last 
week in Mombasa , their offices are lo cated in Nyali ; i have followed up with the company to see 
if they have people from Mombasa but it is very sad that the drivers of the taxis are foreigners 
while we have so many unemployed youths in Mombasa who have valid licenses but these 
companies which  are operating in our County they employ people who are not from Mombasa 
while they are using our resources like what Hon.  Saad said they are using our roads, water but 
our pe ople are the ones who pay taxes .  
 Mr. Speaker some issue s that relate to many of  our youths seeking job opportunities in 
other foreign countries based in United Arab Emirates ; our youths seek employment in those 
countries due to the minimal chances of employment in our County so there's a need for us 
legislators to come up with polici es that for any company to come up or that operate in our 
country or C ounty  they must employ a certain percentage of our youth s before considering oth er 
vacancies to the foreigners.  This issue of employment has also increase d the issue of our youth s 
going  to seek jobs in foreign countries Mr. Speaker ; this  has also increase d the decreasement of 
votes in our County or Country because many of  my friends  who i would like to get to where I 
am have gone to Qatar, Bahrain  and Dubai while we can still create opportunities where  they can 
get employed here .  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  So to us it is also a disadvantage Mr. Speaker because we are losing our votes; t hose 
youths are v ery energetic, they are learned and  If we can maintain them here it will be an 
advantage to our government a nd to ourselves by  giving them a chance to work in the country . 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Mwidani . 
 Hon.  Mwidani:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I  also rise to support the M otion , in fact it is a 
good M otion to have a census of dr ivers in transport and it should be also included not only 
drivers, even co driver s, mechanics, we can see sometimes we get even foreign  mechanics while 
we have our people who real ly have knowledge in mechanics . So Mr. Speaker I won’t say much 
but to giv e support to this M otion so t hat we can get a comprehensive report on  the census of the 
employees in transport  so that we can even come with a Bill to make our issues to be polic ies or 
laws in this House . So I really support this M otion and I think Mr. Speaker to me it is a very 
good Motion which can give the youths the chance so that they can even enjoy  the chances of 
employment available. Thank you , Mr.  Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Madundo . 
 Hon.  Mohamed Madundo:   Ahsante Bwana Spika  kwa kunipatia nafasi hii ; mimi 
naunga mkono ule Mswada amba o umeletwa na Mhes himiwa Fadhili, umenikumbusha wakati  
wa 1983 nilipoenda Afrika Kusini tulikuwa  tumeenda kikazi huko wakati nafanya kazi  kwa 
kikosi cha jeshi na tulipo kaa kule Afrika Kusini kw a muda wa  wiki moja nil iona mambo tofauti 
tofauti  haswa kule watu wengi ambao walikuwa si  wenyeji wa pale walikuwa wana uwawa kwa 
zile kazi ambazo walikuwa wamezichukua wao kwa wingi sana. Kwa hi o, ni muhimu sana sisi 
pia kwa sababu katika Bunge  sisi n dio  hutunga s heria na vile vile pia tuko na M wenyekiti wa 
(??) cha wafanyi  kazi  yuko hapa,  ni muhimu kufwatilizia haya maneno kwa sababu ni vizuri 
tuwe na mipangilio ya kuhakikisha kuwa wale watu wetu ambao wako hapa wamepata kazi 
kama wale ambao sasa wa ko seh emu za nje .  Nash ukuru pia wakati nilipo kuwa nafanya utalii  
kulikuwa na nafasi nyingi sana za kutoka nje wakati tulikuwa tukichukua madereva, naibu wa 
madereva, wale ambao wamesomea lugha walikua wanachuku liwa na pia kulikuwa na utata kwa 
sababu kul ikua na wenye wanajua Kijerumani, Kifaransa, Kitaliano lakini  ser ikali kwa wakati 
ule ikaweka mkazo kwamba wenjeji wa hapa wawe wamepewa.  
 Kwa hivyo hili jambo lilianza  kitambo sana, ni m uhimu  tulichukulie katika huu M swada 
ambao umeletwa hapa tuhakiki she kuwa kuna mpangilio ambao tuta saidiana na vijana kwa 
sababu wakati huu kazi imekuwa ni shida na pia tungeweza kuunda sheria zetu za hapa itakuwa 
ni jambo la muhimu kutusaidia sisi hapa katika Kaunti ya Mombasa. Kwa hayo  mafupi  Bwana  
Spika mimi nime unga mkono kwa dhati na pia naomba ndugu zangu ambao tuko hapa tuweze 
kuunga mkono ili tuweze kuhakikisha kuwa vijana wetu pia wamepata kazi. Ahsante.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Kizito . 
 Hon.  Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the M otion that  has been brought by 
our brother Fadhili to conduct a census on the comp anies  drivers in the companies, that’s what 
the M otion says, we have not been told what next is what it is telling us . After we have done the 
census, where are we going to take the i nformation? Are we going to start making laws , the 
Motion is shallow ; secondly we should seek to do a census of foreign work permits , how they 
got the permits . We should find out people behind this, we should  not look at the companies 
only.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Ogalo . 
 Hon.  Ogalo:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga mk ono hoja ya 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili , tunatakiwa katika Kaunti  ya Mombasa kampuni ziwe na asilimia fulani  ya 
wanaofanya  kazi wawe  wa hapa, 75 perce nt, na 35 ya wengine…  
(Interruption ) 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Hon.  Ogalo that a new law you are trying to introduce can 
we just leave it at 70-30, can we continue from there.  
 Hon.  Ogalo:  Mheshimiwa Spika ningekuwa na vitabu vya sheria ningesoma lakin i sina 
saa hii...  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : There is no any other law that passes the constitution Hon.  
Ogalo, continue . 
 Hon.  Ogalo:  Mheshimiwa Spika kuangaliwe kwanza wenyeji wa hapa wapate halafu 
wengine waletwe sio sawa watu wa n je wawe wengi. Kama  Mwenye kiti mimi nitatembea 
kuangalia k ama itakuwa iko vile, kama watu wa nje wako wengi tuangalie vile tu tafanya ili watu 
wetu wasaidike , ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Zainab . 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab Kithinzi:   Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimesimama  kuunga mkono hili swala lililo letwa na Mheshimiwa Fadhili. Ningependa 
kumpongeza  kwa sababu amekaa akafikiria akaona kuna umuhimu watu wetu kupata kazi kat ika 
zile kampuni ambazo ziko katika eneo letu Mhesh imiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika litakuwa ni 
jambo la maana ikiwa mtafanya hii census  na tuweze kujua madereva ambao wametoka nje ni 
wangapi na wakenya ni wangapi, kwa sababu sisi sote tunafahamu na kujua kwamba madereva 
wengi ambao wako kwenye hizi kampuni  ambazo ziko katika Kaunti ya Mombasa wametoka nje 
na vile vile hawana ufahamu wa barabara zetu ndio unapata mara kwa mara ma lori yameanguka 
kusababisha ajali kwa sababu hawana ufahamu wa hizi barabara zetu. Mheshimiwa Spika vile 
vile ningependa kuomba k uwa wakati tumefanya na tumeamua kuwa waweze kuajiri madereva 
wetu, kuna vijana ambao pia walikuwa ni wasaidizi wa madereva, waliokuwa wakifanya kazi 
katika hizo kampuni, wali weza kusimamishwa ikawa ni lazima dereva achukue gari aende peke 
yake ambapo tuna elewa katika barabara kuna mambo mengi kama vile gari linaweza kupata 
lolote katika barabara na dereva akiwa peke yake hawezi kujisaidia mpaka awe na mwenzake wa 
kumsaidia. Kwa hi o, haya pia ningependa tuwaangalie wakati ambapo tunatunga hizo sheria za  
kwamba waandike vijana wetu na hawa wasaidizi wa madereva wa weze kuingizwa katika hiyo 
orodha ya ajira Mheshimiwa Spika.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Well just before I call upon Hon.  Fadhili to reply it is 
important that we hig hlight various sentiments as proposed by different Hon.  Members , look at 
the title of this M otion and the body then you try to inline the same with the prayer it 's really 
kind of hanging in a way and if you look at the second paragraph to be specific or pr ecise, 'That 
aware that there are many transport companies providing employment to people as driver s, 
mechanics and other occupations '; then the prayer, 'The county government to conduct census of 
all drivers in the transport companies to determine the rat ion of local verses foreign drivers '. So 
that’s an aspect Hon.  Fadhili has been raised on the sense and Hon.  Kithinzi also raised that 
aspect that the so called mechanics, co drivers also had been withdrawn ; for that matter and in  
case others are existin g, what's the ratio ..., another aspect raised by Hon.  Mwidani that yes it is 
important that we look at this particular issue as cutting cost so that in the second paragraph  it 
has been drafted and put by Hon.  Fadhili . I think this must also be reflected i n the titl e and in that 
particular prayer  because I believe like what Hon.  Ogalo was saying even though he is trying to 
raise the figure a little bit higher with 5  per cent  but he has his very right , the constitution has 
given us a guideline of 70/30, why don’t we implement that so we must make sure that those 
aspects are met, and I would also like to mention what Hon.  Ebrahim  Omar  has also brought to 
board that everybody that he is meeting each and every time is actually from outside Mo mbasa 
County so that  leaves you with so many questions that you need to ask a nd for that re ason many 
answers  are hanging.  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtai ned from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  Ladies and gentlemen  in regards to this particular M otion to me, remember yesterday we 
discussed the issue of the plight of the youths of tomorrow, it w as actually basically about 
children, if you look at Article  5,5 of the constitution again tells us what we need to do with our 
youth one of them is ac cess to those opportunities . As it is ladies and gentlemen am going to give 
an oppo rtunity to the author  and M otion mover  that is Hon.  Fadhili to have a chance to reply. 
Hon.  Fadhili . 
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I take this opportunity to first to 
thank the Hon.  Members  for their contribution towards this M otion. Mr. Speaker we have s een 
the main objective of this M otion is employment,  employment to our people, employment to our 
youth . Mr. Speaker no matter  what transpire s or the way we brought the M otion there are many 
concerns as we say that have been raised ; I, as the mover I  agree with what Hon.  Members  have  
brought forward and this as y ou said is a start for us as a C ounty putting into consideration that 
we have the Kenya Ports Authori ty, it is about to employ very many workers after the 
completion in 2022. Mr. Speaker if we st and as a C ounty and have thi s activity going  on in  this 
County  am sure  there are companies ; private companies and also  government companies, 
parastatals     which ever form of the company but if we just go like this there will be indispline in 
matters of employment , and  if we don’t raise our hands we will come and find out that Kenya 
Ports has employed people who are not  from within . Now that there is East African C ommunity 
people are free to move  but we have to put strong measures Mr. Speaker to make sur e that our 
people are going to benefit from these e mployments that are within our County . Mr. Speaker  
long time  our people, our drivers or our youths used to take transit vehicles from CFS around 
Mombasa County , nowadays  there is the E ast African commu nication there is free movement  
people are coming  from Uganda, drivers  are coming from Uganda taking vehicles from the 
CFSs going back to Uganda and our youth are roaming around the streets . 
 So Mr. Speaker I thank the Hon.  Members  and I would like we as  an Assembly and the 
Committee of Transport and I nfrast ructure and the Implementation C ommittee to make sure this 
issue gets its way outside the House  and it should be implemented .  We should look for ways and 
means to see that whatever C ommittees that we are going to put or measures are taken seriously, 
thank you Mr.  Speaker .  
(Question put)  
 Mr. Speaker (Hon . Rajwayi) : Ladies and gentlemen having listened to that carefully the 
only option left is none bu t to put to question, that the M otion on census of drivers and t ransport 
companies be adopted in this House  in the same term as was tabled.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
ADJOURN MENT 
 This House  starts adjourned until tomorro w in the afternoon at exactly 2: 30p.m. 
The House  rose at 10:14a .m.        
 