May 9 , 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 9th May, 2019  
The House met at 3:07p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats,  yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon. Members , good afternoon . Due to the power failures  Hon. Members we shall 
proceed to business number 11 because whatever that transpires  in this House has to be recorded 
and as I said because of the power failure some things might be not recorded so there are some 
businesses that are going to be left out  and I took this opportunity to communicate to you Hon. 
Member s to reduce questions , that  is why we are l eaving the businesses in the Order Paper. Yes 
Clerk ? 
 
MOTION  
LONG RECESS  
 
 Yes the Leader of Majority ? 
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Let me take this 
opportunity to move Procedural Motion.  
 
Pursuant to Standing Order 25(3) of the County Assembly, this House resolves to adjourn 
for long  recess on Thursday, 9th May, 2019 and to resume sittings on Tuesday 18th June, 
2019.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who seconds your M otion?  

May 9 , 2019                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           42 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Mheshimiwa Mwaka Zahoro.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwaka Zahoro ? 
 
 Hon. Mwaka Za horo:  Mr. Speaker  I second the Motion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now prop ose that the Procedural Motion on 
adjournment of the County Assembly for a long recess be debated in t his Hon ourable  House. Yes 
Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Boy:  Thank you Mr . Speaker for according me the  opportunity to support  
the adjournment Motion . There is a saying proverb all work without play makes Jane a dull girl , 
so its duly, its timely, we needed that rest so that when we resume Mr. Speaker we will be fully 
rejuvenated for the business of the House God willing . Thank you very much.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes the move r of the M otion.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . First of all let me 
take thi s opportunity  to thank  the Members , thank the one s who have supported this Motion and 
we are very sure Mr. Speaker that we have a very long recess just to meet our  electora tes there in 
the Wards and there are so many things that were still pending there in the Ward s, and  I think we 
can conc entrate with our people in the Ward. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. M embers the House stands adjourn ed until 
Tuesday 18th June, 2019 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:13 p.m. 
 
 