June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 27th June, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Fourty Third  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  2:39p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Speaker ( Honourable  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Speaker (Honour able Khatri ): Members , you may be  seated. Serjeant-At-Arms 
please ring the bell for five minutes.  
 
[The Serjeant -At-Arms rung the  quorum Bell] 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Good afternoon again Honourable  Members, as you are aware t omor row Wednesday 28th 
June, 2023 has been g azetted as a public holiday, as Muslims we will be celebrating Eid-ul- 
Adha a lso known as the festival of sacrifice . Let me in advance extend my heartfelt greetings  and 
warmest  wishes to all Members of  the M uslim co mmunity in Mombasa and beyond. Honourable  
Members, this festival is not only representing  a spiritual significance but also embodies values 
that are universal in nature;  it emphasizes the importance of compassion , kindness, empathy 
towards others. It encourages us  to extend  our hands to those in need and to foster se nse of unity, 
solidarity, and inclusivity  in our community.  
Honourable  Members,  as we celebrate  Eid-ul- Adha it is essential for us to reflect on the 
values that festival embodies and bring t hem in to our dail y life. Let us remember that our 
strength lies in our diversity and o ur ability to come together irrespective of our background or 
belief to celebrate our shared humanities. Honourable  Member s, as you rejoice in the festivities 
of Eid-ul-Adha let us also remembe r those who are less fortunate and marginalized , let us lend a 
helpin g hand to those who are in need irrespective of their faith or background, through our 
collective efforts we can make a different in the life of others. To our Muslim  brothers and 
sisters,  I extend warmest wishes  for a joyous and blessed Eid-ul-Adha . May the day bring  you 
immense  happiness, peace and prosperity, may your acts of devotion and sacrifice  be accepted 
by the Almighty and may the spirit  of Eid fill  your hea rt and ho mes with peace, harmony  and 
serenity . To our Christians sisters and brothers , I wish you a happy holiday, once again I wish 
you a happy Eid-ul-Adha , Eid Mubarak . Thank you very much . 
 
[Applause ] 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 MOTION S 
 ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE PUBLIC PARTICIPATI ON FOR THE COUNTY INTEGRATED 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN (CIDP)  2023 -2027  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana  Baya Chairperson C ommittee of Finance, Budget and 
Appropriation, please move the Motion . 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Spea ker, I beg to  move the  following Motion . 
 
THAT  this House adopts  the Report on the public participatio n the Mombasa C ounty 
Integrated Development Plan  (CIDP ) 2023 -2027 laid on the Table today , Tuesday.   
 
Thank you, Honourable  Speaker . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): The seconder p lease? 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  I will ask, I start with my V ice Chair Finance . 
 
Hon. Noor:  I do second.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Member. Honourable  
Members , I now pr opose the question th at the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Baya  on adoption 
of Report of public participation of the County Integrated Development Pla n 2023-2027 be 
considered in this Honourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Baya  Chairperson Committee on Fi nance, Budg et and 
Appropriation please make your contribution to the Motion . 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Than k you Honourable  Speaker. Honourable  Speaker, first and 
foremost I would like to ap preciate my Committee and  also your office and also Honourable  
Members  this Mombasa County  Developme nt plan CIDP 2023 -2027 is a strategic document that 
outlines  the long -term developmen t goals, objective s, strategy for our County for the next five 
years. Honourable  Speaker , the adven t of this d ocument has been  in line with t he County 
Government Act , 2012 secti on 1 04 which obli gates a County to develop an  integrated plan, 
design plan unit at all County  administrative unit s and promote  public participation engageme nts 
by non -state actors  in the planni ng unit . Honourable  Speaker , it is the third -generation  plan of its 
kind w hich serves as a l egal development blue print in  the County as it builds on the first and the  
second -generation  integrated development plans than were  implemented during the year 2013  
and 2022.  This plan highl ights  the achievement s made within the second CIDP 2018 - 2022 as 
well as give an insight to constrain s and challenges  they encounter along the per iod.  Honourable  
Speaker , I just want to tell the Members  that the main purpose of this CIDP i s to guide and co-
ordinate development initiative s, project and program s within the County . It covers  various 
sectors including but not limited to; Lands, Urban and Housing , Education  and Digital 
Transformation , Health  Services, Blue  Economy, Agriculture and Livestock . 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 Others are  Transport  and Infrastructure , Public  Service Administration , Youth , Gender 
Social Services and Sports , Environment  and Solid Waste Management . The plan takes into 
account the current state of the County, ident ifies priority area s for its developm ent and it 
provide s road map for achieving the desire goals and outcome . Honourable  Speaker , just to 
highlight some issues ; one of the things  on this CIDP  is the specific details of the County CIDP 
includ e its, vision, goa ls, objective and sector  specific s trategies had been documented in this 
plan.  Honourable  Speaker  also this CIDP include s mechanism for monitoring and evaluating 
progress towa rds to set the target  within the approximated budget for its full implementation 
projected at  around  121.5 Billion . Honourable  Members , the Committee  interrogated  the CIDP as 
well as  conducted public pa rticipation to c ollect views from the public, the key  notable  issue s 
have been cap tured in the Report that am laying o n the floor  for this House . By approving this 
plan, this Assembly will set in Motion  for the execution of this plan as  well as to set in Motion  
the mandate  of this House to oversight  the executive to ensur e full implemen tation of the plan. 
Honourable  Speak er, it is therefore my humble duty to say that this is a good plan fo r us and if 
we implement it the County government will h ave a lot of development within the five years . 
Thank you, Honourable  Speaker . 
 
The Speaker ( Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much for y our contribution. Yes , Honourable  
Fadhili M akarani Deputy Speaker, please make you r contribution.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani) : Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mhesh imiwa Spika kwa hakika mimi nikiwa ni mmoja wa Wanakamati  wa Kamat i ya Fedha  
nasema wazi kuwa mipangilio hii ambayo iko mbele ye tu ama hoja ambayo iko mbele yetu 
ikiwa imebeba mipa ngilio ya serikali katika miaka mitano inayokuja , imeanga zia se kta zote 
ambazo ziko chini ya Gatuzi  la Mombasa na vile vile tunaona ya  kwamba katika mipangilio hii, 
iko mipango ya ku itafsiri  CIDP hii kwa lugha ya Kiswahili ili mwananchi wa chini aweze  
kuielewa zaidi kati ka miaka  mitano hii amba yo tuko  nayo. Mheshimiwa Spika kama 
alivyozungumza Mwenyeki ti wetu ameangazia sehemu tofauti tofauti ambazo serikali ya Kaunti 
imewekelea mipango kwa pamoja ili i wekeze katika miaka hii mitano iweze kufanyia wananchi 
wetu na w ananchi waon e umuhimu wa Gatuzi . Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi nawaomba 
Wahesh imiw a we nza, tuweze kukubaliana na Ripoti hii ambayo Kamati ya Fedha imeweza 
kuleta hapa mbele kwa sababu Mh eshimiwa Sp ika tutakapokuwa tumekubaliana  na hoja  hii na 
hii mipa ngilio ambay o serikali ya Gatuzi i meweka kuenda mbele ndio pale Gatuzi  la Mo mbasa 
litaweza kuto a mipangi lio midogo midogo ambayo itaweza kufanywa ka tika kila mwaka ndani 
ya miaka hii mitano . Kwa hayo Mheshim iwa Spika mimi n aomba wenzangu t uweze kukubaliana 
na Ripoti ambayo iko mbele yetu . Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker ( Hon. Khatr i): Thank you Honourable  Fadhili . Yes, Honourable  Prischilla 
Mumba , the Chief Whip.  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Mumba ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika n a masaa haya namshukuru 
Mungu na  zaidi nimesimam a kuunga mkono hoja hii kwa sababu nimeona hakika vipengele 
vingi katika Wizara tofauti to fauti zikiangazia  haswa nikiangalia  kwa upande wa miundo 
msingi, wamesema barabara  zitapanuliwa zile ambazo tunaita b arabara za mitaani zitaongezwa 
na mitaro itafuku liwa maana wakati wa mvua wananchi hupata shida nyingi, tumehisi kuona 
kama wakati huu vil e wa tu walivyokuwa wana sombwa na maj i na nimeona tumeweka 
mipangilio kabambe, kando  na hivyo pia nimeona pia kutakuwa kuna  uongezefu wa kutambiza 
maji safi katika mita ani, nimeona katika upande wa mazingira tume wekewa hii program  yetu pia 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 itaendelea ambayo i metu gusa sana ya Mombasa yangu ambay o imeweka mazingira kuwa na 
usafi . Tumeona pia wamegusia upande wa vijana wetu h awa wanaoenda kushiriki michezo, 
tumeona wamegusia  pia upande wa youth mambo ya kutengeneza barabara, michezo na basari. 
Nimeona mambo meng i am bayo pia yanatugusa katika jamii  kwa sababu tunaju a ukigusa 
mwananchi, umegusa kaunti nzima. Nimeona pia  upande w a walemavu pia kuna ma mbo mengi 
ambayo wam ewekewa tof auti kat ika Wizara  hii ya jinsia , kwa hivyo nimeona wamegusia 
sehemu nyi ngi  za  kuweza ku ridhisha kazi hii kwa miaka mitano a mbayo inayokuja ikiwa 
mipangili o hii kadi ri ilivyopangwa na  Mwenyekiti   ambaye  niwa kudumu amefanya kazi nzuri 
na kamati yake kutu onyesha kuwa mipangilio ya kaunti  itakavyo endeleza kazi zake kupitia 
Wizara  tunaona tutak uwa tumeboresha mji wetu  na tutakuw a tuko katika hali ya kuridhisha 
watu wetu hata  tukirudi katika nyanjani wakat i ukifika ikiwa tutakuwa tumetekeleza  baadhi ya 
haya mam bo ninayo  yaona, tutakuwa tuna  kazi rahisi sana ya  kuweza kusukuma gurudumu hili 
letu tena  kwa miaka mitano. Mheshimiwa Spika,  nimeona  Kamati hii ya fedha  imejaribu kazi 
nzuri na imefanya kazi nzuri y a kutupa muongozo wa kuju a katika miaka  mitano kutakuwa  
kunaendelea lipi na kuna kazi gani katika hii Wizara . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speak er (Hon. Khatri ): Ahsan te Mheshimiwa Priscilla  Mumba. Yes, Honourable  
Matsaki  please make  your contribution Mi nority Leader.  
 
The Chi ef Whip (Hon. Matsaki ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi pia ninashukuru 
Mwenyezi Mungu kwa nafasi hii kuipata. Kwanz a nashukuru kamati h ii ya fedha kwa kusema 
kongole, mimi nikiwa mmoja wao katika kamati hii. La  pili ni kwamb a naunga mkono bajeti hii 
zaidi ya hapo, sitaongea mengi kwa  sababu Mwenyekiti  ameongea mengi na bajeti hii imegusia 
kila mahali na Kaunti kupitia  Mheshimiwa Gavana, ikiwa kila mahal i patapitiwa vyema na bajeti 
hii, nina  matumaini miaka mitano hii inayokuja, Kaunti  hii itakuwa tofauti sana zaidi ya vile 
ambayo iko , kwa hivyo zaidi n apongeza na nazidi kuunga mkono bajeti hii. Ahsante  sana Bwana 
Spika. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri): Thank you very much Leader of Minority party. Yes , 
Honourable  Mwamwiri, please make your contribution  Leader of M ajority Party.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwam wiri):  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika  niungane na Waheshimiwa wenza kuunga mkono Ripoti y a Mweny ekiti kuhusiana na 
mseto wa mipango ya serikali Gatuzi  ambayo hii ni shuru ti kwa mujibu wa she ria, ukitazama 
Sehemu ya 108 ya she ria za Ugatuzi  vile vile tukipitia sehemu 126 ya us imamizi wa pesa z a 
umma ama PFM pia inapeana mwongozo  wa kutengenezwa mseto wa mipango ya Gatuzi . Kama 
ilivyo katika Ripoti hii imeeleza wazi ya kwamb a Ripoti hii imejengea katika m seto ya mipan go 
pamoja na miradi vilevile am bayo hivyo Mhesh imiwa Spika  katika baad hi ya idara utakuta 
wamezungum zia mipango pasi kuzungumzia miradi lakini kwingine ipo ambapo wametaja kwa 
kina m iradi il iokusudiwa kufanya . Mheshimiwa Spika pia chini ya uongozi wa Mwenyekiti  na 
baraka za ofisi yako Kamati iliweza ku zuri nyanjani kuweza  kuafiki yale m apendek ezo ya 
wananchi ambayo waliyapend ekeza kwa utawala lakini pia am bapo lilisah auliwa  upande wa 
utawala . Mheshimiwa , Kamati ili weza kuchukua hatua madhubuti kuhakikisha imeweza 
kuzingatiwa vilevile pia Mheshimiwa Spika  Kamati iliweza kukaa na washika  dau kadha 
wakiwemo mashirika na pia kuzihusisha  idara zenyewe moja kwa  moja katika kufafanua pale 
ambapo labda kuli kua na walakin ama hapakua bayana kwa Kamati. Mheshimiwa Spika , hivyo 
basi nisihi tu Waheshimi wa ya kwamba mseto wa m ipango hii  ya serikali hii ya awamu ya pili 
chini ya u ongo zi wa  Mstahiki Mheshimiwa Gavana Abd ulswamad imekusudia mengi ikiwemo 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 yale ambayo y alikua kwa riwaza yake tulipokua tukitembea na  yeye sisi wa upand e wa chama 
kilicho wengi k atika Bunge hili na katika haya sisi pia tuliweza kupata nafasi ya kuselelea 
kupeana ahadi kwa wananchi ambazo tunajua  fika utekelezaji wake wa ahadi zile haziko 
mikononi mwetu  bali zinapaswa kuwa chini  ya mseto wa mipango hii ya miseto y a mipango ya 
ugatuzi . Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa hivyo kuangazia mambo lukuki ambayo yanatuhu su sisi na 
wananchi wetu moja kwa moja katik a mseto huu inatupatia nafasi na kuomba Mwenyezi Mungu 
awezeshe rasilimali iweze kupatikan a kwa wakati inavyostahiki . Iwapo yat atekelezeka ni 
hakikisho la kwamba  uchaguzi unao kuja ama Bunge linal o kuja ya awamu ya nne litakua na 
asilimia kubwa ya Waheshimiwa waliodumu katika awamu hii ya tatu watakao rudi . Hii n i kwa 
sababu yale amba yo wananchi walipendek eza katika ahadi zetu yatakayo weza kuangaziwa hivyo 
ni sihi Waheshim iwa wenza kuweza ku kubaliana na Mwenye kiti na hoja hii ya Ripoti  aliyoweza 
kuwasilisha. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you  very mu ch Honourable  Mwamw iri Majority 
leader . Yes Honourable  Hamida Noo r vice Chair Committee on Finance please make your 
contributions .  
 
Hon. Noor : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I do stand up to support the Annual De velopment 
Plan that has been brought  into the House , this CIDP t hat has been brought into the House , what 
we have touched on being the Vice Chair of Finance th at in health we are increasing in the 
Wards of Po rt Reitz, we are isolating patients that is which is very good for us because as  you 
know Mr. Speaker we have a lot of… sorry Mr. Speaker I got a bit confused but as I said in 
health we have increased our  level for  hospitals and in water we have increased the networking 
and environment . Mr. Speaker , we are doing well as much as we have challe nges in the sewage 
and bloc kage s but we are doing that much better right now and for the next five years the lands 
surveys are going to be  much better , the trade marketing we are building more in the sub-
Counties, in the blue economy Mr. Speake r we are going to have our  marine education , in the 
youth and gender we are going to build  social halls in Mkomani,  Mtopanga Wards as we ar e 
going onto the trade we are launching new buildings in Changamwe a nd Youth , Gender and 
Sports , we are going to have a main streaming for our PW Ds and Mr. Speaker with those few 
remarks I  do support the  Motion . Than k you very much.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Honourable  Hamida . Yes, Honourable  
Manuari  please  make you r contributions.  
 
Hon. Manuari:  Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika . Kwanza nich ukue fursa hii kumshukuru 
Mwenyezi  Mungu  kwa mda huu aliotupa pili n iunge mkono ama nimpe suppo rt kubwa ndugu 
yangu , Mwenyekit i wa jopo hili la k ifedha ndugu yangu Kibwana B aya kwa shughuli yake hii 
kubwa aliyoifanya kuhakikisha ana tupangilia mipangilio katika maeneo yetu ili na sisi baada ya 
miak a mitano tuwe tutakua tuko na  la kusema kwa watu wetu. Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi  
nilivyokua nimekaa hapa nd ugu yangu bwana pesa hapa nimejaribu  kuichambua lakini nikawa 
nachambua pahali ambapo s ipo lakini kwa bahati nzuri akanielekeza pale ambapo natakikana 
nichambue na nipaangalie vizuri ila kuna kitu nimekitizam a katika mtaza mo wangu na y ale  
ilikua twataraji a  ndiyo tume wekewa hiyo pesa lakini wakasema hii katika masuala ya uchukuzi 
wametu wekea pesa vizuri lakini mwisho wa siku katika hiyo line yake ya kwanza wa katenga 
sehemu nne wakasema  hizo hususan  wakitum ia jina la kimombo especially  sasa pia hili neno 
especially  pia likanishtua  lakini aka nielezea nikaona kuna muelekeo mzuri sababu niliona  
especially  miaka minne yote takua sehemu nne tu  Mjambere, Jomvu Kuu, Mikindani na Wadi ya 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Miritini na wakati pia kule kwa ngu shida hii ambayo imetaj wa hapa ni kubwa zaidi . Lakini 
alivyo nielekez a hapa huyu b wana na akaniambia ukaona ikiwa kuna tatizo akaniel ekeza katika 
hii b ajeti akaniambia kila mwaka lile ambalo waliona kule lafaa twa weza maneuver  na 
tukakuletea katika maen eo yako . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naliunga sana mkono 
swala hili letu la ndugu zetu kulileta katika Bunge  letu a hsanteni sana.  
 
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Honourable  Manuari from Bofu Ward. Yes, 
Honourable  Salim Baya.  
 
Hon. Salim  Baya: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuni patia fursa hii adhimu . 
Kwanza kabis a nimshukuru Mwenyezi  Mungu  ambae ameweza kutujaalia tukafika siku hii ya 
leo ambayo kwa sisi Waislamu  ni siku kubwa , pili kwa  sababu ya saum ambayo imenibamba  
siku ya leo sitaku a mwingi  wa maneno mimi n itaiunga mkono hoja  hii ilioletwa na Mheshimiwa 
mwenza mzee mwenzangu Mheshimiwa Kibwana Swaleh kwa asilimia themanini kwa mia. 
Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Honourable  Salim Baya from 
Timbwani  Ward. Yes, Honourable  Mohammed Khamis please make your contributions.  
 
Hon. Mohammed Khamis:  Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika . Mimi singelipenda kutaja 
mambo m engi kwa  sababu Idara  zote hapa naona zime wekewa  fedha  za kutosha na miradi ya 
kutosha la muhimu ni sisi kuhaki kisha ya kua hii bajeti yenyewe  inafuatiliwa kikamil ifu ili 
kusudi wakaazi au wana nchi wetu tuku fu wapate maendele o, kwa hivyo mimi naiunga mkono  
moja kwa moja hoja hii . Ahsante.  
 
  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa M ohammed Khamis Nomi nated 
MCA, yes Honourable  Florence Kachumbo  please  make your contributions.  
 
Hon. Kachu mbo: Thank you Mr.  Speaker for this opportunity . First of al l, I want to 
congratulate the Committee of Finance for the good work they have done and also I was going  
through  the CIDP and I like how the y have good development plans for each community , for 
each Ward especially for the youth , gender and sports because th at is where I fall under , also the 
drainage issue s it has been a problem for so many Wards especially the Ward that I come from 
so I’m happy to know that there will be something that will be done in t hat area . For those few 
remarks I support this Motion , yeah . Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Honourable  Florence . Yes, Honourable  
Patrick Mbel le from Bamburi Ward pl ease make your contributions . 
 
Hon. Mbel le: Shukran Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza nipongeze Kamati ya Mheshimiwa 
Kibwana Swaleh kwa ku fanya kazi nzuri ya kuweza kutaja maon o ya wenzetu kulingana na kila 
ambacho wa nanchi wa Mombasa wan getaka kufanyiw a katika mwaka  wa fedha 2023  /2024 na 
hata kwa CIDP . Mheshimiwa Spika , ningeomba ni weze tu  kuongeza maoni tu ambayo labda 
tulisahau kuya weka wa kati wa public participation  ama hatukukumbushwa iwapo itakua 
imesahauliwa mana ke mengine sijayaon a hapa ni kwamba kule kati ka nimeangalia katika ADP  
mwaka 2023 /2024  ni kwamba tunajenga barabara kilom ita… 
 
[Interruption]  
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Yes, continue Honourable  Patrick.  
 
 Hon. Mbel le: Shukran , ilikua napewa mane no ya hekma kidogo kutoka kwa Kiongozi wa 
Weng i na nash ukuru kwa sababu ameni ambia yale il ikua nataka kuonge a saa hizi ni mambo ya 
kuongelewa katika wakati wa ADP lakini vilevile nataka kumshukuru Mwenyekiti  na 
kuwapongeza kazi nzuri munayofanya. A hsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
 
  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you again very much . Yes, Honourable  Maryam 
Baimu from Frère Town please make your cont ributions.  
 
Hon. Baimu: Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika kwa ku nipa nafasi  hii. Mimi napenda 
kumpongeza Mwenyekiti  na Kamati yake  yote kwa kazi nzuri waliofanya na n ina furaha kuu 
Bwana Spika kwa sababu kilio changu kimoja cha ile Frère Town upande wa drug rehabilitation  
naona ime wekwa katika hii ADP, kwa hio  mimi  nimefurahi sana  kongole sana Bwana 
Mwenyekiti  manake naona kazi ya afya  munaichap a.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri): Thank you  very much . Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh  
please reply to the Motion . 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Honourable  Speaker . I want to appreciate y our office 
and also  the Clerk office and Members of the  Finance Committee plus the staff  who have been 
working close to reali ze or to achieve the opportunity today and I wish to ap preciate them and 
we will work together as a team and hope that whatever we  have pass here today  will change the 
lives of our people  in this beloved Mombasa County 001 . Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Honourable  Members . I now put  the 
question that the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Baya on adoption of Report on  the public 
participation for the Cou nty Integrated Development Plan 2023 /2027 be ado pted by this  
Honourable  House in the same te rms as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Honourable  Members , the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Baya on adoption of  Report  on 
the public participa tion for the County  Integrated development plan , 2023 to 2027 is adopted by  
this Honourable  House.  Yes, Clerk next order please.  
 
ADOPTION OF  REPORT ON THE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION FOR THE ANNUAL 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN (ADP) 2023 -2024  
 
Yes, again Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh , Chairperson Committee on Finance , Budget and 
Appropriatio n, please move the Motion . 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Honourable  Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir, I  would like to 
move the following Motion; 
 
That this House adopts the Report on the pu blic participation for the Mombasa County 
Annual Development Plan (ADP) 2023/2024 laid on this House today  Tuesday . 
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 8 I will also ask Honourable  Flore nce Mka jala to  support this Motion . Thank you.  
 
Hon. Mkanjala:  I second.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank  you very much Honourable  Members . Honourable  
Members , I now propose the question that th e Motion  by Honour able Kibwana Baya Swaleh on  
adoption of Report on the public participation for the Annual Development Plan , 2023 to 2024 t o 
be considered by this Honourable  House in th e same terms as moved . 
 
[Question propo sed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Baya Chairperson  Committee of Finance , Budget and 
Appropriation please make your contribution to the Motion  on the ADP.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Honourable  Speaker . Honourable  Speaker , this 
Mombasa Coun ty Annual Developme nt Plan 2023 to 2024 is the yearly plan that outlines that 
development projects and programs  to be undertaken by the Cou nty government within the 
upcoming s pecific fiscal year . This is the first ADP that has been derived from the j ust approved 
and broader Mom basa CIDP for the year 2023 -2027 and designed to implement and achieve  the 
goals and objective outlined in the CIDP . Honourable  Speaker , as a matter of fac t the ADP 
focuses on the short -term development needs and targets of the County an d provides a mor e 
detailed breakdown of activities , timelines and allocated resources for the upcoming financial 
year. Honourable  Speaker and Members , this Mombasa County ADP 2023-2024 was developed 
through consultative process involving various stake holder s; inclu ding government agencies, 
County pa rtners, community  representatives and other relevant parties takes into core account 
the financi al resources project to the availabl e to the County  priorities key sectors and projects 
based on the identified need s and goa ls. 
 Honourable  Speaker , most importantly the Mombasa County ADP also includes 
mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating  progress tow ards set targets with approximated 
budget for its full implementation project at around Ksh.10.4 billion and also the priority in 
terms of distributions has placed environment and solid waste management at around 
Ksh3.2 Billion , Education and Digital Transformati on Ksh1.7 Billion and also Transport and 
infrastructure at around Ksh.1.5Billion. The capital financing of the ADP has been an chored on 
issues on  resource and revenue, public private partnership, development partners among other  
key players of good will. Honourable  Speaker and Honourable  Members , the Comm ittee 
interrogated this ADP  and has already conducted public participati on, picked views from the 
public . Key notable issues have been captured in this Report the Committee is laying on the floor 
for this today Honourable  Spea ker; it is my humble r equest that t he Members will support this 
Motion  for our own benefit and hope that wh atever we have pass ed here as  an Assembly an d 
also as oversight people , Members ; I mean we shall be able to follow it up to  the end and see the 
full impl ementation of the ADP . Thank you, Honourable  Speaker . 
 
[The Sp eaker (Hon. Khatri ) left the Cha mbers ] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani) in the Chair]  
 
  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Honourable  Kibwana Y es 
Honourable  Mwaura.  
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 9 Hon. Mwau ra: Nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Kibwana 
na nise me ya kwamba n ikiangazia ama niseme nikiangalia ndani yake mimi naona haswa 
hospitali ya kwangu  ambayo  imen isumbua kwa muda mrefu na tayari leo wam eanza ku tekeleza  
yale ambayo y amez ungumzwa na wananchi ya zile vikao ya hii ADP imeanza tayari 
kutekelezwa . Kwa hivyo mimi nasimama kuunga mkon o nikiuliza kuna kitu ni meona hapa 
kuhusiana na ujenzi wa ile tunaita recycling facility  kule sehemu  ya Mwakirunge na mimi nikiwa 
upande wa Kam ati ya Utekelezaji  nitakuwa makini sana kuangalia kama swala hili kwa hak ika 
linatimia kwa sa babu hakika wal e amb ao wanapiti a maeneo yale wana weza kuhurumia wanan chi 
ama watu wa nao kaa maeneo ya Mwakirunge . Ni kwa hakika wanapitia hali ambayo haistahil i 
kukaa mwananchi na tunataka kwa hakika kuona kam a mambo hayo yamekwisha kut imia ila 
ninapenda k uunga mkono man ake yale nimeangalia  hapa , ni ya le wananchi wa Nyali  kwa sababu 
nilikuwa katika hizo vikao  waliweza kuzungumza na nina furaha kwamba yameweza kuwa  
captured  na sasa tunaweza kuyapitisha . Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Thank  you. Yes, Honourable  Frank line 
Makanga?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika. Nachukua fursa hii kwanza kushukuru 
Mwenyezi Mungu ambaye ameturuhusu tena kupatikana hapa na pia kuunga mkono hoja hii , 
iliyoletwa  na Mwenyekiti wa mas uala ya fedha n a mipangilio ya k iserikali.  Mheshimiwa Spika , 
mimi naunga mkono kwa sababu  kulingana na hii mipangilio ya mwaka  huu ambao utaanza 
masaa machach e kutoka sasa  tumeona wameweza kuangazia kati  ya mambo  ambayo yamew eza 
kuzungumziw a nyanjani. Pili, Mheshimiwa Spika imeweza pia kutilia maanani kwa kiasi 
kikubw a japo si kwa mia asili mia lakini  tunaona ipo nia ya  kuweza kuhusisha maoni yale 
ambayo wananchi waliweza kutoa na mimi naam ini kuanzia sasa tukiendelea mbele  tutakuwa na 
uwezo wa ku hakikisha k wam ba wananchi wetu wanap ata kutimiz iwa kwa zile ahadi ambazo  
tuliweza kuwa wekea na ambazo wame wekewa  pia na s erikali  la Gatuzi  hili la Mombasa. Kwa 
hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika mimi nasimama kuunga mko no hoja hii iliyoletwa na Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Honourable  Makanga . Yes, 
Patrick Mbe lle? 
 
Hon. Mbel le: Shukrani  Bwana Spika kwa na fasi hii na ni mshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu kwa 
kutupa nafasi hii pia  na ni pongez i pia Kamat i kwa kazi nzuri ambayo wamefanya , hasa nikiona 
kama kuna maoni me ngi ambayo yameweza kuchukuliwa kutoka kwa  watu wangu na niko na 
hakika kwamba , yataweza kutimizwa kul ingana  na vile wananchi wame sema. Vile vile 
ningependa tu  labda kwa kifupi , niweze kuku mbus ha Mwenyekiti ama kumuomba katika 
mpango wa mw aka huu 2023 mpaka 2024 , waweze kutukumbuka pia  wale wa Bamburi maoni 
yetu ya kwamba, zipo sehemu n ilizohitaji ambazo wa lijengewa hospit ali katika mwaka huu , 
anajua hio ni mipango kulingana na fedha vile zil ipo lakini  naomba iwapo itawezekana , ile 
sehemu y a Bamburi Ward hakuna hata d ispensary hata moja ambayo inaweza kuhudumia watu 
wa pal e. Kwa hivyo ninge omba sana tuweze k utilia maanani ya kwamba, tuweze kupata angalau 
dispensary . Vile vile katika maswala ya barabara ni kweli tumek uwa kwamba kutaje ngwa 
barabara kilomita zaidi ya elfu  moja mia tano , katika mwaka huu wa kifedha na na jua ku na wadi 
zengine na sema hil i Bw ana Spika  si kukejeli Wadi zengine  lakini kuna zile ambazo hivi sasa 
nafikiri kulingana Ripoti tuliopewa  wakati wa special  planning , wako na al most 98 per cent 
coverage  ya cabro  na lami.  Kwa hivyo wa le ambao elfu moja mia tano kwao  itakuwa haiwezi si 
ati haiwafai sana, l akini  itakuwa si  muhimu sana kwao . 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 10 Ningeomba zile mita zengine kidogo kidogo ziweze kuga nyiw a sehemu kama vile 
Bamburi kwa sabab u, sisi kwa mda mrefu tumekuwa bila b arabara zile za cabro na  lami. Kwa 
hivyo ningeomba taf adhali ule mgao kama  unaweza ongezew a pale Bamburi  itakuwa bora zaid i. 
Na vile vile niweze kutilia maanani ka tika sekta ya uchu mi samawati kwa  sababu , nimeona 
Gava na ako na nia nzur i ya kuweza kuimar isha s ekta hio na nimpongeze kwa  hilo nikiomba tu 
na w enzangu tuweze kushik iriana zaidi na t uweze kusukuma k wamba vijana na watu wetu 
waweze kulikumbatia jambo hili la maswala ya uchu mi samawati  katika maswala ya kuweza 
kusoma na hata katika implementation , ahsante Bwa na Spika na naunga hoja hii ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Sp eaker  (Hon. Fadhi li M akarani ): Thank y ou. Yes, Honourable  Maryam 
Baimu?  
 
Hon. Baimu:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika kwa kunipa nafasi h ii mimi naunga mkono 
Mwenyeki ti wa fedha na timu yake kwa h ii kazi nzuri wamefanya , manake ikifanikiwa naona 
idara  zote zimewaki lishwa vyema , zimetaji wa hoja hii na hii ambayo yote ni katika maendeleo 
ya wadi zetu. Kwa hivyo mimi nampa pongezi yeye na t imu yake kwa kazi nzuri  waliyofa nya 
ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Honourable  Kibwana Swale h, 
please reply.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Than k you Honourable  Speak er, in short,  I would just want once 
again to appreciate all the Members of this Assemb ly, Staffs an d also the office of th e Speaker 
and Clerk and I would also want to appreciate Honourable  Patrick Mbe lle for what he said, he 
needs to be considere d when the time c omes  so, mine as  I share with the finance committee will 
put into consideration  the vi ews the Members have raised  and the same time, we shall see that 
we implement whatever has been approved in this Honourable  House . Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now put the  
question that the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Baya Swaleh , on adoption of Report on the 
Public Participation  for Annual Development Plan 2023 /2024 to be adopted by this Honourable  
House in the same ter ms as moved ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes, the Motion  bearer Honourable  Kibwana  Swaleh Bay a on adoption of Report o n the 
Public Participation for Annual Development Plan 2023/2024 is adopted by this Honourable  
House . Yes Clerk? 
 
MOTION  
 ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION FOR THE MOMBASA COUNTY FISCAL 
STRATEGY PAPER , 2023  AND PROGRAM ME BASED BUDGET ESTIMATE  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swa leh: Thank you Honourable  Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg to move  
the following Motion .  
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 11 “THAT, this House adopts the Rep ort on the Public Participation for the Mombasa County 
Fiscal Strategy Pa per Plan , 2023 and Programme Based Budget Estimate s laid on the 
Table today on  Tuesday, 27th June, 2023 . 
 
I will ask Honourable  Mwaura t o second . 
  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Mwaura please s econd . 
 
Hon. Mwa ura: Mr. Speaker , I second.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Honourable  Members , I now 
propose the que stion that the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya Adoption of Report 
on th e Public Participation fo r the Momb asa County Fisca l Strategy Paper Plan , 2023 and … 
 
[Silence ] 
 
Okay Honourable  Members , I will propose again the questio n; I now propose the  question 
again that the Motio n by Honourab le Kibwan a Swale h Baya  on Adoption  of Report on the  
Public Participation for the Mombasa Co unty Fis cal Strategy Paper Pl an, 2023 and Programme 
Based Budget Estimate 2023/2024 to be considered by this  Honourable  House in the same terms 
as moved ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya Chairp erson Committee on Finan ce, Budge t and 
Appropriation please make your  contribution?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Honourable  Speaker . You know today is my day 
where am perusing a lot of papers and f igures  which are very h uge. Honourable  Speaker , as early 
as state d that  being th e Chair o f Finance Committee being supported by Commit tee Member s as 
well as the Secretariat , today  I am also honoured again  and delighted  to present the Report on the 
public participa tion, for the Mombasa C ounty Fiscal Strategy Paper that is 2023/2024 and  
Programm e Based Budget Estimate s, 2023/2024 for the Cou nty government of M ombasa . The 
two policy  documents for the County governme nt annual spending f or the upcoming year and 
both docume nts can be found , the annual recurr ent as well as development expendi ture based  on 
the priorities and ceilings se t by the County  government . Honourable  Speaker , the County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper 2023/2024 and Progra mme Based Budget Estimate , 2023/20 24 were submitted to 
the County Assemb ly by the County Executive Committee Me mbers of Fi nance and Economic  
Planning , has indicated in his letter Ref; CECM/F&EP  28th April , 2023.  Honourable  Speaker, as 
a Committee , we also have ar ea of observation and findings which a re contained in this  Report 
and one  of the highlights  that I want  to bring to  attention , is that among the notabl e development 
were to bring upward adjustment for the County Assembly  recurrent c eiling by the Senate by 
Kshs 72,507,500  Million for building , insuran ce, E-parliament , domestic and for eign and assets 
maintenan ce cost. So, I think as an Assembly we have been allocated more money  through the 
Senate, the  other area Honourable  Speak er because it is wide and Members have this Report, 
‘The Committee also noted challen ges in complying with fiscal respon sibility princi pal, 
especi ally in terms of compensation to employ ees which is beyond the se ttle image which is 35  
per cent  set by the public finan ce ministry of the Act, 2012 and it’s  a regula tion.  
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 12 We urge  the County government to  work on this  and other issues so t hat i t’s fully in 
compl iant with the law. ’   
Honourable  Speaker , we also recei ved views from the public which is also huge. I think 
one of the things that we have heard is  about  establishin g public sports ground in  Jomvu Sub -
County , where am coming from includi ng also peop le living with disability are part of the views 
that we recei ved, Honourable  Speaker another issue that was also captu red is the issue of 
MOWASC O, it mean s the accountabi lity of this department is very imp ortant and we found that , 
we should  be having very qualified personnel in MOWASCO  and also to improve the areas. 
Honourable  Speaker as a Chair , all the department s have  been covered , we have education  and 
vocational  training to give  out scholarship to needy and best students , as we have witness ed 
today whe re we have given out the bursary to the needy students those are the vie ws, we also  
look at Transport and Infrastruct ure.  
Honourable  Speaker , in conclusio n so that at least we move forw ard on this issue , having 
received and reviewed the propos ed C ounty Fi scal Strategy Paper Plan 2023 /2024  and 
Programme Based Budget E stimate 2023/2024  and conductin g an extensive process of  public 
participation , the Committee  on Finance,  Budget and  Approp riation has given due considera tion 
to the once views conce rns and prop osal expressed by public through oral and written 
submissions.  Cons equently,  the Com mittee recom mends to the County Gov ernment through the 
County Treasury and oth er department that the vie ws, concerns and proposals r aised during th e 
public part icipation pr ocess and  enumerated  in this Report be addressed and in cooperated  into 
the prop osed County Fisc al Strategy Paper , 2023 /2024 and programmed based budget 
2023/2024 with a view to implementin g them for better service in the County.  
Our RECOMMENDA TION S Mr. Speaker, as I wind up has THAT , pursuant to section 
117,125,129, 130 and 131 of the Publ ic Finance Management Act, 2012 and Standing order of 
179 of the Mombasa  County  Assembly Standing Order . The County Assembly is resolve to adopt 
the draft Cou nty F iscal Strategy Paper for the period 2023/2024 and programmed based 
estimate 2023/2024 subm itted to the County  government of Momba sa, subject to considering and 
inclu ding propo sed projects and programme  enumerated paragraph  eight o f this Report.  Finall y, 
Honourable  Speake r THAT , pursuant to Standing Order 179, this County Assembly RESO LVES  
to adopt th e Report on Public P articipation for County Fiscal Strategy Paper , 2023/2024 and 
the Programme -Based Budget estim ates, 2023/2024 as annexed  minutes o f proce edings  of this 
Committ ee approving this Report . Thank you, Honourable  Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Honourable  Kibwana . Yes, 
Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri ? 
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you M r. Speaker, as st ated b y the 
Chai r being among the Members of the said Committee , I also wish to register  my appreciation 
for the entire proces s. Mr. Speaker , there w as a lot of impr ovement on the formation CFSP both 
ends the Execu tive side, as  an Assem bly when we went fo r valid ation the masses acknowledge d 
that the Executive indeed conducted public participation with fair time for th em to contribute an d 
whatever there was  convenience Honourable  Speaker was captured , among  the challenges which 
we a re still dragging as recom mended  in the re port, is the issue of allocating the percentage 
allocation to personnel  which is suppose d to be 35 per cent  and not m ore than that  but being a 
city County we inherited several staff from the Municipality  whic h  we cannot just fire them , but 
there is an im provement the numb er is dragging from 50  per cent  to now 53  per cent . Mr. 
Speaker , also there is a decline on dev elopmen t of 3  per cent  as req uired by the la w to have 
development  of 30  per cent.   
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 13 Mr. Speaker of the b udget , but we believe wit h proper measure s the government will be 
there at the 30  per cent  in the com ing CF SP Insha Allah. So, I urge the Honourable  Members  that 
we adopt the report  and the recommendation fo r the impl ementation with the leadership of  our 
Chair , we will be do  the du e diligence  and follow  up, to the Executive  end, to ma ke sure that 
whatever has been recommended has been adopted and  applied for Mr. Speaker.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker , I support.  
 
The Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank  you Leader of Majority . Yes, 
Honourable  Manuari?  
 
Hon. Juma Manuar i:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Nimesima ma kuunga mkono hoja hii 
ya ndugu y etu kiongozi wa Kamati ya kutathmini  pesa zetu za Kaunti yetu  ta Momba sa na mimi 
ni nimwambie tu kongole kwa kazi yao nzuri  wameifanya , ila kati ka hi i sehemu y a biashara  
’trade ’ pale kwa ngu ndani ya Bofu pana j umba la  miaka mingi sana la kihistoria amb alo liko 
pale. Mimi ningeomba tu k upitia Mwenyekiti wa Fedha jumba lile lilijengwa na limebaki sha 
nukta tu kukamilik a, ili watu wasivuke kutoka Liko ni ku ja hapa k atika maeneo ya Bunge kulip ia 
biashara zao  kwa sababu lile  ni Jumba ambalo liko chini ya Wizara  ya biashara. Kwa hivyo 
ndugu ya ngu Mhe shimiwa Spika ningeomba ndu gu yangu wakati mwengine wakikaa , waangalie 
vizuri swala hili ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika  na naunga  mkono swal a hili.     
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani) exite d the Chair]  
[The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) in  the Chair]  
       
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Honourable  Juma Manuari from Bofu 
Ward. Yes , Honoura ble Hami si Salim Mbaya please make y our contr ibution. 
 
 Hon. Hamisi  Mbaya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa tia fursa  hii. 
Mheshimiwa Spika , kama nilivyotangulia kwenye changi zo zangu ambazo zimepitia nyuma  
kwamba leo hii vile nimefunga niko na s waum ambayo  imen ibamba  zaidi, sitowe za kuongea 
mane no m engi isipokuwa tu nitaweza kuwaambia kwamba nimei unga mkono hoj a hii kwa  
asilimia tisaini na tisa kwa mia . Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Honourable  Salim. Yes , Honourable  
Mwaura p lease  make your  contribution.  
 
 Hon. Mwaura:  Mheshimiwa Spika nikipongeza Kamati ambayo imeleta Mswada huu, 
nataka kusema ya kwamba napendezwa na maoni yao kwamba wamezingatia maoni ya 
mwananchi na hawajakosa kuhaki kisha ya kwamba japo kuwa haitaenda vizur i na upande wa 
Executive  kwamba wa nasema hii Fiscal Strategy Paper  haiendi ama hai uiani na sheria ya Public 
Finance Management Act, PFM Act  hawakukosa kuichuku a muhimu na pia hawakukosa 
kuizingatia na kuisema. Kwa hivyo mimi nikiangalia yale  ambayo  yamenak iliwa  hapa ni y ale 
ambayo  yamekwi sha kuzungumzwa kule nyanjani, kule mashinani katika public particip ation  na 
nishukuru kwa sababu tumeona mwelekeo kuhusiana na hizi public participation  na tumeona 
faida yake na ni washukuru kwa sababu wanahakikisha y a kwam ba ma oni yetu n a maoni ya 
wananch i yameweza kuratibiwa na wameweza kuyanakili na pia kuyapeana mahali  panapo 
stahili. Kwa hivyo ninasimama kuunga swala hili mkono. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 14  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ):  Thank you very much  Honourable  Samue l Mwa ura from 
Kongowea Ward. Yes, Honourable  Francis from Chaani Ward please make your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Mak anga:  Thank you Honourable  Speaker. I stand to sup port the Motion  and the 
Report that the Committee on Finance and  Planning has brought to this Ho use. Honourabl e 
Speaker , we must admit that it indeed has come to pass that our Committee  has overworked by 
ensuri ng that t hey do their due diligence and ensuring  that the opinions of every  citizen down 
there has been capture d. Ukiniruhusu kwa Kiswahili  Mheshimiwa ni kw amba Kamati hii yetu 
hapa la bda ingepewa nafasi kuwakilisha Bunge la Kitaifa ama Serikali ile iliy oko pale juu, 
hatungekuwa na vilio a mbavyo tuko navyo hapa chini , kwa sabab u wameweza kuzingatia yale 
ambayo wa nanchi wamesema. Mheshim iwa Spika  lazima tuwapo ngeza, na lazima tuwa unge 
mkono kwa jambo hili tukiwa tunaju a kwamba huu ndio mwanzo wa kuweza kut imiza aha di 
nyingi tulizowapa wananchi wetu kwa kuhakikisha kwamba hata il e mikutano ya kupata maoni 
yao ambay o ni public participation  iliyowek wa k isheria, h aifanyiki tu kama mzaha kam a 
tunavyo ona pale juu wanavyofanya lakini wameweza kuzingatia tukianzi a pale up ande wa 
Serikali ambao ni Executive  wamezingatia yale ambayo tuli wasikia wananchi wakiyasema na pia 
Kamati yetu ya Bunge  pia ilipoenda pale wameweza pia kusisitiza yale ambayo wana nchi wetu 
wameweza kusema. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni dalili  kwamba t unapoelekea ni pazuri 
na ushirikiano huu endapo utaendelea , basi Mombasa tutaisogeza  mbele kwa uwezo wa Mungu 
na hata kule juu naju a watakuja hapa Mo mbasa kufanya bench markin g ili hata hao wanapofanya 
wakati mwengine wazingatie sheria na maoni y a wananch i ambao kulingana na Katiba ya Kenya 
wako na nguvu zaidi na zaidi  sana. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank  you very much  Honourable  Francis Makanga  from 
Chaani Ward. Yes , Honourable  Morgan Matsaki, Leader of Minority Party pl ease make  your 
contribution.  
 
 The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Bado mimi 
nikiwa mmoja wa Kamati hii na z idi pia kuunga  mkono na pia napongeza  Waheshimiwa wenza 
kwa kutupatia ushirikiano kwa ajili ya  hii kazi tuli yo zidi k uifanya. Langu  pia nazidi kusisitiza tu 
ni Kaunti husika izidi kutekeleza hay a mambo mashinani. Otherwise , mimi nazidi tu kuunga 
mkono hoja  hii. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Thank you very much. Yes, Honourable  Ali Shariff , please 
make your contribut ion from Tononoka Ward.  
 
 Hon. Ali Shariff:  Ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii kutoa maoni yangu. 
Naamka kuunga mkono Kamati hii ya Fedha kwa kutengeza Ripoti hii na nawa pongeza sana 
sasa iliyobakia ni kazi yetu kusimamia utumiaji wa fedh a hizo. A hsante sana Bwana Spik a. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Please substantiate, ni Ripoti gani  hio unayo  izungumzia 
Mheshimiwa ? 
 
 Hon. Ali Shariff: Ripo ti hii ni ya County Fisc al Strategy Paper  Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank y ou Honour able Ali Shariff. Yes , Honourable  
Kibwan a please reply to the Motion . 
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 15  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Honourable  Speaker. Honourable  Speaker , once 
again ju st to appreciate your office, the office of t he C lerk, the Committee Members plus the 
Members of thi s Honourable House . One thi ng that I  want to just to mention here so that we 
know where we are ; Honourable  Speaker , is just to say that whate ver the Members have raised in 
this Hono urable  House to be put into consideration but I wa nt also to let them know th at no  
document, no huma n being i s perfect and I mean that even this document is not 100  per cent  
perfe ct; but we have tried to do our best as M embers  and one of the thing that we have taken up 
is that the Committee will also write to the County Secretary as well a s the County Executive 
Member fo r Finance to adjust or to include and address the issues that have been raised by this 
Hono urable  House. So, with these few remarks Honourable  Speaker, I sincerely thank the 
Members  for their support and hope that as Honoura ble Ali Shariff has said , it is up on us now to 
do our oversight role as Members of the County Assembly. Thank you, Honourable  Speak er. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Honourable  Kibwana  Swaleh  Baya. 
Hono urable Members , I now put  the question that the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Baya 
Swaleh on Adoption of  the Report on the Public Participation for the Mombasa County F iscal 
Strate gy Paper , 2023 and Programme Based Budget Estimates 2023/2024  to be adopted by this 
Hono urable House in the same terms as move d. 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Hono urable  Members , the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Baya Swaleh on Adoption of 
Repo rt on the Public Participation for the Mombasa County Fiscal Strategy Paper , 2023 and 
Programme Based Budget Estima tes 2023/2024  is adopted by this Honorable  House . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes, Clerk n ext order please.  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
REDUCTION OF PUBLICATION PERI OD O F THE MOMBASA COUNTY APPROPRIATIONS BILL , 2023  
 
 Yes, again Honourable  Kibwana Sw aleh Baya  Chairpers on Committee on F inance, 
Budget and Appropriations please move the Procedural Motion . 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I b eg to move th e 
following Motion ; 
 
THAT , pursuant to the provisions of Standing O rder 116, t his House RESO LVES to 
Reduce the P ublica tion P eriod of the Mombasa County Appropriations Bill, 2023 from 
seven (7) days to one day.  
 
Honourable  Speaker I will  ask Honou rable  Salim Mbaya to second this Motion . Thank 
you. 
 
 Hon. Salim Mbaya:  I stand to second.  
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 16 The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much. Hono urable  Members , I now propose 
the question that the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya for  Reduction o f Publication 
Period of the Mombasa County Appropriations Bill 2 023, Bill No.4 of 2023  to be conside red by 
this Honorable  House in the sam e terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Hono urable  Members , I now put the question that the Motion by Honourable  Kibwana 
Swaleh for the Reduction of Publication P eriod of the Mombasa County Appropriations Bi ll 
2023  Bill No.4 2023  to be adopted by this Hono urable  House in the same terms.  
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
So, the Motion  by Honourable  Kibw ana Baya  Swaleh for the Reduction of Publication 
Period of the Mombasa County Appropriations Bill 2023 , Bill No.4 2023  is adopt ed by this 
House. Yes, Clerk next order please?  
 
BILL 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY APPROPRIATIONS BILL , 2023  (BILL NO .4 OF 2023)  
FIRST READING  
  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khat ri): Yes, please read the Bill for t he first time . 
 
[The Clerk read the Bill for the first time]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Yes, Honourable  Kibw ana Swaleh Baya, Chairperson 
Committ ee on Finance, Budget and Appropria tions please move t he Motion  to be read for a 
second time?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Honourable  Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move 
the following Motion ; 
 
THAT , the M ombasa County Supplementary Appropri ations (No.2) Bill , 2023 (Bill No.3 of 
2023) be now read a seco nd time.  
 
I will ask my Vice Chair to second the Motion . 
 
Hon. Noor: I arise to second.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very muc h Hono urable  Members. Hono urable  
Membe rs, I now propose the question that th e Motion  by Honourable  Kibwa na Swaleh Baya fo r 
the Mombasa County Appropriations Bill 2023, Bill No. 4 of 2023  to be read for a second time 
be considered by this Hono urable  House in th e same t erms as m oved ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 17 Hono urable  Members , I now put the question tha t the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana 
Swaleh Baya for the Mombasa Count y Appropriations Bill 2023, Bill No. 4 of 2023  to be 
adopted by this Honorable  House in  the same te rms as mo ved. 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
The Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya for the Momb asa C ounty 
Appropriations Bill 2023, Bill No. 4 of 2023  to be read for a second is adopted by  this Honorable  
House. Yes Clerk,  please  read the B ill for the secon d time ? 
 
[The Bill w as read for the Second time] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes, Clerk next or der please.  
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
ORDER OF THE COMMITTEE READ  
 
[The Ser jeant -At-Arms lower ed the Mace ] 
[The Honourable  Speaker ( Honourable  Aharub Khatri) exited the Chai r] 
 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Deputy Speaker ( Honourable  Fadhili Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Take your seats . Yes, Members welcome to 
the Commit tee of the Whole House. We have the Mombasa County Appropriation Bill , 2023 . 
Yes, Clerk let us procee d. 
 
[The Clerk read the Titl e of the Bill ] 
[The Clerk r ead Clause No. 2, 3 and 4]  
 
 Honourable  Members , I now pro pose that Clause two, Clause three, Claus e four as read 
be part of t he Bi ll. 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Member s any input? Yes , Honourable  Chair? Chairman  Kibwana Swaleh?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you  Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman I am sati sfied with the 
document and I have no inpu t on it. Tha nk you.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Ali Sharif f? 
 
Hon. Ali Sharif f: Yes , Chairman I have no comment and I a m satisfied with  the Report.  
 
The Chai rperson  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ali Sharif f we are in Clause one, 
sorry we a re in Clause  two, three, and Clause fo ur so a re you in agreement with those clauses to  
be part of the Bill?  
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 18 Hon. Ali Sharif f: Yes, Chairman  I am in agreement with clause  two, th ree and four.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Mwamwi ri? 
 
The Leader of Major ity (Hon. Mwamwi ri): No input Ch air and I  am satis fied. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Honourable  Members , now I can 
see the mood of the House  and I now proceed to put a  question that ;  
Clause two, the C ounty Treasury may issue the sum of fourteen  Billion, seven Hundred 
million, Keny a shillings only ou t of the County Revenue Fund and ap ply it towards the supply  
granted for the service of the year  ending on the 30th June, 202 4 and A ppropriation of the money 
granted.   
Clause three; the sum granted by section 2 shall be appropriated for s everal services and  
purposes specified in the second c olumn of the first S chedu le in the amounts specified in the t hird 
column of that schedule.   
Clause four;  in addition to the sum granted by section 2, the sum specifie d in the f ourth 
column of the First a nd Second S chedules  shall be applied for the  several s ervices and purposes 
specified in the second column of those schedules, out of revenues di rected to be applied outside 
the County Revenue F und under Article 207(1) o f the cons titution .  
Honourable  Members , I now put a question that clause tw o cla use three and c lause four be 
part of the Bill. 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?   
 
[The Clerk read Clause Five-Appropriation in Aid in respect to votes R3011 , R3012, 
R3013, R3014, R3015, R30 16, R3017, R3018, R3019, R3020, R3 021, R3022 , R3023, R3024 , 
R3025, R3026 and , D3011, D3012, D3013, D3014, D30 15, D3016, D3017, D3018,  D3019, 
D3020, D3021 , D3022, D 3023, D 3026  in accordanc e with the A ppropriation Act, 2023 ]  
 
Honourable  Members , I now pr opose the qu estion that clause five as read be part of the 
Bill? 
 
[Question propo sed and agreed to] 
 
Memb ers, any input in c lause five? Yes, Honourab le Florence any input on c lause five ? 
 
Hon. Kachumb o: No input.  
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Honourabl e Members , I now 
proceed to put a question that Clause five as it was re ad be part of th e Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Cle rk? 
 
[The Clerk read the schedule  to the Mombasa County Approp riation Bill, 2023]  
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 19 Clerk : Schedu le to the Mom basa County Appropriation Bill, 2023. Recurrent expendit ure 
Votes; R3011, R3012…  
 
[Consultat ions] 
 
The recurrent expenditure vote R3011, first total expenditure supply is Ksh.9,274,504,489  
Billion . Donor f unds is total Ksh.28,838,052 Million . Total Appropriation in Aid 
Ksh.1,541,373,094  Billion , R3011, Supply  is Ksh.174,000,000  Million  Donor funds nil 
while Appropriation in Aid Ksh.29,458,904  Million  Vote R3012; Sup ply is total  
Ksh.914,100,000 Million  total A ppropriation  in Aid for t hat vote is 
Ksh.154,760,830 Million . Vote R3013,  supply tota l is Ksh.131, 400,000  Million , 
Appropriation in Aid Ksh.22, 246,552Million . Vote R3014,  Supply is total Ksh.1, 
121,500,000, total A ppropriation in aid for that vote is  Ksh.189, 874, 489Million . 
Vote R3015,  Suppl y to tal is  Ksh.623,000 ,000Million,  Total Appropriation in Aid 
Ksh.105,476,421 Million,  Vote R3016, Supp ly total is Ksh.984,000,000 Million  total 
Appro priation in Aid Ksh.166,595,182 Million  Vote R3017,  Supply total is 1,943,973,855 B 
donor fund is total Ksh.12,878,25 0M and the  total Approp riation  in Aid for that  vote is 
Ksh.316 ,244,391 Million . 
Vote R3018,  total sup ply is K sh.114,000,000 Million  total donor fund of that vote is Ksh.18, 
830 and total Appropriation in Aid  for tat vote is Ksh.19, 281,831 Million . 
Vote R3019 , Total Supply is Ksh.1, 357,000,000 Billion , total Appropria tion in aid for that 
vote is Ksh.229,745,592 Million . 
Vote R3020, Total Supply  is Ksh.390,107,190 Million  and t he total Appropriation in A id is 
Ksh.66, 046,726 Million .  
Vote R3021 total Supply is Ksh .266,423,444 Million  and total Appropriation in Aid is 
Ksh.45,106,5 67Million . 
Vote R3022.  Supply total is Ksh.916, 000,000 Million  while Total appropriation in Aid 
Ksh.155, 082,507 Million . Vote R3023, Supp ly total is Ksh.209,000,000 Million,  Total 
Donor funds  for that vote  Ksh.2,512,539 Milliuon  and total A ppropriation in Aid for that 
vote Ksh.32 ,872,007 Million. Vote R3026  total Supply is Ksh.130, 000,000  Billion , Donor  
Fund Ksh.13,428,433 Million  and the Total  appropriation in aid for th at vote is 
Ksh8,581,093 Million .  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now propose a 
question th at the  recurrent expenditure Votes an d total as read b e part  of the Bill. 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Any input Honourable  Members on the recurrent expendi tures? Yes , Honourable  Mbaya  
Hamisi ? 
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya:  No input.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhi li Makarani ): Thank  you. Yes, Honourab le Manuari?  
 
Hon. Juma Man uari: No input.  
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 20 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank y ou. Yes, Honourable  Vice Chair of 
Finance Honourable  Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor: [Off microphone ] No input Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhil i Makarani ): Honourable  Members , I now put  the question 
that the tota l the recurrent V ote plus their totals as read be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk read the d evelopment expe nditure  votes ] 
 
Clerk : We are still on the Schedule, now we will be reading the development expe nditure 
whereby the total deve lopment ex penditure su pply is Ksh. 5,425,495,511 Billion  total dono r funds 
is KSh. 1,556,842,010 total A ppropriations in Aid for the development expenditure  is 
KSh. 3,711,423,025 M. 
Now for the votes;  we have votes number D3011, Total S upply is Kenyan shillings 
Ksh.28,00 0,000 M and to tal appropriation i n Aid is Keny an Shillin gs is Ksh.24,275,502 Million .  
Vote D3012 T otal supply is KSh. 50,000,000  and Total appropriat ion in Aid is 
Ksh.48,551,004 Million .  
Vote D3013 T otal supply is  Ksh.20,000,000 M while  total appropriation in Aid is  
Ksh.19,420,401 Million .   
Vote D3014 Ksh.716,000,000 M, Donor’s  fund Ksh.250,000,000 M and appropriation  in 
Aid of that Vote is Ksh.445,250,371 M.  
Vote D3015 total supply is Kenyan shillings 164,000 ,000 total appropriation in aid is K sh. 
159,247,2 91M. 
Vote D30 16 T otal supply is Ksh.166,000,000 t otal appr opriation in aid is  Ksh. 
161,189,332 M.  
Vote D3017 Tota l supply is K sh.1,584,026,145 B total appropriation is 
Ksh.1,538,121,179 B.  
Vote D3018 Total su pply Ksh.1,083,000,000 total Donor’s  fund Ksh.1,011,000,000 B total 
approp riation in aid Ksh.40,614,737 M.  
Vote D3019 total supp ly is Kenya  Ksh.225,000,000 M total a ppropriation in aid 
Ksh.218,4 79,516 M.   
Vote D3020 Total supply is Ksh. 221,892,810 M total appropriations  in Aid is  
Ksh.215,462,37 2M.  
Vote D3021 total supply i s Ksh.559,676,556 M total donors fund is Ksh. 250,000,000 M 
while appropriation in aid of that vot e is K sh.293,360,067 M. 
 Vote D3022 total supply is Ksh.361,000,000 and t he total app ropriation  in aid is  
Ksh.350,538,246 .  
Vote D3 023 total supply is K sh.250,00 0,000 M donors fund is Ksh.45,842,010 M while the 
appropriatio n in aid is Khs.196, 913,008 M and Vote D3026 is blank ; all column s are blank.  
 
[Consultatio ns] 
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 21 The Chairpers on (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honour able Members , as we are wai t for the 
Clerk to do the calculations and  I propose a question please you can interact in low tone s as I am 
waiting for t he Clerk to finish their calculations . 
 
[Consultations]  
 
Honourable  Members , I now propose the  question th at the Deve lopment votes plus th eir 
totals ; Vote D3011, Vote D3012, Vote D3013, Vo te D3014, Vote D3015, Vote D3016 , Vote 
D3017, Vote D3018, Vote D3019 , Vote D 3020, Vote  D3021, Vote D3022, Vote D3023, Vote 
D3024, Vote D3025and D3026  as read plus  its totals ….? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Chair any  input?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank  you Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair I have no any input the only 
thing that I want to raise t o you is that  you will fin d that the re is no vote on Development to the 
Office of the County A ttorney  but it is we ll captured in the Recu rrent Expenditure. Thank you.  
 
The Ch airperson (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you  Honourable  Chair ; so that is vote 
D3026 right ?! Okay Honourable  Member s, after g etting the input from the Honourable  Chair 
Finance Honourable  Kibwana I now proc eed to put a questio n that the Development V otes as 
were read be part of the Bi ll. 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Honourable  Members , I now put a question that vote  D3011, vote D3012, vote D3013, 
vote D3014, vote D3015, vote D3016, vote D3 017, vote D30 18, vote D3019 , vote D3 020, vote 
D3021, vote D3022, vote D3023 and vote D3026 be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk read Clause 1, short title and commencement]  
 
This Act may be cited as the M ombasa App ropriat ion Act, 2023  and shall come into fo rce 
upon publication in the Gazette  
 
Honourable  Members , I now pro pose a question that the  short  title Clause 1 be part of the 
Bill? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 22 Any input Honourable  Members before I proceed to put questio n. Thank you.  Yes, 
Honourable  Members I now put a quest ion that Clause 1 be part of the Bil l? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
[The Clerk read the long title]  
 
The Mombasa County Appropriation Bill, 2023, a Bill for  an Act of County Assembly to 
authorize the issue of certain sums of money out of the County Revenue Fund and their 
application towards the service of the year ending on the 30th June, 2024, and to 
appropriate those sums for certain public services and purposes  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now propose a 
question that the Long Title as re ad be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Any inputs Honourable  Member s? Honourable  Members any inpu ts?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Thank you. I now proc eed t o put a question tha t the long title as it was read be part  of the 
Bill? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swa leh: Thank you Chair . 
 
[Consultation s] 
 
Thank you  Chair , I move a Motion  that we move to the Plenary.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Who is your Seconder?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: I will ask Honourable  Morgan Matsa ki? 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Morgan Mat saki?  
 
The Leade r of Minority (Hon. Matsaki ): I beg to second . 
 
The Chairpe rson (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members I now propose a 
question that  the House returns to the Reporting S tage? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 23 I now put a question that the House  returns to the Reporting stage? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
The House now resumes to the reporting stage. 
 
[Honourable  Members st ood] 
 
PLENARY RESUMED  
[The Serjeant -At-Arms placed the Mace on the Upper Deck ] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani) i n The Cha ir] 
 
The Deput y Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani): Have your seats  Honourable  Members.  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh, please report back to the House ? 
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Honourable  Speaker . Honourable  Speaker , I want to 
report  back to the House that we we nt thro ugh clause by  clause and there was no amendment and 
I was glad that all the Members agreed on what tra nspired and they are happy . We believe  that 
we will continue t o work together . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon Fadhili M akarani ): Who is your Seconder?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: I ask my brother Honourable  Ngug i to second  the Motion . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Ngugi? 
 
Hon. Ngugi: Mr. S peaker I stand to  second  the Motion . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Thank  you Honourable  Member. I now 
propose a quest ion that the Report on wha t transpired during the Committee of the Whole House  
on th e Mombasa County Approp riation Bill,  2023 Bill (No. 4) of 2023 by Honourabl e Kibwana 
Swaleh be considered by th is Honourable  House with the same terms as moved . 
 
[Ques tion proposed and agreed to] 
 
There is none, I now put a question that the report on wha t transpired during the 
Committee o f the Whole House on the Mombasa Count y Appropriation Bill, 2023 Bill (No.  4) of 
2023 by Honourable  Kibwana Swa leh be adopted by this Honourable  House ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourab le Kibwana  Swaleh Baya, please mo ve a Motion  for the Bill to be read for 
the third time.  
 
MOTION  
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 24 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , I beg to move th e 
following Motion ; 
 
That the Mombasa  County Appropriation Bill, 2 023 be now read for the third time . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Who is your seconder?  
 
Hon. Kibw ana Swaleh: I ask my colleague  Honourable  Manuari to second . 
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  I second . 
 
The Deput y Speaker  (Hon. Fadhi li Makarani ): Thank you . Honourable  Members I now 
propose a question that  the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana  Swaleh Baya for the Mombasa 
County Appropri ation Bill, 2023 (No . 4) 2023 to be read for  the third time be considered by thi s 
Honourable  House  with th e same terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Honourable  Members , I now put a question that the Motion  by Honourable  Kibwana 
Swaleh Baya  for the Mombasa C ounty Appropriation Bill, 2023 (No. 4) 2023 to be read for the  
third time to be read a third time to the Ho use with same te rms as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk , read the Bill for the Third Time?  
 
THIRD READING  
[The Clerk read the B ill for the third time]  
 
The Depu ty Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani) : Yes, Clerk  next order please?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTI ON 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri ? 
 
The Leade r of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you Mr. Sp eaker . Mr. Speaker Sir, I 
beg to Move  the following  Moti on; 
 
THAT Pursuant to Standing Ord er 28 the House a djourns today Tues day 27th June, 2023 
and resumes its sittings on Tuesday 18th July, 2023.   
 
May I ask Honourable  Franklin e Ma kanga (Hosanna)  to second.  
 
The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga 
(Hosanna)?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  I seco nd, Mr. Speaker .  
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 25 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now propose a 
question that the Motion  as moved  by the Leader of Majority Honourable  Athman  Mwamwiri be 
debated in this House . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwir i please make your  contribution ? 
 
The L eader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you M r. Chair . Mr. Chair, for the past 
few weeks Membe rs have been  exhausted by the commitments especially during the budget  
making process and al so Mr. Speaker there are a  lot of issues of County im portance in cluding the  
process of registration  of Mombasa Care  which is go ing on at our Wards. Also Mr. Speaker , 
there is a process of the bursary issuance and cheques  issuance on bursary w hich will start as 
from next week . Mr. Speaker , so I humbly ask  Honourable  Members to approve that we adjourn 
today so that one this sitting u ntil then so that Members  can participate in th is exercise in the 
grassroots to ensure that those intended t o benefit from t he Mombasa Care....  
 
[Interrup tion] 
 
The Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Fadhil i Makarani ): Honourable  Mwamwiri , for the benefit  of 
Hansard they are not  getting you  it is as if you are speaking  in Chinese …! 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you Chair for the guid ance. Mr. 
Speaker , as earlier stated the Mem bers of this House have been up and down to ma ke sure that 
the Mombasa  County  Budget 2023/2024 is approved today , that was a hectic exercise which 
really  consumed a  lot of energy and time for this Honourable  Member s. Mr. Speaker , at the same 
time, the Memb ers do report a nd partici pate in other parts in represe nting their people at the 
grass roots  level . So, I beg that Mr. Speaker as a House we approve  the Members  that we adjourn 
today so that one they  can get a little bit time t o strengthen their legs but also there are other 
issues of County i mporta nce w hich are going on including the registration of the Mombasa Care 
which is being conducte d at the Ward level . So, it is my  humble submi ssion , that Members adopt  
so that the y can be  part of the ex ercise on the ground to ensure that the offic ers indeed they 
register the intended  people to benefit in the Mombasa Care  exercise  as intended  by His 
Excellency the Governo r as well as also the County pla ns to issue chequ es from nex t week . On 
the same Mr. S peaker , the beneficiaries are from our Wards and it is of importance if the 
Members do participate in those exercises so that when we adjourn it will not hinder with the 
sitting and issue of q uorum . Therefore,  I beg to  humbl y ask Honourable  Members to ag ree that 
we adjourn today so that we can take part on  other issues of County importance. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you.  Yes, Honourable  Frankline 
Makang a? 
 
Hon. Makanga: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nasimama kuunga mk ono Hoja hii  iliolet wa 
na Kiongozi wa Wengi iki wa i nalenga kuweza kulifunga Bunge hili ili tuelekee katika 
mapumziko lakini Mheshimiwa Spika kama Kiongozi wa We ngi alivyosema haya si map umziko 
mbali na ya le mengi aliyoyasema kwamba tutakuwa  tunapambana na masuala ya wananchi . 
Mheshimiwa Spika , niliambie Bung e hili kwamba sisi  tuna vita na vita vyetu kwamba sisi kama 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 26 viongozi tulio  chaguliw a na tulio pia  wengine amba o waliweza kuteuliwa ili k uwakilisha  
mafungu  ya watu a mbao wamepewa maju kumu kik atiba. Mheshimiw a Spika , kudhalilishw a 
kwetu kumezidi kuendelea na tumei ona serikali haswa yule bwana ambaye ni Naibu Rais wa 
nchi hii akiendelea kuwadhalilisha viongozi hawa am bao saa hii, kufikia saa h ii ni saa kumi na 
moja lakini  bado w ako hapa  katika B unge hili wakiangaz ia masuala  ya wananchi...  
 
[Interrupt ion] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Frankline , please stick to your 
Motion . 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante  Mheshimi wa Spika . Najenga H oja kwamb a kat i ya yale meng i 
mazuri ambayo yamese mwa na Kiongozi wa Wengi  lazima pia ieleweke haw a Waheshi miwa 
ambao ni viongozi katika Gatuzi  ambazo ni 47 ndani ya nchi hii lazima haya masuala yao 
yaangaziwe , yashughulikiwe na k ama hawat afanya hivyo basi kama uong ozi w a muungano wa 
wawakilishi Wodi tutap eana mwelekeo zaidi ikiwa moja wapo ni ile ambay o am esema  tuweke 
sufuria kwa kichwa . Mimi nasimama kuunga mkono wacha twende nyumbani ili tupambane na 
wananchi na  pia tuangalie ni  jinsi ga ni tutarudisha had hi ya Bun ge hi li na viongozi  wote 
walioteuliwa kulingana na Katiba  ya Kenya . Ahsante sana Mheshimi wa S pika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Florence?  
 
Hon. Kachumbo: Ahsant e sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nakubaliana na Mheshimiwa 
mwenzangu Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  kuwa tunahitaji mu da twende tupumzike 
tukakabaliane na masuala y a wananch i mashinani , so I second .  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): It has already been seconded so you 
support the Motion . Yes , Honou rable Leader of Major ity please reply to your Motion ? 
 
The Leader of Major ity (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mhes himiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika , niwashukuru Waheshimiwa kwa kulielewa  hili lakini pia nichukue f ursa hii niwatakie 
ndugu zangu Waislamu  katik a sikukuu inayowak abili kesh o, sikukuu ya Eid -ul-Adha na kwa 
sababu tunajua miezi michache mbele ndugu zetu wakrist o watakuwa  na krismasi tuna hiari ya 
kuwaalika tuweke akiba  ya kesho lakini pia tukiwasahau kuw aalika tujue na sisi  chetu kimotoni 
itakapofik a mwezi wa Disemba  Mheshimi wa Spika. Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika , kila la kheri 
kwa Waheshimiwa na wafanyikazi wetu wa Bung e hili . Ahsantum.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Honourable  Members , I now 
stand to put a quest ion that the Motion  by Honourable  Athman  Mwamwiri  on Adjournment be 
adopted by this Honourable  House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
The Motion  has been  adopted.  
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
June 27, 202 3                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBAT ES                                        43 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 27 ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , as per the earlier approved Motion  the House stands adjourned until 
18th July,  2023 . 
 
The House rose at 4:53p .m. 