June 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                           43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 20th June, 2018  
The House met at 9:10a .m. 
 
(The Deputy  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats, yes Clerk.  
MESSAGE  
Hon. Members, I have a  message from His Excellency the Governor through the County 
Attorney, that the Governor ha s brought a memorandum for the Public H ealth Law with the 
instruction for revision and incorporating  new changes to the said above l aw so I commit the 
memorandum to the Health Committee for further actions. Yes Clerk?  
PETITION  
 
Hon. Members there's a petition and I direct the Leader of Majority to read the petition in 
front of the Honorable Assembly. Yes Leader of Majority?  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Okay  Mr. Speaker thank you, let me take this 
opportunity to read the petition of the County Assembly of Mombasa as urgent matters, on the 
date of 30th 4, 2018 . 
 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) read the Petition)  
 
We the Director, Chair person and management of Wu meri Travel Company Ltd, Tatama 
Sacco, 2TS Sacco, Kaloleni Association, Mariakani Association and Double T Sacco do 
hereby lodge our complaint and seek for your indulgence concerning the above 
referenced subject.  
 
We have been operating from Kobil Kenol M wembe Tayari for more than 40 years  and 
we have been very peaceful with all the a uthorities in the past.  

June 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                           43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 1. We have been receiving threats from the Inspectorate department to vacate from the 
petrol station without a written notice from the County. We have bee n receiving 
intimidation from the Director of Inspectorate who have  a fixed mind and does not 
entertain any public participation in decision making. He keeps on threatening us with 
County Askaris to enforce his orders.  
2. We were allocated a parking slot with in Coast bus and Singh restaurant. These parking 
were designed for normal cars parking and not intended for matatu or bus terminus.  
3. No Z ebra crossing.  
4. No toilets and shades for the passenger and safety of our passengers were not considered 
by the Authority . We have been paying revenue as per the County finances act.i.e.2000/= 
for 14 seaters and 3500/= for minibuses.  
            We find the decision made by the Inspectorate D epartment as discriminative as other 
petrol station s are operating as bus station s within the environs;  Modern Coast operating from  
petrol station, b uses and Matatus  operate f rom the petrol station next to Coast B us Total petrol 
station. We feel cheated when we  are allocated a place behind the main road and not a strategic 
place and other s are still operating in the highway i.e. upcountry buses hence making our 
business in loses.  We are l aw abidi ng Kenyan Citizens. However, we are rendered out of our 
legitimate business through int imidation and threats from the a uthority, we are appealing to you 
to accord us attention and offer an appropriate assistance to end this menace.  
            We urge the County g overnment of Mombasa through the County Assembly to stop this 
Executive order of transferring the above matter till we get a proper solut ion through publi c 
participation between County g overnment and all stakeholders operating in the Kobil petrol 
station.  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
      The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you.  Hon. Members under Standing order 
201 you are permitted to co mment on the petition before the Assembly, any comments or 
observations? Yes Hon. Samba Tobias?  
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for according me this opportunity . It’s a genuine 
concern by the Petitioner, P etitioner as I have read there, they are Sacco and these people have 
also been contributing immensely to the growth of the econom y of the Mombasa County but of 
late there are some observation s I don’t know where these I nspectorate got their directives or 
rather powers, because they’ve been misusing the ir powers infact it was yesterday I got a 
concern call by a group of business people that they were given some time limit that they had to 
demolish their structures or the County I nspectorate will do that on their behalf but of late if you 
can be observant  enough, there are erection of containers with the l ogo of the County, County 
government logos.  
 Mr. Speaker as per the investigation s that I have done, those con tainers are not for the 
County g overnment, they are for individual who are purporting to opera te under the County 
Government of Mombasa. Mr. Speaker when it reaches a  point where by these County 
Inspectorate take order s from an individual I think it is now risky because I fail to understand 
how somebody can just wake up in the morning and then deci de the whole of this row will be 
demolished without giving them notices, without giving them anything . So I just compare it with  
these ones, there are so many Matatus  I have gone to intercede  on their behalf at the County 
Inspectorate there, the reason as to why may be they are being intimidated they are not even 
genuine that they’ve packed at the wrong lane , actually if you go there you will find out that the 
accusation is mischievous .  
June 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                           43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  So I think I would appeal in this Hon orable  House we shoul d come up wi th regulations 
and l aws that these County Inspectorate are going to operate on, for now it’s as if they are 
operating in a vacuum even if you feel or wish you want to subject som ebody or torture by the 
County I nspectorate you just go there, you give them s omething small or you tell then do act 
upon these and they will act, and citizen out there they are well conversant with these l aws and 
that is why it has taken this Honorable group to take this initiative to do it in a written petition so 
that at least we  may act. Mr. Speaker it is in order through your permission if you allow t he 
House should come up with a C ommittee or rather a task force that is going to ensure that we 
have structures that are going to govern the County I nspectorate so that at least the y may be 
operating on a certain genuine an d lawful premises of the l aw. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you, yes Hon. Thoya?  
  Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Spika ni malalamishi ambayo yameweza kufika na ukweli 
hatutaki kuyaach a tu hivi hivi , ni malalamishi ambayo yanahitaji kuchunguzwa na Jumba hili la 
sheria. Nafikiri kama sijakosea Inspectorate  iko katika upande wa idra ya ugatuzi  ambao mimi ni 
Mwenyekiti, na kuna wale ambao tunawavulia kofia kwa utenda kazi wao, na kuna wale  ambao 
wanahitaji kuchunguzwa kwa makini kwa sababu wanatumia zile kofia zetu za Kaunti yale 
magwanda ya kijani kibichi ki makosa na hatungependa kikosi hiki ambacho wengi wanajitolea 
katika hali na mali ukweli wako vijana katika Inspectorate ambao wanafan ya kazi kwa bidii tena 
sana lakini hatungependa kwamba wawili watatu ambao wanatumia sheria ambazo wanajua 
wanakozitoa waweze kuharibu kikosi kizima cha askari wetu wa Kaunti.  
Kwa hivyo ipo haja Kamati yetu ya Leba na kuna ile Kamati ya barabara kwa sabab u ni 
lazima tujue wamepewa vipi ama wanaendelea vipi? Kwa hivyo ipo haja tuweze kutembea 
tuwaite walalamishi tuwahoji na ikiwa kuna askari ambaye anatumia nguvu kupita kiasi cha 
sheria ambazo tumeweza kuzitunga hapa aweze kuchukuliwa  hatua . Zaidi ya yote t unapendekeza 
baadhi ya hawa askari ambao tuko nao huenda tukawaregeshe katika mafundisho, tuwaregeshe 
katika mafundi sho kwa sababu wakati mwengine W aheshimiwa uko ndani ya gari hawakujui 
unaona yale maneno ambayo wanatupia wapita njia si maneno ya sawa . Pengine siwezi kujua 
kwa Kiswahili utanisamehe lakini courtesy ile lugha ambayo ni ya sawa ipo haja customer care  
ama ile jinsi ya kuzungumza na mtu hawa watu ambao wanajaribu kuwa  harass  ama 
kuwasukuma ndio wateja na hao unaambiwa wanalipa, wanalipa tumeamb iwa zile pesa wanalipa 
si hawa nafikiri ndio matajiri wa Kaunti lakini ikiwa hatuwezi kuheshimu yule mtu anatulipa na 
mimi naambiwa mteja ni mfalme lakini hawa hawa ndio watu wanatulipa ni lazima tuwachukulie 
na heshima ya hali ya juu . Ikiwa vijana wetu wa naanza kutepetea tutamuita Bwana Changawa na 
Director waje ili tuwaambie tafadhalini sana mjaribu kuzungumza na hawa vijana askari wale 
ambao wanahitaji kurudi kwa mafunzo warudi kabla hatujachukua hatua za kisheria. Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  
Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Naibu Spika kwa kunipatia fursa 
hii pia mimi niweze kutia mchango wangu, mwanzo nishukuru kwa watu ambao wameleta sijui 
tutaiitaje kwa sababu pia Kiswahili sio mdomo  wetu. Kwa kweli watu wengi walikuwa 
wakinyanyasika na askari wetu wa Inspectorate  pasipo kujua  ni njia gani ambayo  wanaweza 
tumia wakapata suluhu,  lakini nashukuru siku  hii ya leo tumepata hawa wana M atatu ambao 
wananyanyasika na askari wetu wa Inspectora te kwa kuhangaishwa pale Kenol gari za kwenda 
huku Mazeras.  
June 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                           43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Mheshimiwa Naibu wa Spika ni kweli kuna kilio kingi kutoka kwa askari wetu wa 
Inspectorate  sio wote lakini baadhi yao, siwezi sema wote ni wabaya lakini wako baadhi ni kama 
wamelewa na ile kofia n yeupe hawajui kuitumia vizuri.  Mheshimiwa Naibu Spika ni hivi majuzi 
tu nimekuwa katika Radio Salaam nikihojiwa nikapata malalamishi chungu mzima kuhusu hawa 
Inspectorate  wengine wanaenda kwa vibanda pale Likoni Ferry wanaenda kuchukua hongo na 
wanajulikan a mpaka majina yao ilinibidi mpaka nimpigie Changawa nikam uunganisha  na huyo 
mzee aweze kufuatilia hilo suala.  Mheshimiwa Naibu Spika kama Nyumba ya sheria 
hatutaruhusu Kaunti yetu nzuri iweze kupakwa tope na watu wachache,  ni vizuri kuweze 
kutengenezwa K amati haraka iwezekanavyo ifuatilie jambo hili ili waweze kujua ni akina nani 
ambao wanachafua idara yetu ya Inspectorate . Mheshimiwa Naibu Spika tumekuwa sana na 
Public Participation ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Faith just to  inform you that the Deputy 
Speaker does not sit on this Chair, it i s the Speaker who sits in this C hair. 
Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Mheshimiwa Spika samahani kwa hilo. Mheshimiwa Spika 
hata yameenda na hewa niliokuwa nataka kuongea lakini ipo haja ya kute ngeneza Kamati iweze 
kwenda  kuchunguza hali halisi yenye inaendelea mitaani japokuwa mengine tunayajua ili 
Mombasa yetu iwache kuchafuliwa na watu wachache. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you, yes Hon. H atimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nasimama hapa nina furaha sana hapa leo kusikia …  
 
(Laughter)  
Mheshimiwa aliyetoka kuongea hapa kusema kuwa watu wanajaribu kuharibu Kaunti hii 
nzuri hii yetu hiyo nafikiri ni statement moja nzuri sana. Mheshimiwa Spika nikitilia nguvu hata 
maneno yake aliyosema nafikiri itabidi tuambie Inspectorate  wafanye evaluation , monitoring 
and evaluation  ya wale wafanyi  kazi ili tuweze kupata na tupate kujua wana fanya kazi zao  
namna gani?  
(Applause)  
Nafikiri jambo hili ndilo litakuwa kwa wale ambao ni wazuri wawe watabakia kwa wale 
ambao si wazuri basi tuang alie tutachukua hatua gani?  
(Applause)  
Kwa sababu watu wengi sana wanataka kupatiwa kazi Mheshimiwa kazi na najua kuwa 
wengi ambao wako nje ni wazuri kuliko wale walioko ndani Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo 
naunga mkono  hii. Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Naliaka?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mary Wafula : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii . Kama vile 
wenzangu wamechangia mimi pia nitaongeza tu sauti yangu . 
June 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                           43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 Hichi kitengo cha Inspectorate  kinahitaji kufanyiwa au kupigwa msasa maana mimi 
mwenyewe nimewahi kuwa muathiriwa, kuna wakati gari la mzee wangu pale Ralli House  
liliweza kufungwa pale na hata nilipofuatilizia kumpigia huyo Changawa mwenyewe mara 
nyingi hata hiyo simu hashiki, hata ukijaribu kuwaongelesha wale wengine wakishafunga hilo 
gari wamepotea, sasa inakuwa kama biashara wakati hawana pesa wanatafuta njia za kutafuta 
hizo pesa kwa lazima ni kama wanasukumwa na mtu fula ni. Mara nyingi hii K aunti yetu 
imekuwa na shida ya k wamba kila mtu ana yule amemleta . Kwa hivyo sasa inakuwa ukionyesha 
kidole cha lawama inakuwa unamchimba mtu fulani kwa maana hiyo ningependa tafadhali kwa 
heshima ya hii Nyumba tukaweze kuregesha jina z uri la hii Kaunti. Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I think I will allow the last speaker Hon. Mwaka 
because under the Standing Order 201; you are just allowed 30 minutes. Yes Hon. Mwaka?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika, mimi pia nina mchango wangu 
kidogo ambao naw eza kuchangia k wa jambo hili ambalo limenitoa hapa kwenye Nyumba hii 
nadhani M gala muuweni na haki yake mumpe. Kwa upande ambao mjadala ulioletwa hapa ni 
upande wa maaskari wetu na hiyo steji. N yumba hii iko haja kuweka mikakati na sheria ya hizi 
steji zote za Kaunti ya Mombasa  kwa sababu pale Mwembe Tayari ni kitovu cha mji ambayo 
kwamba ni steji kubwa lakini pale pia kuna uchafu zaidi ambayo kwamba hawana nidhamu kwa 
kusema kweli kulingana na h ao hiyo steji yote haina nidhamu hao watu wa magari hawana 
nidhamu hawaangalii au hawachukulii wateja wao kwa nidhamu.  
Kwa kusema kweli pana uchafu zaidi pale si msasa peke e yake kupigwa kwenye upande 
wa Inspectorate  lakini pia hiyo steji wawekewe mikakat i na sheria ya kupangiwa hiyo steji, kwa 
sababu wezi wako pale, wachuuzi  wako pale na hata hiyo kontena  yasemekana pale pia ni ya 
mtu binafsi na ni kontena  nyingi ambazo ziko katika steji pia ziondolewe na kama basi ni 
kunufaika kwa Kaunti yetu basi pia il e kontena  iwe ni ya Kaunti yetu sio kuwa ya mtu binafsi 
miaka nenda miaka rudi iko pale na hatujui ni ya nani?  Hiyo iko haja pia ichunguzwe pia hiyo 
kontena .  
Kwa hiyo mimi nasema askari wetu iko haja kupa ta msasa lakini M gala muuweni haki 
yake muwapat ieni kwa sababu hiyo steji ni chafu na hali ya mazingira yetu ya Mombasa ni 
machafu kulingana na wale wale wenyewe wako pale kusema kweli mimi nishaona watu 
wakikojoa pale na ni mchana, wale wale makanga ategemea gari anaenda kumpele ka mtoto shule 
yuko pale p ale anakojoa pale, p ale pale na hapana choo, hapana lolote na pale pale ndio chooni, 
pale pale ndio wezi, pale pale kuna uchafu wa kila kitu. Kwa hiyo mimi nataka kusema Jumba 
hili iko haja ya kupanga mikakati na sheria zote na steji zote sio ile Mwembe Ta yari pekee yake. 
Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Members I now stand to 
commit a petition brought to this Assembly and the Committee or Committees that I will commit 
the petition to they must move as per o ur Standing Orders and our Standing Order 202 clearly 
says we need a response to this House not more than 60 days. So I commit Transport Committee 
and Labour Committee to work hand in hand to make sure the Assembly get a response and the 
petitioner to get what they have intended from their petition. Thank you.   
Yes Clerk?  
June 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBAT ES                                           43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members the House stands adj ourn until today afternoon at 2: 30p.m. 
The House rose at 9: 36a.m 
 
  
 
 
 
 