June 18, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           43 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes o nly. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 
  
 
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 18th June, 2019  
The House met at 3:22p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub  Ebrahim  Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Membe rs you may be seated, yes Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon. Members good afternoon again. Hon. Mem bers I wish to extend warm welcome to 
you all ; we meet again after long recess which commenced on Friday 10th May, 2019 and ended 
yesterday in line with our County Assembly Calender.  
 Hon. Members , it is my hope the recess period did provide us with ample time to 
recharge our batteries while at the same time providing us with opportunity to interact with our 
Counstituen cy.  
 Hon. Members , as we begin the second part of our Calender which will run up to 8th 
August , 2019, let us reflect on the the significance and centrality in our work as Legislators. This 
County Assembly does primarily exist for one reason only and that is to solve the problem and 
meet the needs of our people, this can be done if we dilige ntly discharge our roles of 
representation, legislation and oversight. To do that, we therefore need  to always remind 
ourselves of what is expected of the Members of the County Assembly.   
 Hon. Members , in this regard I would like to urge you all to bring M otions, Statements  
and Bills to the Assembly. It is by so doing that you will be carrying out our roles as Members of 
the County Assembly.   
 Hon. Members, I wish to also put emphasis on the County Assembly Committees in 
helping you discharge your roles as legis lators. I am aware that the Committee’s activities have 
been going on for a better part of the recess. It is my hope that these Committees used this 
duration valuably to dispense off pending activities. I am convinced that the deliberation coming 
out of th e Committee activities will form part of our legislative agenda moving forward.   
 Hon. Members, as you were all aware key among the activities during the recess was the 
Budget making process which is still on course.  

June 18, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           43 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes o nly. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 
  This is therefore the time that you are e xpected to engage yourself in the County Budget 
process as outlined in Section 125 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012.   
 Hon. Members, today the County Assembly Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations is carrying out public participation on t he Mombasa County Budget Estimates 
2019/2020 pursuant to Article  196 (1) b of the Constitution of Kenya , 2010, Section 131 (2) of 
the Public Management Finance Act , 2012, and Standing Order 207 (5) of the County Assembly 
of Mombasa Standing Orders.   
 Hon. Members, i t is my hope that Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations will 
be able to carry out a successful public participation  and that the County Assembly Budget 
FY2019/2020 that will be laid in this House by the 30th June, 2019 and will reflect t he people’s 
needs.   
 Hon. Members, as I conclude  I wish to once again take this opportunity to officially 
welcome you all and it is my hope that we  will engage and have an interactive session to the 
benefit of the residents of this great County.  Thank you an d May God bless you all.  
(Applause)  
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members  this House stands adjourned until Wednesday, 19th June, 2019 at 9 :00a.m. 
The House rose at 3 :28 p.m . 
 