March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 30th March , 2016  
The House  met at 2:30p.m.  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Member s have your seats. Yes, Clerk?  
COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE CHAIR  
Ladies  and gentlemen there is i nformation that is important that you receive ; there is a 
letter that has been sent to us from from the D irector of Center  for Parliamentary Studies  training 
(CPST )  they are working in collaboration with USAID  on a governance forum  that is supposed 
to be conducting a program within Mombasa County  Assembly  to be specic and the institution 
itself is AHADI that is conducting a needs assessment for 21 County  Assemblies currently under 
USAID/AHADI program as apart o f enhancing  supporting devolution . It is anticipated that this 
exercise will enhance County  legislation to identif y and document in a more symet ric way the 
learning needs to inform training and other capacity interventions for both Member s and sta ff of 
the County  Assembly. The next paragr aph reads , ‘I am writing to infrom you that  Mombasa 
County  Assembly  has been mapped to participate in the noble exercise  as part of a lea rning 
needs assessment , this exercise will involve the collection of data and information from both the 
Member s of the County  Assembly as well as staff . The data collection process in the County  
Assembly  is slated to begin on 6th of April, 2016 , this particular team will be headed by Dr.  
Philip Buchere,  for two days period ’. So ladies and genetlemen you have to make sure that  you 
abide by the letter and  be rightly advised. Clerk?  
PAPER  
Yes Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy?  
(Silence)  
Yes Hon.  Fadhili.  
Hon.  Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Chairman and 
the Committee , before we bring the Paper, the County  Revenue Automation we were  to convene 
a meeting for the Committee  Member s but unfortunately the  meeting did not take place due to 
lack of quorum for adopting this Report  that has come to this Hon.  House . So Mr. Speaker that 
has delayed us as the Committee  to forward the Paper to this Hon.  House  but we ar e looking 
forward to bring the P aper as soon as possible after the Committee  adopts the Report.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Maybe the Committee  will be  urged to make sure that the 
Report  is tabled because it will help us to plan for the next budget because this is an important 
document even Hon.  Amur and Hon.  Dharwesh have put forward.  Next?  
STATEMENTS  
Yes Hon.  Karisa Nzai. Yes, Hon.  Ahmed?  
Hon.  Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I rise on  behalf of Hon.  Karisa Nzai 
who h as delegated to give the Statement  on his behalf. If you allow me Mr. Speaker I will 
proceed.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, on his behalf if you have the genuine blessings that  
you do that.  
Hon.  Faraj : Absolutely  true. 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Go ahead . 
 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  
DELAY OF REGISTRATION OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES WITHIN THE CBD  
(Hon. Faraj moved the Statement)  
Mr. Speaker Sir, I rise to issue the following statement. Mr. Speaker Sir, people have 
been doing business within the Central Business District ( CBD ) for a long time , even after the 
illegalization of the same by the County  government. This has been in the commission for 
affirmative action as provided for in the Kenyan constitution section 27, sub -section 26 and the 
County  Government Act number 17 of 2012 section 87 part B. However there has been frequent 
unwarranted for har rasement and evictions by the Inspectorate department causing anger,  
frustration , havoc,  anxiety,  discomfort,  disgruntlement , name it in the disability fraternity.  As a 
result the  Hon.  Member  representing Persons living with disabilities ( PWDs ) together with his 
Committee  and various relevant County  government departments of the executive arm have had 
several meeting s to deliberate on the subject matter . Mr. Speaker now as it stands,  decisions have 
always been reached upon but no tangible or vis ible action taken hence leaving the affected 
persons  hanging in the balance.  Mr. Speaker Sir key among  the decisions made has been the 
formalization and recognition of CBD  business by PWDs through issuance of identification 
documents by the relevant departments and which has never been actualized to date.  Mr.Speaker  
Sir it is for this reason that I am humbly appealing to your esteem office to give direction on this 
very vit al, crucial  and sensitive matter.  Thank you so much.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Simi nyu. 
Hon.  Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker, I would like, first of all to congratulate Hon.  Karisa Nzai  
for bringing this matter. Mr. Speaker me being a Member  of the Committee , we had several 
meetings wi th the Inspectorate Department , the challenges that the people with disabilities are 
passing through is very s ad to see , as we come to the new dispensation. Mr. Speaker  these people 
have been working within the CBD for quite some time and we had serious discussion s with 
Nahid Moo sa then, who was in charge of the I nspectorate by that time a nd it is important, this 
matter should be looked into properly because every now and then there is change of leadership 
there and if somebody new comes  we are taken back from where we have progressed as a 
Committee  and the people who are fighting for  peopl e with disabilities. Mr. Speaker I pray for 
this House  and the direction, if so the Committee , that is the E qual opportunities Committee  
should be given a long date so th at it can look into this matter s o that we can come to a solution 
and these people to be protected. Mr. Speaker the kind of embarrassment that the business 
community, the business class of people with disability within the CBD are facing  it is so sad 
because some of them cannot even express themselves ; they are dumb and deaf and here we 
cannot even explain to those people who are coming to arrest them whe ther they are in t hat 
condition a nd you can never tell by just looking at them whether they are deaf or whether they 
cannot talk. Someone had taken that they were pretending Mr. Speaker Sir,  so the issuance of 
identification cards, the issuance of numbers for easy identification of people living with 
disabilities on the streets will be proper . I beg for your humble C hair to direct the Committee  and 
the department itself to sit down and come t o a conclusion to this matter so that we can have 
their interests and rights be protected by the County  Mr. Speaker Sir. Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Ahsante Bwana Spika. Bwana Spika kwanza kabisa ningependa tu 
kurekebisha pale ilipotajwa kipengee cha  katiba kuwa ni Article  27(6) sio section  27(6),  kwa 
kusema ukweli kama tunavyojua Bunge  letu twajua Mheshimiwa  Karume  mmoja katika wale 
anaebeba  bendera na pia vile vile ni mwakilishi wa wale walemavu. Mheshimiwa  Spika hata pia 
katika Bunge  hili mimi ni mmoja kati ya wale ambao wamepewa ruhusa kwa  sababu ya kuongea 
kwangu taratibu. Mheshimiwa  Spika pia nasema pole kwa ndugu zangu , dadangu Mary nam uona 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 pia sasa kidogo mimi na yeye tutakuwa katika chama kimoja. Mheshimiwa  Spika ipo haja 
sana…  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon.  Murfad.  
Hon.  Amur : Twaomba tujue ni chama gani maana ke hapa hakuna chama h apa tuko 
Bunge ni na chama mambo ya chama ni baada ye nataka tujue ni chama gani hiki?  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili.  
Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika naelewa chama 
anachokijua Mheshimiwa  Murfad kile cha ma cha  ODM l akini kuna kitu chengine kile ambacho 
tunakizungumza . Mheshimiwa  Spika ni  muhimu kwa ukweli kabisa ndani ya katiba ye tu 
imeweza kuangazia maswala ya…  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, What is it Hon.  Murfad?  
Hon.  Amur : Mheshimiwa  Spika ingawa anajaribu kukwepa yale tunataka kujua  
nimezungumzia chama anasema ODM y eye pia yuko ODM , hiki chama ambacho amesema wao 
ni chama gani? Kwa  sababu tunajua chama  kimoja ambacho ni ODM ni kweli, k una chama cha 
ODM, lakini hiki chama ambacho ame kivumbua leo ni chama gani? Tunataka tufahamishwe .  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  asubiri kwanza chama hicho 
kikiwa kimeandikishwa atakuja kuangalia ni chama gani … 
(Laughter ) 
...Lakini kwa  sasa hivi Mheshimiwa  Spika ch ama hiki bado hatujakiandikisha  hatujakipa 
jina, Mheshimiwa  iko haja ya sisi kama nchi na kama viongozi wa serikali ya Mombasa 
kuangalia ili ndugu zetu wasije wakakua wanaweza kudhalilishwa . Mheshimiwa  Spika tuli ona 
wakati wa nyuma wakati tulipokuwa tunasafisha miji yetu , wananchi walichangany wa, wananchi 
waliumia wakiwemo makahaba ambao wanaishi katika hali ya ulemavu. Mheshimiwa  Spika 
tuliamua kama  serikali watu hawa waweze kupatiwa kama kitambulisho ambavyo vitaweza 
kuwasaidia katika kufanya shughuli zao  za kila siku l akini twaona  kuna ulegevu mahali 
wananchi wetu hawa wamekuwa hawajapata utambulisho ule hawajaweza kutambulika n a 
nahofia serikali hii tulioko nayo hivi sa sa imebakisha mwaka na miezi kadhaa, Je, itakuwa je 
ikiwa hawataweza kupata utambulis ho kama huu w akati serikali hii i taondoka, zije serikali 
zengine.  Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi naona iko haja tushikane pamoja ili ndugu zetu wasione kuwa 
wamebaguliwa ; kama ilivyozungumza ndani ya katiba yetu maswala ya kutete a yale makundi 
machache, imezungumza katiba yetu vizuri kabisa ndani ya kipengee ambacho kimezungumzwa 
ama kimetajwa ni cha 27/6 ni vipi tutaangalia maswala ya wale waliokuwa wakikandamizwa ili 
sauti zao zisikike.  
Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi  naomba waheshimiwa wenzangu tushikane pamoja tuangalie 
haki za hawa ndugu zetu kama s isi viongozi tumesimama mbele tujue tunapoongoza kuna wengi 
ambao wako nyuma yetu hawa ndugu zetu ambao wanaishi katika hali ya ulemavu. Mheshimiwa  
Spika  mimi  namuunga mkono haswa huyu aliyejitoa muhanga maana alipewa fursa aje asome 
taarifa  hii naye bila kurudi nyuma alisimama mbele akaonyesha ujasiri . Naomba wen zangu, 
tusimameni pamoja kama alivyosimama Mheshimiwa  Saad, tuungeni mkono hoja  hii ili ndugu 
zetu wapate urahisi wa kufanya shughuli zao ndani ya CBD  ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa na pia 
ikiwezekana hata kule kando isipokuwa tu tuwe waangalifu watu wengine wasiweze kutumia 
fursa hii wakaifanya ni kitega uchumi. Maana ikishasemwa kuwa tunawapatia vitambulisho hi vi 
twaelewa w atu ni wajanja Mheshimiwa  Spika  kuna wengine hutoka majumbani wanazungumza 
lakini wakifika sehemu hizi za CBD ukaja ukawapata ni watu ambao hawazungumzi ama 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 hawaoni. Mheshimiwa  Spika twataka tuwe makini sana na  ili isiwe itachezewa, fursa hii 
isichezewe kabisa na tuwalinde ndugu zetu ambao tuko nao hapa Kaunti  ya Mombasa. A hsante.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon.  Mary Akinyi.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika, k wanza kabla sijaendelea kuunga 
mambo haya mkono ningependa kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu ambaye ameniwezesha nikafika 
hapa mahali ambapo nimefika. Pili, Mheshimiwa  Spika ningependa kuunga mkono taarifa  hii 
ambayo imeletwa na Mheshimiwa  Karisa Nza i. Mheshimiwa  Spika, mambo hayo  mimi kama 
mwana Kamati  katika Kamati  ya fursa  sawa tumekuwa  Kamati  ya fursa sawa, ambapo  
tunakutana mara kwa mara na hawa wenzetu walemavu , tumewahi  kukutana hata kabla Nahid 
Moosa  alikuwa hajawacha Inspectorate  tukakutana mpaka wakati sasa na  yule County  Secretary  
ambaye alienda tukawa tunazungumzia haya mambo vile tunaweza kuyatekeleza na yakaweza 
kufanya kazi. Mheshimiwa  Spika hata mwaka uliopita D isemba , ama mwezi wa kumi na mbili 
pia tuliwe za kukutana na County  Secretary  ambaye saa hizi yuko Bwana Thoya, tukakutana pia 
na walemavu tukazungumzia haya mambo kiundani sana. Mheshimiwa  Spika, yale mambo 
ambayo yamebaki hapa ni utekelezaji kwa  sababu mambo haya yote tuliyazungumza 
tukasikizana kuwa kufikia mwaka huu walikuwa wa le watu ambao wanafanya biashara k atika 
barabara , hawa walemavu ambao huwa wanafanya biashara katika mabarabara  ambapo mara 
nyingi huwa wanabumburushwa na kufukuzwa na kufanyiwa  yale yote ambayo hayatakikani 
tukakubaliana na County  Secretary  Thoya kuwa yal ikuwa yale mambo yaanze kutekelezwa , 
walikuwa wapewe vitambulisho w aangaliwe zile, kuna vyeti vy ao amba vyo walemavu huwa 
wako navy o viangaliwe wapewe na vitambulisho amba vyo v itakuwa viko na picha zao ili 
waendelee kufanya hizi biashara zao ambazo wanafany a katika  mabarabara .  
Mheshimiwa  Spika, mambo ambayo  yamebaki hapa ni utekelezaji k wa hivyo mimi 
ningeomba kama Bunge  hili vile tunaweza kuenda kurudi kwa County  Secretary  aweze 
kutekeleza haya mambo kama vile tulivyokubaliana  kuwa aweze kutekeleza haya mambo 
ambayo tumeyazungumzia kwa mapana na marefu. A hsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Zainab Said Ali. 
Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab Said : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  kwa kunipa hii fursa. Mimi pia 
naunga mkono kwa  sababu mimi pia ni mwana  Kamati  na hii Kamati  ni ya fursa sawa na 
tulifanya mkutano kweli na yale amba yo nilikuwa nataka kuyazungumza  Mary ameyazungumza. 
Lakini tumeambiwa kuwa kutafanywa uchunguzi wa hawa walemavu  kwa sababu wengine si 
raia wa hapa l akini wamepata nafasi kwa kuwa walemavu hawa wa hapa wamewapa nafasi 
kufanya biashara na h ao wakaja wakatwaa ile nafasi l akini sasa hatujui huo uchunguzi 
umefanywa ama haukufanywa na pia kusumbu liwa na namna ile pia si sawa k wa sababu 
tulipokwenda sisi tuk asema sisi ndio Kamati  na Mwenyekiti  wetu ni fulani . Kwa hivyo hayo 
mashirika hatuna mashaka hiyo na v ile twawashika basi wangemuita y ule Mwenyekiti  na sisi 
Kamati  tukaambiwa tujue kweli wale ni wao  ama si wao s asa yule Mwenyekiti  angetoa namna 
ya kufanya kama atazungumza na kitengo cha Inspectorate , Inspectorate  ajue atafanya nini 
lakini wao wanasumbua wanawafukuza wengine hawawezi kukimbia, wengine wachukuliwa 
vitu vyao ambao hawa waanza kukimbia  wale wengine wanaiba vitu vyao k wa hivyo si sawa. 
Tuwape sheria na tupe haki zao hawa wakenya s ioni binadamu kama sisi. Shukran.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Murfad Amur.  
Hon.  Amur : Ahsante Bwana Spika.  Ninge penda kuchangia kwa tahadhari nyingi 
Mheshimiwa  Spika; kwanza nataka niseme hivi hii ni time bomb ; wakati tutakubali tu hivi 
tutakuwa tumefanya CBD yetu i jazan e watu  kwa sababu hawa wote ni ndugu zetu wanatoka 
maeneo tofauti na kule mahali wanakotoka lazima kuna njia ya kuweza kupata w ale watu 
wanaofanya kazi zile s i lazima mtu at oke Kwale, atoke Kilifi aje afanye kazi katika Kaunti  ya 
Mombasa , ni lazima kuwe na sheria maalum Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa  sababu tukifungua tu hivi 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 basi tunafungua uwanja wa ndege. Ndege zote zitatua hapa k wa sababu atokae Kilifi, atokae 
Kwale, atokae  Mazeras, atokae Mari akani watakuwa wageni wetu hapa i lhali huku kwetu kuna 
wale wanaoweza kufanya biashara zao na kujikimu kimaisha . Kwa nini nasema hayo 
Mheshimiwa  Spika, wengine wanachukua advantage  mtu mmoja huyo ambaye wewe unafikiria  
wewe kuwa ni kil ema ana weza kukodisha aka weka watu wakati yule mtu atashikwa atajitokeza 
yeye aje aseme hapa ni kwangu huwezi kuwa mtu mmoja una miliki pahali patano kwa  sababu 
wewe una upungufu fulani lazima tuweke sheria kadhaa. Si pingi l akini  lazima kuwe na tahadhari  
kubwa s heria ziwekwe , si sheria za mjini kabisa kwa  sababu mmoja awe na nafasi moja i siwe 
mmoja akakuwa na nafasi nne katika CBD  ameweka watu. Hii ndio nasema lazima kuwe na 
sheria hususan za kutambua  watu … 
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes can you allow  intervention?  Hon.   Siminyu . 
Hon.  Simi nyu: Nilikuwa nataka kumpatia taarifa  ndugu yangu, yote tumefanya kama 
Kamati  ya fursa sawa na wakati ule  kuna wale wako kwa sasa na kila sehemu ikue inajulikana  
nani yupo na watu wangapi wamejiandikisha  na wako katika kikundi. Kwa  hivyo hicho ni kitu 
ambacho kilikuwa ki naendelea  na ni shida imetokea  tu ni  kwa sababu kila wakati anakuja 
kiongozi mpya, Director  mpya kwa Inspectorate  ndio inatatiza  mipango  ambayo itakuwa 
inawa linda  si kiongozi mwengine akija anabadili sha mambo yale h ii ndio taarifa  kwa ndugu 
yangu.  
Hon.  Amur:  Nashukuru kwa taarifa hiyo Bwana Spika, ila ninachosema  sheria ni 
muhimu k wa sababu tunapoangalia sheria hususan inaweza kutapeli na CBD  ndiyo hiyo hiyo 
tunayo iona lau tukaiacha wazi  basi, hata mahali pa kupita tutakosa kwa  sababu tunachukua 
advantage  kwamba sisi ni walemavu basi tuingie mjini tufanye mji kama Mariakani ama kama 
kwengine. Kwa  hivyo  nasema, lazima kuwe na sheria f ulani ambayo kwamba…  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, can you allow the second intervention from Hon.  
Ebrahim.  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ebrahim Omar ): Ahsante Bwana Spika. M imi ningependa 
kumuelezea Mheshimiwa  mwenzangu, Mheshimiwa  Amur maana tulisema  mapendekezo yetu 
kwamba wakati tutakapofungua fursa hii ya walemavu kujiandikisha itakuwa ni kama 
tunafungua uwanj a wa ndege . Kwa h ivyo ningeomba kwa kupitia yeye m wenyewe atupe wazo 
atafanya vipi? Manake akisema kutakuwa na uwanja wa ndege labda hatupi w azo ambalo sisi 
tutaweza kutumia ili tuangalie kuwa uandikishaji ni wa kisawasawa k wa sababu hii ni mara ya 
kwanza , singependa itoke hivi  hivi k ama ataweza kuchangia basi atupe wazo lake . Ahsante , 
Bwana Spika.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Murfad.  
Hon. Amur:  Mheshimiwa  Spika, niliposema tuweke sheria mikakati nilimaanisha ya 
kwamba ikiwa mtu yule anatoka Kilifi bila shaka atakuwa afanye katika Kaunti  ya Kilifi , ikiwa 
anatoka Kwale basi anawez a kuenda kufanya biashara hii s isi tubaki na wale wa Kaunti  ya 
Mombasa, k wa sababu tusifungue jamvi  la wageni. Kila mtu awe akija awe ni mgeni t unatak a 
kila mmoja afanyie kule aliko , tunataka tumpate k ama sio wa Mombasa ni wa Kwale tumregeshe 
Kwale, i kiwa ni wa Kilifi, tumregeshe n dio nasema, lazima kuwe na sheria hus usan ili 
kuwatambua hao  hao ili tusifungue soko ama uwanja wa ndege  ambao u taleta wachuuzi wengi 
kupita kiasi … 
(Interruption ) 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is it Hon.  Simi nyu? 
Hon.  Simi nyu: Bwana Spika lazima tuweke J umba hili maanake am esema ukipatikana 
unatoka upande  fulani  yeye mwenyewe ametoka Lamu, sijui tumregeshe Lamu?  Lazima 
tuangalie kila mtu anapotoka,  bora mtoto amelelewa hapa Bwana Spika.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon.  Jimmy?  Before you continue Hon.  Murfad can  
you allow Hon.  Odari?  
Hon.  Odari : Ahsante Mhehsimiwa Spika. Mhehimiwa Spika pia mi mi ningependa 
kumregelelea ndugu yangu Amur kwamba hawa watu, kama alivyotangulia kusema 
Mheshimiwa  Mary, Mheshimiwa  Simi nyu, pia mimi ni mwanachama wa Kamati  ya fursa sawa 
na kama alivyosema tushakuwa na vikao vingi  na haya mambo yote  anayozungumza 
Mheshimiwa  Amur tushazungumza na tunajaribu ku rekebisha  mambo yote haya ndio maana 
hawa watu walemavu wako kwenye vyama ambapo ni vyama ambavyo vinatambulika na Kaunti 
na idadi yao inajulikana na walikuwa wapewe vitambulisho k upitia vile vyama waliomo ndani . 
Kwa hio mtu yeyote atakayekuja kutoka nje ambaye hajulikani huko kwenye c hama hataweza 
kuingia kiholela n a hawa wote walemavu wanajulikana sehemu  zao waliko . Wale wa Posta, wale 
wa Bima Tower s, kila mmoja anajulikana kwa majina na kila kitu. Isipokuwa kama alivyosema 
Mheshimiwa  Simi nyu, kila  akibadilishwa County  Director  wa Inspectorate  huwa hafuatilizii ule 
mkakati n afikiri hii inatokana na upande wa ofisi ya County  Secretary  hawaja weka amri ama  
kutoa  maelezo ambay o wale watu wa Inspectorate  watakuwa wakifuatilia inabidi 
tunapowabadilisha wale viongozi pale, wale ma -Director  sio mtu aje na sheria z engin e tofauti 
lakini ni jambo limekub alika na mikutano tumefanya mingi na  ni jambo lajulikana na idadi yao 
hata idadi yao imewekwa na  serikali ya Kaunti . 
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you, thank you. Yes, do you have the same point 
because we are about to wind up? Okay, Hon.  Amu r can you resume your seat for you to be 
informed?  
Hon.  Faraj:  Thank you so much Mr. Speaker. I think Mr. Speaker for us to find the 
concern that the Hon.  Member  has with regards to people with disabilities who are in the streets  
for us to have, to come up  with a policy framework which will provide guidelines to any new 
director who is coming in or any new employer who will be coming in, any new employee who 
is coming because  from what I have gathered from the discussion on the floor of the House  it is 
that the Committee  has done its work as far as looking at the interests of the PWDs b ut the 
problem which is coming up is because we don’t have a policy in place that guides any new 
director who comes in s o once the new director comes in, he comes with new ide as and new 
programs for that department and I feel it ’s high time that this House  should come up with a 
policy for the PWDs so that it can provide guidelines to all those who work for the department. 
Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon.  Murfad can you wind up? Unless , you are 
already done.  
Hon.  Amur : I want to present my identification  to show that I was born in Mombasa;  I 
was raised in Mombasa  that’s why I want this Hon.  House  to understand  I want to table this Mr. 
Speaker so that we can …  
(Hon.  Amur table d his national identity card ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Amur which Report  is that you are tabling? Nobody 
requested for that. So…  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 (Interruption ) 
Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon.  Simi nyu…  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you speak from where ver you were?  
Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker that proves that I was born in Mombasa, I was raised in 
Mom basa, I was educated in Mombasa t he revelation that I come from another County … 
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order! Hon.  Simi nyu can you resume your seat Hon.  
Simi nyu? 
Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speake r, we all come from one tribe: the Bantus and the Nilotes w e 
originate as far as Malawi Mr. Speaker Sir b ut… 
(Laughter ) 
…There are those who were born in Mombasa Mr. Speaker, there  are those who were 
born in Kwale, Kilifi that is the identification now. When I said they should be identified, I had a 
purpose;  if they were really born in Mombasa I have no objection b ut if they come from  another 
County  they should be referre d to their County  that is my cry. Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy.  
Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika n aona hapa  Mheshimiwa  Amur 
yuko katika kizungumk uti… 
(Laughter ) 
…anatoa kitambulisho  hakuna  asiye mjua Mheshimiwa  Amur atoka wapi.  
(Laughter ) 
            ….Sisi tunayo  histor ia yake, wacha yeye wazazi wake twawajua watoka wapi  
Mheshimiwa  Spika , jambo hili  lililokuja ni jambo  nyeti ;  mwanzo nataka kusema hivi kuwa hapa 
mwenye taarifa  amenukuu Article  27(6) ambapo 27( 6) kuna kipande ambacho kinasema , ‘The 
Assembly  shall make legislation and  other measures to implement the principl e’.  Mheshimiwa  
Spika  mimi natarajia  kuwa Mheshimiwa  Karume yuko hapa anget oa ushahidi, nimekuwa mstari 
wa mbele sana katika kuweza kuwatetea hawa walemavu. Lakini Mheshimiwa  Spika kama 
unavyojua k uwa Wakenya ni wahodari sana t umekuwa na kesi mbili ; ya kwanza kiti kimoja 
ambacho nilikuwa natetea kama Mwanachama ambacho kikachukuliw a na Inspectorate 
tukakomeshwa. Mheshimiwa  Spika hawa watu hukaa wanajulikana kama walem avu huwa 
wamete ngeneza vijibao ama motorbike , honda zao zile wanawashwa kufanya kazi na mwengine 
huka a chini lakini utaona y ule mlemavu amekaa na mtu mwengine ambaye yuko sawa, ile 
biash ara ni ya yule mtu aliye sawa sa a hizi kesi ziko,  ukitaka ushahidi  nitakuletea n i kuwa 
wanatumiwa. Watu wanawatumia ikifika mwisho wa siku ndio h upawa ile vile 
walivyokubaliana , kuna ke si iliyotokea na nikaletwa mimi nikaitwa kuenda kui ngililia n i kuwa 
mlemavu ameshirikiana kukub aliana na mke kufanya biashara b aada ya mwisho kufunga ile 
biashara y ule mtu ambaye yuko sawa, ambaye si mlemavu akataka , kumnyima haki yake y ule, 
kumdhulumu. Mheshimiwa  Spika ikabidi mambo hayo yakafika mpaka po lisi kuwa 
walikubaliana kuwa mwisho wa s iku atapatiwa shilingi mia tano  na shilingi mia tano aidha 
akiwa amepata biashara ama hajafanya biashara lakini hataki kuonekana.  
            Basi Mheshimiwa  Spika kulikuwa na vurugu hapo kwa masaa matatu mpaka mwishowe 
kesi hiyo ikafikishwa polisi. Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika ni lazima sisi tuweze kuja, kama 
Mheshimiwa  Saad alivyosema kama ni policy , ama ni sheria yoyote itengenezwe ili tuweze 
kuwaweka hawa watu kwa njia ya sawasawa , la sivyo  itakuwa CBD  imeregelea sasa vile vile 
shida zilivyokuwa katika mji wa Mombasa. Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi naomba 
Kamati  ya fursa sawa  ikae iweze kuangalia jambo hili kwa urefu na kwa undani ili kutatua shida 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 hii kupata kuitatua iwe wameitatua once and for  all Mheshimiwa  Spika. A hsante Mheshimiwa  
Spika.   
            Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well ladies and gentlemen, with regards to that particular 
statement it is something that we must put in all seriousness that it deserves an d that particular 
constituency is also protected by our very own constitution and moreso Article 54 of the 
constitution it decides about applying and about how we need to treat people living with 
disability than any  other ordinary person and as a governme nt we have all it takes to fulfill what 
is required of us by the constitution and  according to what has come out. T hree Hon.  Member s 
that are in that same Committee  have actually expressed their opinion that something has to be 
done ; that is  Hon.  Zainab Dharwesh and the other Hon.  Mary and Hon.  Jimmy odari a lso Hon.  
Patrick Siminyu  that when person y changes , the tune changes . It means then that we are cooking 
up things and there is no proper procedure on how  we are operating as a government and f or that 
reason therefore Article 27 sub A rticle 7 of the same  needs to be implemented and put into place 
and now that those particular policies are not in place and the executive has tried to make them 
so that they reach the deadline but can we extend it f urther to a get clear cut on how we are going 
to get there because for me it is also important that we also control , we can not just open up the 
city to every Dick and H arry moreso when yo u get people are being ferried from everywhere to 
come and just over crowd the CBD . Maybe that is something that we need to paraphrase and 
therefore the Committee  of Delegated legislation to pick up this matter and do the necessary in 
terms of legislations and  make sure within one month before that slot they need to get to the 
House  a proposal on legislation on how to control that so we must learn we just cant operate like 
that we need to have a clear structure on how we are going to operate as a goverement,  the 
Committee  must move with speed to make sure that directi ve is respected.  Next ? 
MOTION  
            Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes is it Hon.  Amur or Hon.  Kasangamba .? Yes Hon.  
Kasangamba . 
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Kasangamba ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Sir, I have a 
Privilege Motion , which I would wish to  move it if permission is granted from your Chair.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, as it is, the S tanding orders are very clear  with the 
privilege Motion . Go ahead.  
PRIVILEDGE MOTION  
ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE SELECTION COMMITTEE  
(Hon. Kasangamba moved  the Priviledge Motion)  
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Kasangamba ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I would 
like to move a Motion  on adoption of the Report  on the Committee , the S election Committee  
concerning amendments of the Member s of the Committee  of the House . Mr. Speaker Sir, I urge 
this Assembly  to adopt this Report  because we will have, in the Report  it is based on matters that 
we have discussed on the whole House  or House  Committee  that the Committee s Member s 
should be reduced to meet the quorum of th e House .  Mr. Speaker on the same Report  we have 
included the 1/3 gender rule ; we have considered so many matters on the Report  and we have 
considered matters of constitutionalism. Mr. Speaker Sir, for the Report  which is very long there 
is a letter attached here from the party concerning the S tanding order that we have , the Member s 
of the select Committee s of the House  should be recommended from the political party which the 
Member s are coming from. Mr. Speaker, I beg this House  to adopt this Report  so as to ensure 
smooth movement and smooth running of the Committee s at large , I would wish t o be seconded 
by Hon.  Meti , the House  Chief Whip.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ebrahim .  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed Omar  Ebrahim ): Yes Mr. Speaker. I am here to second the 
Motion  tabled by the Majority Leader of the County  Assembly  Mr. Abdallah Kasangamba 
concerning the nomination of Member s to select Committee s on House  session 2016 Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
(Question proposed)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Ladies and gentlemen , I propose that the Motion  on, the 
privileged Motion  on the nomination of Member s to select Committee s on House  session 2016 
be adopted by this Hon.  House . 
(Question put  and agreed to ) 
Yes you can say the essence as to why; I want to believe key things have been 
documented here ; one you have mentioned the gender balance, second , you have mentioned you 
will conform with the rule that no Committee  except the one on t he Committee  of the W hole 
House  and the  House  Business Committee  the rest must not superc eed  the quorum of the House  
unless  there is anybody or any other issue.  
Leader of Majority (Hon Kasangamba ): Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to read the 
content of the Report  Mr. Speaker if you allow me . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, carry on as far as there is no objection to that Paper.  
Leader of Majority (Hon Kasangamba ): Yes, Mr. Speaker Sir , in the Report  we have 
Member s of the S peakers panel, from the Report , the County  Assembly  of Mombasa F irst 
Assembly , Fourth session Committee s’ Member ship. Mr. Speaker, we have Speakers Panel 
where we have a list of five Member s.  
 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Kasangamba moved the Report of the Select Committee)  
SPEAKERS PANEL  
1. Hon.  Thaddeus Rajwayi,  
2. Hon.  Mswabah Rashid,  
3. Hon.  Asha Mohamed   
4. Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  
5. Hon.  (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula  
            
Mr. Speak er, The second Committee  is the House  Business Committee  which is headed by ; 
HOUSE BUSINESS COMMITTEE  
1. Hon.  Thaddeus Rajwayi  – Chairperson  
2. Hon. Mswabah Rashid  - Vice Chair  
3. Hon.  Abdallah  Kasangamba, Majority Leader  
4. Hon.  Abubakar Kibwana  - Member  
5. Hon.  Ibrahim Omar  - Member  
6. Hon.  Amir Thoya  - Member  
7. Hon.  (Ms.) Caroline Owino  - Member  
8. Hon.  Duncan Onyango  - Member  
9. Hon.  Enock Mwadziwe  - Member  
10. Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  - Member  
11. Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Mote  - Member  
12. Hon.  Hamis i Mwidani  - Member  
13. Hon.  Hudson Karume  - Member  
14. Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo  - Member  
15. Hon. J immy Odari - Member  
16. Hon. Karisa Nzai  - Member  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 17. Hon.  Kibwana Swale h Baya  - Member  
18. Hon. Kizito Opeya  - Member  
19. Hon. (Ms.) Lucy Chireri Chizi  - Member  
20. Hon. (Mrs.) Maimuna Mwamassa  – Member  
21. Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Mwawasi  - Member  
22. Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy  - Member  
23. Hon.  Mohamed  Madundo  - Member  
24. Hon. Murfad Amur  - Member  
25. Hon. Paul Onje  - Memb er 
26. Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba  - Member  
27. Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula  - Member  
28. Hon. Stephen Wangudi  - Member  
29. Hon.  Tom Ogalo - Member  
30. Hon. (Ms.)  Zeinab Kithinzi - Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON SELECTION  
1. Hon.  Abdallah Kasagamba – Chairperson  
2. Hon. (Mrs.) Maimuna Mwa massa  - Vice Chair who is the deputy Leader of M ajority  
3. Hon.  Ahmed Ibrahim - Member  
4. Hon. Duncan Onyango  – Member  
5. Hon. Fadhili Makarani – Member  
6. Hon. Hamisi Mwidani – Member  
7. Hon.  Kizito Opeya  – Member  
8. Hon. (Ms.)  Maimuna Mwamass i – Member  
9. Hon. (Ms.)  Zeinab Mumba - Member   
 
THE COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMENTATION  
1. Hon. Kizito Opeya – Chairperson  
2. Hon. Enock Mwinga – Vice Chairperson  
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasagamba  – Member  
4. Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh Mote  – Member   
5. Hon. Lucy C hireri Chizi  – Member  
6. Hon. (ms.)  Maimuna Mwamassa –Member  
7. Hon.  Mswabah Rashid – Member  
8. Hon. M urfad Amur  – Member  
9. Hon. Tom Ogalo – Member  
 
FINANCE BUDGET AND APPROPRIATION COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy  - Chairman  
2. Hon. Karisa Nzai - Vice Chair  
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasagamba  – Member  
4. Hon. Asha Hussein  – Member  
5. Hon. (Ms.) Caroline O wino  – Member  
6. Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  – Member  
7. Hon. H amis i Mwidani  – Member  
8. Hon.  Mswabah Rashid   - Member  
9. Hon. (Mrs.)  Serah Nyamvula - Member  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11  
POWER AND PRIVILEGE COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Thadius Rajwayi  - Chairman  
2. Hon.  Ahmed Ibrahim  - Vice C hair  
3. Hon.  Abdallah Kasa ngamba – Member  
4. Hon. (Ms.) Caroline Owino  - Member  
5. Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  – Member  
6. Hon. (Ms.) Lucy Chireri  - Member  
7. Hon. (Mrs.) Maimuna Mwamassa  - Member  
8. Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy - Member  
9. Hon.  Suleiman  Boma - Member  
 
RULES AND PROCEDURES COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Thadius Rajwayi  – Chairman  
2. Hon.  Mswabah Rashid  - Vice Chair  
3. Hon.  Abdallah Kasa ngamba  – Member  
4. Hon. (Ms.)  Maimuna Mwawasi  - Member  
5. Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy  - Member  
6. Hon. (Mrs.)  Serah Nyamvula - Member  
7. Hon. (Ms.)  Zeinab  Mumba  - Member  
 
Mr. Speaker the eighth Committee  is headed by Deputy S peaker Hon.  Mswabah Rashid and 
Member s… 
 COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENT  
1. Hon. Thadius Rajwayi  - Chairman  
2. Hon. Abdallah Kasagamba - Vice Chair  
3. Hon. (Ms.) M aimuna Mwamassa  – Member  
4. Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy  - Member  
5. Hon. Mswabah Rashid - Member  
6. Hon. (Mrs.)  Prischilla Mumba - Member  
 
Mr. Speaker, the ninth Committee  is the Ward Development Committee  
 WARD DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Patrick Muriuki Siminyu  – Chairperson  
2. Hon. David Kalume  – Vice Chairperson  
3. Hon. Hudson  Karume  – Member  
4. Hon. (Ms.)  Lucy Chizi  – Member  
5. Hon. (Ms.) Mary Aoko  - Member  
6. Hon. Duncan Onyango  - Member  
7. Hon. (Mrs.)  Serah Ny amvula  - Member  
8. Hon. Stephen Wangudi - Member  
9. Hon. Ha misi Mwidani - Member  
  COMMITTEE ON DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
1. Hon. Paul Onje - Chairman  
2. Hon. Zeinab Kithinzi  - Vice C hair  
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba - Member   
4. Hon. Abubakar Kibwana - Member  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12 5. Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  - Member  
6. Hon.  Karisa Nzai  - Member  
7. Hon.  Maimuna Mwawasi  - Member  
8. Hon. Kizito Opeya  - Member  
9. Hon. (Mr s.) Prischilla Mumba - Member  
 
  PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
1. Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  - Chairman   
2. Hon. Asha Hussein  - Vice Chair ,  
3. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh  - Member  
4. Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy  - Member  
5. Hon. Suleiman Boma  - Member  
 
  PUBLIC INVESTMENTS COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. (Ms.)  Maimuna Swaleh Mwawasi  - Chair person  
2. Hon. Mswabah Rashid  -Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Lucy Chireri Chizi  - Member  
4. Hon.  Saad Faraj  - Member  
5. Hon. (Mrs.)  Serah Nyamvula  - Member  
 
  COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND LEGAL AFFAIRS  
1. Hon. Jimmy Odari  - Chairman  
2. Hon. Beatrice Kai  - Vice C hair 
3. Hon.  Abdallah Kasa ngamba - Member  
4. Hon.  Hudson Karume  - Member  
5. Hon. (Ms.)  Mary Aoko  - Member  
6. Hon.  Mohamed  Madundo  - Member  
7. Hon. Patrick Siminyu  - Member  
8. Hon. (Ms.)  Serah Nyamvulah  - Member  
9. Hon. Nassir  Suleiman  - Member  
 
  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE LIVESTOCK AND FISHERIES  
1. Hon. Duncan Onyango - Chairman  
2. Hon. (Ms.)  Prischilla Mumba  - Vice C hair 
3. Hon.  Amir Thoya - Member  
4. Hon. Enock Mwadziwe  - Member  
5. Hon. Suleiman Boma  - Member  
6. Hon. Ibrahim Kondo  - Member  
7. Hon. (Ms.) Lucy Chizi - Member  
8. Hon. (Ms.)  Zeinab Kithinzi  - Member  
9. Hon.  Nassir Suleiman  - Member  
 
  COMMITTEE IS EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CHILDREN AND 
VOCATIONAL TRAINING   
 
1. Hon. Stephen Wangudi - Chairman  
2. Hon. Suleiman Omar Boma  - Vice C hair 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 3. Hon. Abdallah Kasa ngamba  - Member  
4. Hon. (Ms.) Beatrice Kai  - Member  
5. Hon. (Ms.)  Caroline Owino  - Member  
6. Hon.  Enock Mwadziwe  - Member  
7. Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh  - Member  
8. Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Mwawasi  - Member  
9. Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy  - Member  
 
  COMMITTEE ON TOURISM COOPERATIVE AND CULTURE AND 
COMMUNITY SERVICES  
1. Hon. Murfad Amur  - Chairman  
2. Hon. Swaleh Kibwana  - Vice Chair 
3. Hon. Ahmed Ibrahim - Member  
4. Hon. Khamis Ali Mwabashir i - Member  
5. Hon.  Duncan Onyango  - Member  
6. Hon. (Mrs.)  Prischilla Mumba  - Member  
7. Hon.  Suleiman  Boma  - Member  
8. Hon. (Mrs.)  Zeinab Said - Member  
9. Hon. (Ms.)  Zeinab Kithinzi  - Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC W ORKS AND TRANSPORT  
 
1. Hon. Amir Thoya – Chairman  
2. Hon.   Caroline Owino – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh – Member  
4. Hon. (Ms .) Lucy Chizi  – Member  
5. Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda  – Member  
6. Hon. Saad Faraj  – Member  
7. Hon. Tom Ogalo  – Member  
8. Hon. (Mrs.)  Zeinab Said  – Member  
9. Hon. (Ms.)  Zeinab Kithinzi  - Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL PLANNING LAND AND HOUSING  
1. Hon. Saad Faraj Ahmed -  Chairman  
2. Hon. Mohamed Madundo - Vice Chair 
3. Hon. Amir Thoya  – Member  
4. Hon. (Mrs.)  Asha Hussein  – Member  
5. Hon.  Jimmy Odari  – Member  
6. Hon.  Karisa Nzai  – Member  
7. Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy  – Member  
8. Hon. (Ms.) Z einab Mumba  - Member  
9. Hon. (Mrs.)  Zeinab Said  - Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON SPORTS, YOUTH GENDER AND SOCIAL SERVICES  
1. Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula  – Chairperson  
2. Hon. Ahmed Ibrahim  - Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Amir Thoya  – Member  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14 4. Hon.  Duncan Onyango  – Member  
5. Hon. (Ms.) Lucy  Chizi  – Member  
6. Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy  – Member  
7. Hon. Stephen Wangudi  – Member  
8. Hon. Riziki Fundi – Member  
9. Hon. (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba  - Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVE 
DEVELOPMENT  
1. Hon. Ibrahim Kondo – Chairman  
2. Hon.  Fatma Swaleh Mote - Vice Chair  
3. Hon. Abubakar Kibwana – Member  
4. Hon.  Ahmed Ibrahim  – Member  
5. Hon. Amir Thoya  – Member  
6. Hon. (Ms.) Caroline Owino  – Member  
7. Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh Baya – Member  
8. Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Mwawasi – Member  
9. Hon. Suleiman Boma  – Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATION, COUNTY SECURITY AND 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
1. Hon. H amis i Mwidani  – Chairman  
2. Hon.  Mary Aoko  - Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Jabess Oduor  – Member  
4. Hon. Karisa Nzai  – Member  
5. Hon. (Ms.)  Maimuna Mwawasi  - Member  
6. Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda – Member  
7. Hon.  Murfad Amur  – Member  
8. Hon. Riziki Fundi  – Member  
9. Hon. (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba  - Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH SERVICES  
1. Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh – Chairman  
2. Hon. Lucy Chireri  - Vice Chair 
3. Hon. Fadhili Makarani  – Member  
4. Hon. Fatuma Mote  – Member  
5. Hon. H amis i Mwidani  – Member  
6. Hon. Kizito Opeya  – Member  
7. Hon.  Mohamed  Madundo  – Member  
8. Hon.  Patrick Siminyu   - Member  
9. Hon. (Mrs.)  Zeinab Said  - Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITY  
1. Hon. Hudson Karume – Chairman  
2. Hon. (Mrs.)  Zeinab Said  - Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Abubakar Kibwana – Member  
4. Hon. Amir Thoya  – Member  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15 5. Hon. (Ms.)  Caroline Owino  – Member  
6. Hon. Ibrahim Kondo  – Member  
7. Hon. (Mrs.)  Maimuna Mwamassa  - Member  
8. Hon.  Mswabah Rashid  – Member  
9. Hon.  Riziki Fundi  – Member  
10. Hon.  Tom Ogalo  – Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES  
1. Hon. (Ms.) Zeinab Omar Mumba  – Chairperson  
2. Hon.  Rashid Suleiman - Vice C hair 
3. Hon.  Abdallah Kasa ngamba  – Member  
4. Hon. Beatrice Kai  – Member  
5. Hon. Enock Mw adziwe  – Member  
6. Hon. (Mrs.)  Prischilla Mumba  – Member  
7. Hon.  Jimmy Odari  – Member  
8. Hon. Karisa Nzai – Member  
9. Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy – Member  
 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE  
1. Hon. Tom Ogalo  – Chairman  
2. Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Mwawasi  - Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Abubakar Kibwana  – Member  
4. Hon. Hudson Karume  – Member  
5. Hon. Kizito Opeya  – Member  
6. Hon. (Ms.) Lucy Chizi  – Member  
7. Hon. (Ms.) Mary Aoko  – Member  
8. Hon. Murfad Amur  – Member  
9. Hon. Nassir Suleiman  - Member  
 
Mr. Speaker for the Report s that I have read to this Assembly , I wish the Hon.  House  to 
support this Report  to enable easy movement and easy flow of our legislative work and 
legislative procedures in this County  Assembly . Mr. Speaker we had so many hiccups, at times 
concerning our sponsors or donors . If you see our Committee  Mr. Speaker, the Committee  has 
many Member s who supersede  the quorum of the House  of our Assembly  which is against the 
best practices of the Assembly . Mr. Speaker, at times our County  Assembly  has less Member s in 
gender representation ; so many times we have seen Hon.  female Member s have been 
complaining that they are not represented. Mr. Speaker in this Report  we have captured all the 
constraints that we had last time and we wish this House  will have a brighter future and we will 
have a smooth work considering all the aspects that we have captured. I beg to move Mr. 
Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy . 
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I suppor t the Report  but 
there are very few amendments because Mary Akinyi, I don’t know but maybe I did not hear the 
name Mary Ak inyi only appears once , deputy in  one Committee . Mr. Speaker, t hank you . 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, any other comment before I put the question,  yes 
Hon.  Mary Akinyi.  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
16 Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa  Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika mi mi pia 
ningependa kuwe na marekebisho  katika hii Ripoti  ambayo imeandikwa kwa  sababu alipokuwa 
anaanza amesema vizuri kuwa ameangalia mambo ya jinsia , lakini ikiwa unaangalia hapo katika 
hizo Kamati  zote unapata kuwa mambo na jinsia  haikuweza kuingia vizuri vile ina vyohitajika. 
Kwa  sababu  unapata kuwa W aheshimiwa a mbao ni wamama, wako tu katika W enyeviti ambao 
ni watatu peke yake ambapo hapo bado hakuna ambaye jinsia kama vile alivyokuwa anasema 
alipoanza kutoa taarifa yake kuwa ameangalia mambo na jinsia . Ukiwa unaangalia katika taar ifa 
yake ama ikiwa unaona hiyo Ripoti yake W enyeviti unapata ni watatu tu katika hizo Kamati    
zote. Mheshimiwa  Spika hata chukua mfano ikiwa kama Wenyeviti wote wanaitwa utapata kuwa 
jinsia  haitakuwa  ya kutosha ya asilimia  2/3 kiwango cha jinsia  haitakuwa ama  1/3 ya jinsia 
haita kuwa inahusika hapo vile inavyohitajika . Utapata  pengine kama itakuwa kunai twa 
Wenyeviti wote, utapata kuwa pengine wamama ni watatu peke yake. Kwa  sababu tukiwa 
tunaangalia hii Ripoti, wamama ambao ni W enyeviti ni watatu peke  yake na si ati wamama 
hawawezi kazi, kazi tunaziweza na hata pia nikiwa ninaangalia katika hizi Kamati  zote ambazo 
nimetajwa jina langu , sioni Kamati  ambayo ni Kamati ya sectoral  ambayo niko, kwa  sababu ile 
Kamati  ambayo mimi niko ni security  and administration  unaona kama agriculture, health 
education  hizi Kamati  zote ambazo  ni Kamati  ambazo ziko hata na mawaziri mimi n apata kuwa 
hakuna hapo jina l angu mahali ambapo ime jitokeza  na si ati siwezi kazi, kazi naiweza, na 
naweza kufanya kazi. A hsante.  
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, Hon.  Amur Murfad.  
Hon.  Amur : Mheshimiwa  Spika, kwa  nidhamu ndio maana Mheshimiwa  Hatimy 
alikuwa amesimama akasema jina la Hon.  Mary liangaliwe vizuri, sababu labda halikusomwa. 
Ndio maana akasema kuna jina ambalo ameo na likisomwa, si typing error  kwa hio mama 
nakuhakikishia kwamba hayo mambo yataan galiwa hata usiw e na wasiwasi n dio maana 
Mheshimiwa  Hatimy alifanya kusisitiza ule ukweli.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Kibwana.  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  Mine is just to support the Report  
with the amendment that has been put across in this Hon.  House  and I think as much as we want 
to be  in different Committee s but sometimes it is impossible because of our number  and I also 
had a problem with my Committee . The other time that most of want ed to be in the H ealth 
Committee  but when it c ame to meetings you find that we are few Member s who are attending. 
So I think being that the number , being almost the number that we require according to the 
Standing order s should also be helpful to us  the Chair to see that when we are calling a meeting 
all Member s will be present and those who won ’t be presen t I think they will be very few.  
Another point I would also want to make  Mr. Speaker, we as C hairs fac e a lot of 
challenges in this area , we have been talking about the offices like the Chair of the H ealth 
Committee  who is also very critical in giving service to  the people we have no offices , so I think 
as we look into the Committee s and I hope, I  think this time around as the Leader of M inority 
has put it, when it comes to donors, they give you a number of people w ho want to come into a 
meeting s o you find that some Member s have felt that they have been left out but because 
sometimes I am given a number of only thirtee n to attend a certain meeting,  so to me as much as 
we have a problem there I think we can sort it out, the amendment be pu t, but I think maybe we 
have a M inister we have the same, same allowa nce because once you are a M inister you get the 
same amount of m oney as the one who is being a M inister. Here I think it is a matter of 
commitment, it is a matter of  interest ed, I really appr eciate the work of Lucy I  mean Mary who 
has been my deputy for long in that Committee  but because of certain circumstances we should 
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
17 also allow that, I think it was an issue that cropped up and  the Chair is very happy and also to be 
considered as the Vice C hair who receive s the same amount as the other Vice C hairs and also 
executive Member s. Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well before I give an opportunity to Hon.  Patrick 
Siminyu , maybe there is room for consultation because Hon.  Hatimy  actually  has made a very 
serious statement  underlining the statement that  with the amendments , maybe to clear certain 
doubts in your minds. Maybe you can consult  maybe where yo u have it very specific  but in the 
amendment that you want or yo u find it easier for you  to partici pate in Committee  1, 2, and 3 s o 
that’s where you have it in question, and you pu t the question to that effect t hat is so mething that 
cannot take you more than five minutes s o you put your minds together as we continue getting 
much more opinion from other Hon.  Member s. Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu . In the meantime, 
Hon.  Hatimy and Hon.  Mary and Hon.  Kibwana can put their heads together.  
Hon.  Siminyu : Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to support what the C hair for 
finance has brought up with amend ments , not only today but if somebody is left behind and I 
think the Majority Leader should sit down if there is a  need to see whether  a person is left out 
because it is something that has been brought up to this House  and I think it is through change 
because change is always good as you know and we  should always embrace change b ut if we 
found somebody, becau se they have not been equal for each Hon.  Member   a Member  should n ot 
be left out t o be given the required seat that is required by the Committee s because a Member  
qualifies in all the other Committee s. This should be looked into so that we can have a fair share 
or equal opportunities as Member s in this Hon.  House . Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mwinga.  
Hon. Mwinga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I had received a call and it was an 
emergencey so I was out and I don’t have a copy so I can’t  contribute.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Okay, y es Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu?  
Hon.  Mwalimu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker as you have put it that Hon.  
Member , ODM Chairman is on the party and we all belong to the same party. Mr. Speaker, we 
believe we are all in one party and i t is after delivery  through the M embers of this Hon.  House  
that I have brought this list to this Hon.  House  and the C hairman has put it open ly that there are 
amendments that will be allowed to be done in these lists of Committee s from the party. Mr. 
Speaker I think it ’s time we accept the list from the party with amendments and the amendments 
that are to be done they will give what it is in this Hon.  House  soonest possible . And we also 
accept the will of the party Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy.  
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika nadhani 
nimekubaliana na Mheshimiwa  Mary kwa kuangalia lile swala zima la jinsia  na ninakubaliana na 
maoni ya Fadhili kuwa kama itawezekana kesho tulete ya le marekebisho amba yo kuwa tutakuwa 
tumefanya.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon.  Kasangamba.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Kasangamba ): Mheshimiwa  Spika, labda naomba 
unikumbushe juu ya hii kuwa pengine  kuna hitilafu moja au nyengine, l akini lengo kubwa la 
Kamati  kukaa na  kupanga ile mipangilio ni ili kwamba kila Mwanachama  awe na Kamati ya 
sectoral  yake kulingana na makubalian o tuli okuwa tumekubaliana . Kwa hio kama haijajitokeza 
basi ni hitilafu tu ndogo ambapo baada ya Mheshimiwa , muda ambao si mrefu tutajaribu 
kurekebis ha na wale wa Kamati  tofauti mwakaribishwa. Mheshimiwa  Spika labda kujibu swala 
lengine la Mheshimiwa  Mary kuhusu maswala ya jinsi ukiangalia tokea ile Ripoti  ya nyuma na 
ya sasa tumejitahidi kadri tuwezavyo lakini kama swala moja ambalo limetupa  changamoto sana  
March 30 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         43 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
18 na si ukweli kwa  sabab u sio sisi ambao tulichagu a Waheshimiwa kina baba wengi a ma si mimi 
ni kura za wananchi ndi o zilituchagua ikalazimu  kivyovyote hao ndio wawe wengi . Mheshimiwa  
Spika, vile vile pia ikilazimu kulingana na mipangilio ile ya kupanga, kwamba mipangilio 
mingine yapangwa lakini baada ya muda ama labda Bunge  itaweza kukadiria ama kuongeza 
idadi kubwa ya wanawake , waheshimiwa kina mama a mbayo italeta pia idadi ambayo kuwa hao 
kuwa wengi na sisi pia tujitetee. Lakini Mheshimiwa  Spika katika Kamati  na mpangilio wa 
wanachama wa Kamati  tumeainika kisawa  ila tatizo moja ni kwa W enyeviti tulijaribu lakini 
haikuweza kwamba itafikia watu wote kulingana na hali ya orodha ya idadi ya Waheshimiwa 
walioko ndani ya N yumba hii. Ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well, ladies and gentlemen  as information is now very 
vital to Hon.  Hatimy and Hon.  Abdallah Kasagamba o nce you have introduced the aspects of 
necessary amendments it is not a must that you bri ng this particular Report  back i f a question is 
put that it be passed with amendment s because I want to believe you as Hon.  Member s that is 
something that once you have agreed upon it does not have many many amendments , like in 
page 5, the only amendment you can have is inst ead of Having Hon.  Maimuna as the C hairman, 
you have Hon.  Maimuna as the C hairperson , so those are things you do not need going back in 
the House  for debate . Ladies and gentlemen I now put to question that this Motion  on 
nomination of Member s to select commitees for the session 2016 be adopted with the necessary 
amendments.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Ladies and gentlemen, this House  stands adjourned until tomorrow, Thursday at exactly 
2:30p .m. 
The House  rose at 3:46p.m. 
 