March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA  COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 31st March , 2016  
The House  met at 2: 33p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : You may have yo ur seat s Hon.  Member s, yes C lerk. 
PAPER  
Yes Hon.  Zainab Mumba?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab Mumba: Thank  you Mr. Speaker  Sir. Mr. Speaker  I beg to t able this 
Report  on the status of smoking  zones  within  the County . Mr. Speaker  Sir in reference  to your 
request I have a list of proposed different  smoking  zones  around  the County  that w e seek 
directions as a Committee s. The department  of Education a nd Environment  thanks you for your 
support in transforming  the lives of our children , young people a nd generations to come . Areas 
which were preferred  for smoking  zones  to be gazette d are eleven ;  
1. Treasury S quare  near toilet section  
2. Makadara ground s around the toilet area  
3. Mama N gina near toilet  
4. Mama Ngina open space next to N akumatt toilets  
5. Uhuru gardens next to the toilet area   
6. Jomo K enyatta public beach  
7. Pirates public toilet  
8. Buxton stage  toilet area open spaces  
9. Changamwe round create space on the ground  
10. Kongowea Ma rket spaces next to toilet areas  
11. All bars and rest aurants to provide for smoking zones,  Makupa round about create zone,  
railway round create zone.  
Thank  you Mr. Speaker  sir I beg Hon.  Jimmy Odari  to second.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Jimmy.  
Hon.  Odari:  I wish  to second  Mr. Speaker . 
(Question proposed)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : I propose the question that the Report  on status of 
smoking  zones within  Mombasa  County  to be deliberated in this  House ? 
(Question proposed and agreed to) 
Yes Hon.  Zeinab?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Zeinab Mumba:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  hii ni taarifa  iliyotolewa 
na Mheshimiwa  Mary Akinyi na sasa imekuja Ripoti  kutoka vitengo husika ambavyo ni kitengo 
cha elimu na mazingira.  K atika hizi smoki ng areas   kumi na moja zimea ndikwa hapa  na 
zenyewe ni Treasury squ are, Makadara ground s, Mama N gina,  Uhuru gardens,  Jomo K enyatta  
Public beach, Buxton stage,  Changamwe round , Kongowea market , all bars and rest aurants t o 
provide for smoking zones,  Makupa round about,  Railway zone  ambapo hizi ndio sehemu  zile 
watu wa nafaa wavute sigara hapo.  
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Jimmy.  
Hon.  Odari:   Thank  you Hon.  Speaker . Hon.  Speaker  I stand  here to support  the Motion  
on the Report  by the Hon.  Zeinab Mumba  regarding  the revival of smoking  zones  within  the 
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 County . Mr. Speaker  as you know  cigarette  smoking  all over the world has  been  recognized  as 
one of the main  cause s for cancer, particularly  lung cancer  therefore it has been  found  important 
that those who smoke cigarette or those who have decided to smoke cigarette be  given a 
particular place for them to continue  smoking  because they  are smoking  out of their ow n volition 
and Mr. Speaker  our main  concern  is with regard to those people who do not smoke. They  are 
more offended  when people smoke near them, therefore  it is only prudent that we as a County  
come up with these smoking zones  so that those who smoke can go there and smoke at their ow n 
pleasure without having  to interfere or  offend  those others  who do not like smoking and who  are 
offended by the peop le who smoke near or next to them . Therefore  Mr. Speaker  this is a very 
important  Report  and I urge this County  to make all effort to  ensure  that these desig nated 
locations  be revived so  that the smokers  can continue  smoking  and those who are offended  by 
cigarette smoke ca n enjoy  the freedom to enjoy  fresh air and to escape from the problem  which 
is a result of cigarette smoke.  Thank  you Hon.  Speaker . 
Mr. Spea ker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Suleiman Omar.  
Hon.  Boma : Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa ku nipa nafasi hii,  mimi pia nataka 
nichagie kidogo kwa sa babu kama tujuavyo uvutaji wa sigara tayari  chini ya paketi yake ku na  
chapa linalosema ina dhuru afya yako . Ama  kweli ka bisa kwa watu wegi ne kama sisi am bao tu na 
maradhi ya pumu  mvutaji wa sigara akitukari bia sisi huwa a natuacha tutakuwa attacked  mara 
moja kwa hi o watu wa kuvuta sigara wawe wameteg newa sehemu zao ka ndo na sehemu zile 
ziwe Mombasa  wote sigara  kwa kusema kweli sio kwa watu peke yake hali zi nadhuru watu 
wegi ne am bao kama Mheshimiwa  Saad  yeye akiingia chumba cha mikutano  pale uta pata watu 
wote wametoroka kwa sa babu ya uvutaji wake wa sigara … 
(Applause) 
...Kwa  hivyo naomba Mheshimiwa  Saad kama yuko hapa hizo sigara zako ukazivute 
mahali p egine, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Omar.  
Hon.  Ahmed Omar Ebrahim : Shukra ni Bwana Spika  nami pia ku nipa fursa hii  
kuhusia na na hii Ripoti  iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa  wetu wa  M agogo ni Mheshimiwa  Zeinab  
Omar Mumba kuhusu mae neo ya uvutaji wa sigara am byo yatawekwa kwa Kaunti  hii. 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  kama tuavyojua mam bo ya uvutaji wa sigara ni jambo linalodh uru afya yako ; 
kuhusu madhara haya Bwana  Spika  tunajua kw amba inahari bu mapafu , inaharibu sasa 
ninavyosikia wakisema hata nguvu za kiume unapovuta sigara sa na. Kama vile tu navyojua 
katika uvutaji wa sigara,  yule a nayevuta ule moshi a naotoa u na mwa thiri zaidi yule mtu am baye 
havuti Mheshimiwa  Spika … 
(Applause ) 
...kwa hi o jam bo kama h ili Mheshimiwa  Spika  linatia wananchi wetu kwe nye hadhari 
sana na itakuwa vyema kama hawa wavutaji wote wata fute mahali am bao wao wataumiza na 
wenyewe kwa we nyewe na watuo ndolee sisi am bao hatu na hatia wala sisi tu nachukia uvu taji wa 
sigara . Kwa hio naunga Ripoti  hii mko no Mheshimiwa  Spika  na naomba Bunge  hili liu nge 
mkono jambo kama hili kwa sa babu  lazima tua ngalie maslahi ya wa nanchi wetu  na watoto wetu 
na  pia ku na zingine siku hizi zi naitwa shisha  Mheshimiwa  Spika , pia zia ngaliwe maeneo yaliyo 
mazuri sa babu hata ku na shisha joi nt moja iko pale barabarani karibu na kituo cha mafuta  
ambapo wakati wowote ku kitokea  shida kidogo waweza poteza maisha . Mheshimiwa  Spika   
lazima mae neo haya ya uvutaji wa sigara na hizi shisha  yaangaliwe mahali yatawekwa ili 
kukinga mai sha ya wa nanchi wetu na  afya zao.  Shukra ni. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Amir  Thoya .  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon.  Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa kuweza ku nipa fursa hii kucha ngia 
Mswada  ambao upo m bele ya Nyumba  hii. Bwana  Spika  mimi nataka kutoa shukra ni kwa 
Mhes himiwa  Mwakilishi wa W odi ya Magogoni Mheshimiwa  Zeinab Omar Mum ba kwa 
kuweza kuleta Mswada  huu wa maa na katika chum ba hiki . Tukiangalia  sote na tuk ikubaliana 
kwa umoja uvutaji wa sigara ni kweli kwam ba unadhuru afya na ni muhimu kama  serikali i weze 
kuja na njia mwafaka wa  kuangalia ni jinsi gani wale watu am bao hawavuti au kutumia sigara  
wanaweza kuepushwa na moshi am bao u natoka na na wale we nzetu am bao wa natumia ama 
kuvuta sigara . Hivi  nashukuru kwam ba Mheshimiwa  Spika  katika orodha am bayo imetoka kwa 
Mheshimiwa  Waziri wa mazi ngira am bayo i naonyesha kwam ba zile sehemu am bazo  
watate ngewa k wa ajili ya uvutaji wa sigara ni  kwam ba sehemu nyingi kama u navyoa ngalia  ni  
karibu na choo kwa sa babu kua nzia Treasury Square  ni karibu na choo,  uwanja wa M akadara pia 
ni karibu na choo na Mama Ngina vilevile . Kwa hio ni  muhimu  Mheshimiwa  Spika  tukubaliane 
kama serikali,  vile vile haim aanishi kwam ba ni  sehemu hizi peke e yake nafasi iweze kupatika na 
kwa sa babu idadi ya wavutaji sigara katika Kaunti  ni wengi na ambao  kwam ba wamete ngewa 
sehemu kumi peke yak e na sehemu kumi na moja inamaa nisha kwam ba iwapo kutakuwa na 
sehemu nyingine zitaweza kujitokeza hata kama ni kule Kisauni  kwa sa babu nina hakika 
kwam ba sehemu hizi ni  za CBD peke e yake.   
Kwa hio kama nafasi itatokeza hat a kule upa nde wa Public beach  sehemu kama hizi 
ziweze kuhakikishwa kwam ba zimeje ngwa ili wale wavutaji sigara am bao ni wengi wasihisi 
kwam ba wame nyanyasiwa  uraibu kwa sababu wameachiwa  kuvuta sigara kama wezi . Kwa hi o 
mimi nashukuru aliyeleta Mswada  huu na mimi naunga mko no mia kwa mia.  Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Mheshimiwa  Caroline . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Auma : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika , mimi pia naunga mko no Mswada  huu 
ambao umeletwa na Mheshimiwa  ambaye ni mwanamke Zeinab  Mumba . Mheshi miwa  Spika  
ukiangalia kwa kweli uvutaji sigara u naathiri afya ya watu we ngi, sio wale wavutaji sigara peke 
yake,  mpaka wale wako kari bu na wale wavutaji sigara  na ukiangalia zile nafasi zimeweza 
kutolewa za kuvuta sigara,  tukia nza na mahali pa naitwa C hangamwe rou nd kumea ndikwa 
‘create space in  the grou nd’, sasa hiyo create space  in the grou nd sijaielewa vizuri kwa sa babu 
ikiandikwa ‘ create space in the grou nd’,  sijui kama hiyo nafasi  iko pale  pale round about  ama 
iko wapi , lakini hizi sehemu zote nimeku baliana nae mahali am bapo pia asema wa ngetafuta 
nafasi ni  pale Lights , pale Lights  huwa ku na watu we ngi sa na na mso ngama no wa watu huwa 
pale na waweza kupata watu wa navuta sigara pale na kama ku na wakati kari bu nianguke chi ni 
kwa sa babu kulikuwa na mvuto wa sigara sijui ya a ina gani iliniingia mpaka ndani ya kichwa 
kikazu nguka zu nguka kari bu nigongwe na gari hata naona sehemu ya Lights  pale tu ngetafuta 
nafasi ya kuvutia sigara Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika  hata tu ngeweka marufuku 
kuvuta sigara madereva na hata ndani ya matatu.  Mheshimiwa  Spika  magari ya matatu na dereva 
inafika mahali dereva anaendesha gari huku a najisahau yuavuta sigara mara a nakosea kidogo 
kuweka hiyo pia tu ngeangalia zaidi . Ahsante sa na nimemu unga mko no zaidi huyu W aziri wetu 
wa e limu kutupa mahali am bapo pa nafaa sana hapa T reasury square ametupa sehemu  nzuri wale 
wanaovuta sigara sa na sana hapa wameweza kupata nafasi ya  kuvuta sigara kule nje kari bu na 
choo … 
(Applause ) 
...Mheshimiwa Spika  wanatoka ndani  ya hii Nyumba  wanaenda kule nyum a nje kari bu na 
choo ; naona kuvuta sigara kari bu na choo i nafaa zaidi kwa  sababu ule moshi wa sigara na moshi 
wa choo i naambatana. 
(Applause ) 
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 …hasa hapo nampongeza  saa huyu W aziri wa elimu kwa kua ngalia mam bo ya choo na 
sigara kama am bavyo ni vitu viko kar ibu sana. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Saad ? 
Hon.  Faraj:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  nimesimama kuu nga m kono vikali ka bisa 
Mswada  ambao kwam ba umeletwa hivi leo , mimi nikiwa mmojawapo wa wa nakamti wa maji , 
mazi ngira na vile nimes ikia m aeneo hayo . Mheshimiwa  Spika  swala la uvutaji wa sigara 
limekithiri sa na katika sehemu tofauti tofauti za mji wetu wa Mombasa  Bwana  Spika  na we ngi 
hawape ndelei maswala kama haya na mimi nikiwa mmoja wao kuo na kuwa mtu a naweza kuvuta 
sigara m bele ya wen zake na hatari i nayoweza kufa nyika i nakuwa ni  zaidi yule mtu am baye 
amekaa pem beni mwake . Kwa hio Mheshimiwa  Spika  hili swala la  muhimu zaidi na ni  lazima 
sisi kama W aheshimiwa am bao kwam ba tuko hapa katika hii Nyumba  tuhakikishe kuwa 
tumesimamisha na tumewaweke a hawa watu sehemu am bazo ziko ka ndo ka bisa na sisi kama ni  
kule choo ni ama sehemu nyingine zile zaweza kuwa sawa kwa sa babu inadhuru afya zetu na pia 
wale vijana wadogo Bwana  Spika  zinataka wazee kutuhari bia familia zetu kwa hio ... 
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Spea ker (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Odari.  
Hon.  Odari : Mheshimiwa  Spika  ni sawa kwa Mheshimiwa  anayeo ngea sasa kupotosha 
hili Bunge  na hali yeye ndiye yuko katika mstari wa mbele kuvuta hayo masigara .  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Saad  you may proceed . Hon.  Saad, Hon.  Saad 
proceed … 
(Laughter ) 
Hon.  Faraj : Mheshimiwa  Spika  nafikiria Mheshimiwa  Jimmy Odari la bda 
amenifananisha mimi na mtu mwi ngine lakini mimi maswala y a kuvuta sigara mimi huwa 
sivuti … 
(Applause ) 
…kwa hio mimi napinga mam bo haya na mimi naomba vijana wa naona wakivutavuta 
sigara wa naona hili likiwa jam bo la kawaida sasa na wao wale watoto tulikulia manyumba ni 
mwetu tu nawapatia ile picha m baya na tunawafu ndisha vi baya, kwa hi o ni lazima  tupinge na  
lazima tupi nge na tuwawekee mahali fula ni wae nde wak avute sigara zao ka ndo, kama wa nataka 
kujimaliza wajimalize laki ni kando ka bisa. Ahsante sana, Mheshimiwa  Spika  shukra ni. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Onje. 
Hon.  Onje : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi langu ni furaha tu siku ya leo,  hii 
hoja am bayo i mekuja m bele ya Bunge  leo ni  hoja n zuri zaidi na sana sana nimefurahi kwa 
sababu mwe nzangu rafiki ya ngu hapa Saad Faraj Mheshimiwa  ameu nga mko no kikamilifu na 
kuunga kwake mko no ita fanya tupi ge  hatua sa na sana kwa sa babu mimi vile  ninavyom jua ni 
rafiki ya ngu tangu  aanzie kutumia lakini kua nzia mwezi uliopita aliniambia hio kitu ameacha 
kabisa anataka kutoa mfa no bora wao ne kwam ba uvutaji wa sigara unadhuru afya na pia vile vile 
inahari bu uchumi yaa ni mfuko unatoboka . Sasa Bwana  Spika  wale ambao wa natumia  sigara 
tusichukulie ni  kama wa nafanya hatia vile laki ni inabidi tua ngalie vile tu navyowaekea mahali 
pazuri , mahali waweza kwe nda na kuvuta sigara yao kistarehe hata kama t una runinga tu naweza 
wawekea pale wa naangalia wa natazama vipi ndi wakati wa napovuta siga ra mazi ngira am bayo pia 
inafaa maisha ya binadamu kwa sa babu kama i ngekuwa ni  sigara hatutaki ka bisa kwanza 
tungeanza na zile kampu ni za kute ngeneza sigara,  tungezifu nga zote  lakini kwa sa babu 
wam eruhusiwa n a serikali kue ndesha biashara yao ni lazima  tuwa hurumie wale am bao 
wanatumia sigara tutafute njia am bayo tutawate ngea kila mahali hata baada ya nusu kilomita 
tunawaegea mahali pa kuvuta sigara . Kupitia njia hii itatusaidia Bwana  Spika  na pale pale 
tutakusa nya pesa ukii ngia tu pale kuvuta sigara tu naweka mtu wa kuchukua pesa kila sigara 
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 unayovuta Mheshimiwa  Spika  shilingi kumi na kufikia usiku ama jio ni serikali ya Kaunti  
itakuwa imekusa nya pesa nyingi sana. Ahsante sana. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Mumba Zainab do you have any response  pertaining  
to this issue?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika  natoa shukra ni za dhati kwa 
wale wote waliou nga Mswada  huu mko no, pia naomba Mheshimiwa  Mswada  huu ukawezwe 
kupitishwa ili uweze kusaidia Kaunti  ya Mombasa . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Thank  you Hon.  Zainab,  Hon.  Member s I was expecting 
from the Member s to ask from the Committee  a letter from County  executive Member s 
department  of education a nd environment Mr. Lewa Tendai M tana he had requested the 
Committee ’s direction pertaining the issue of sm oking area zones ; as I said he was expecting 
Member s to ask from the Committee  what he had requested or what he had proposed to the 
executive Member  so I will not put a question to this I will return the issue to the Committee  for 
them to at least propose t he directions they think whether they will follow they will bring much 
impact to this County  to the help of wana nchi of Mombasa  County . So the issue will return to 
the Committee  and we will ex pect a detailed Report  and if also the said preffered zones have  
been gazzetted and also there are some areas that are being mentioned , the Committee  also 
should consider if the areas mentinesd are good enough to be considered in the Report  and also 
not to leave open spaces just like that , the list that has been forwar ded on the table 9,10,11 
Makupa roundabout,  Changamwe roundabout it is just saying ‘create zones ’ we need specific 
points that when passed in this Assembly  they are going to be gazzeted . So Hon.  Member s the 
issue still stands and we will expect from the Committee  in two weeks time.Yes Clerk.  
PAPER  
Hon.  Mwidani:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I would request to be given more time infact it 
was yesterday I wrote a reminder to the (??) that up to now we have not reci eved any information 
so I am requesting if we can be  given more time to come with the Report . Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Hamisi Musa the issue of traffic congestion if I am 
not wrong was brought to this Hon.  House  about two weeks time you had ample time and I am 
wondering why t here is a delay with the Report . 
Hon.  Mwidani:  Mr. Speaker  I think you are aware we were out with the Finance 
Committee  for one week I was not around so I think that is what led to this delay.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Clerk . 
MOTION  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker  I… (Inaudible ). 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Use your mic . 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I am holding brief for  Chairman lands Hon.  Saad  and I am a 
Member  of this  Committee , I wish to give a N otice of Motion ... 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : We are in order  number seven.  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : We want to seek leave to discuss the Motion  Mr. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Permission granted .Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker  I beg to give notice of the following 
Motion ; 
(Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy moved the Notice of Motion)  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 That this House , adopts the Report  on physical land and housing on the proposed 
redevelopment of old etstes within Mombasa  County  layed here in this House  on thus rday 31st 
March , 2016 . 
I would like to apply  for 10 minutes adjournment as we wait for the C hairman , you can 
give us a few minutes.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : You just requested but you do not have anyone to second 
the Motion . What is it Hon.  Amir?  
Hon.  Thoya:  Mr.Speaker  Sir I stand here to second the proposal by Hon.  Hatimy.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : As you know when the Speaker  is on his feet he has  the 
power I hereby I propose a question that the House  adjourns for ten minutes?  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(The House adjourned for ten minu tes) 
(Resumption of busine ss after  ten minutes adjournment ) 
You can have your seats. Yes C lerk? 
STATEMENT  
(Silence)  
I see the owner of the Statement is not around.  Proceed.  
STATEMENT  
Hon.  Paul you may proceed .  
Hon.  Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika .  Mheshimiwa  Spika nimesimama  hapa  
nikiwa na  ujumbe w a  stima ;  nilikuwa nimewaza vile tunaweza kupata afueni kwa mambo ya 
stima ambapo kila siku tunalipa bili kubwa kule kwa shirika la K enya Power na hizi pesa 
zinaw eza kutusaidia kwa mambo mengine na pia vil evile inafanya estates nyingine zinakosa 
mwangaza kwa  sababu ya mzigo mzito ambao serikali ya Kaunti  iko nayo kulipa hizo bil i. Hivyo 
basi Mheshimiwa  Spika  kupitia fikra zangu tunaweza kuangalia vile tunaweza kujenga mahali 
ambapo tuna weza na tutafute wata alamu ambao wanaweza kutujengea mahali am bapo tunaweza 
kuzalisha kawi kup itia solar panels , hii itatusaidia tukiwa pamoja na wakurugenzi wa Kenya 
Power kujua tume  ni tujue tu tunataka ku zalisha  kiasi ngapi  ya  kawi  na kukiwa na  makubaliano 
na wakurugenzi wa Kenya P ower itatusaidia kujua tume zalisha  kiasi gani kupitia solar panel  na 
kiasi gani wametukopesha ili  hio tofauti  ndio tuna weza kulipa kwa  sababu najua  ya kwamba 
solar panel  tunaweza kupata hata yenye ina weza kaa miaka mia moja  na tukitafuta mahali  kama 
Mwakirunge ama Junda naona kuna mashamba kule kidogo ambapo tukitafuta tunaweza kupata 
tujenge plan pale ya nguv u hata ikiwezekana sisi wenyewe kama serikali ya Kaunti   tuweze 
kupata  stima yetu sisi wenyewe sasa tutakuwa tukilipa tu  huduma  kidogo tu kule kwa Kenya 
Power  na Kaunti  itang’aa bila shida na hakuna shida yoyote kupitia kulipa bil i.  
Kwa hio mimi nilikuwa naomba ikiwezekana hii Nyumba  ya W aheshimiwa waweze 
kuangazia taarifa  yangu na watilie mkazo Mheshimiwa  Spika hii itatusaidia sana na iko  na faida 
kubwa sana manake  kweli kuna hasara ya kujenga kile kiwanda lakini baada ya kujenga  
tutakuwa sasa ni kuogelea tu na p esa na taa inawaka kila mahali hata kwenye mabaraza  kwa 
sababu kwa kulipa haina shida jua inajilipia kupitia miale ya jua. S asa Mheshimiwa  Spika hio  
ndio taarifa  yangu kwa siku ya leo na mimi naomba W aheshimiwa wenzangu wangalie jinsi vile 
tunaweza kusaidia huu Mradi . Ahsante sana. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Thank you  Hon.  Onje.  Hon.  Onje I will require a 
statement from the Commit tee for T rade and Energy to at least do some research and bring a 
good Report  in this House  and also  if the  Committee  will have to travel to other Counties to 
check if the system has ever worked in any other County , that will be upon the Committee  to 
decid e but it’s  a good statement and the Committee  will work upon it. Yes Clerk.  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 MOTION  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Saad.  
Hon.  Faraj : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  Sir I beg to move the following 
Motion  on the adoption of the Report  on proposed redeve lopment of old estate within Mombasa  
County . Mr. Speaker  I wish to read the Report  and thereafter move the Motion  and it will also be 
seconded by Hon.  Jimmy Odari.  
(Hon.  Faraj read the Report on proposed redevelopment of old estate within Mombasa 
County)  
This is a Report  on the proposed redevelopment of old Estates w ithin Mombasa  County  
which the Committee  considered and approved after discussions , presentations  and scrutiny of 
the necessary documents submitted to it.  The Committee  held several meetings wit h the 
Department of Planning,  Lands and Housing whereby all pertinent matters were discussed and 
thrashed out and the concerns and needs of Member s were taken on bo ard. A detailed document 
titled , ‘Proposed  redevelopment of old e states within Mombasa  Count y through Joint Venture 
Partnerships”  (Annexed hereto) was circulated to Member s for consideration and information.  
Under Schedule Four of the C onstitution of Kenya,  2010,  housing is one of the functions of the 
County  government. The County  government ther efore is within its right to redevelop the estates 
subject to compliance with the necessary laws.  Mr. Speaker  Sir, I hereby present a brief Report  
of the Committee  on Physical Planning,  Lands and Housing on the  proposed redevelopment of 
old e states within  Mombasa  County  for consideration and adoption by the House . Mombasa  
County  government has developed a housing policy which is:  
Policy for Housing and Shelter:  
The housing policy is based on the ultimate goal of ensuring “Shelter for  All”, by 
harnessing the  potential of the Publ ic, Private/ Corporate and  household sectors.  
The aim of the housing policy is to:  
• Provide approximately 20,000 modern and affordable housing units  for the residents of 
Mombasa  County  on either rental or ownership  basis by the year 2 019. 
• Arrest and improvement of deteriorating housing conditions.  
• Encouraging integrated, participatory approaches to slum upgrading,  including income -
generating activities that effectively combat  poverty.  
• Promote research on the development of low co st building materials  and construction 
techniques.  
• Facilitating increased investment by the formal and informal privatesector, in the construction 
of housing for low and middle -incomeurban dwellers.  
• Creating a Housing Development Fund to be financed th rough  budgetary allocations and 
financial support from development  partners and other sources.  
• Encourage public agencies as facilitator through policy and strategic  interventions.  
• Compliance with the Constitution of Kenya on provision of adequate  housi ng as a basic human 
right.  
            The County  government intends to redevelop the following estates under the public -
private partnership framework:  
1. Khadija Estate  
2. Miritini Greenfield  
3. Changamwe Estate  
4. Tudor Estate  
5. Mzizima Estate  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 6. Buxton  Estate  
7. Likoni Estate  
8. Nyerere Estate  
9. Tom Mboya Estate  
10. Kaa C Hon. jo Estate  
11. Kizingo Estate  
            The Department of Planning,  Lands and Housing has done several public participation 
forums with tenants and various stakeholders expl aining the rationale and objectives of the 
projects. Though there have been a few concerns here and there,  the County  government has 
made elaborate arrangements to ensure existing tenants will be taken care of and necessary 
agreements are entered to safeguard th eir rights and those of the County  government.  We wish to 
further note that no public land will be lost or sold out as the County  government will still retain 
the mother title while tenants and those who will be sold the housing units will be given 99 -year 
leases.  The Committee  therefore finds that the County  government has taken all necessary 
measures to safeguard its assets and the interest of the tenants and the general public.  The 
Committee  is satisfied that all necessary consultations with stakeholders  and the general public 
were done and necessary concerns and queries properly thrashed out.  
1.1 The project of redevelopment of Old Estates Within Mombasa  County  belonging to the 
County  government would have immense benefits for the citizens of Mombasa  now an d in the 
future and contribute a lot of revenue to the County  government which will benefit the public at 
large.  
1.2 The project has been well thought out with involvement of professionals and stakeholders 
making it suitable and viable under the public -private -partnership framework.  
1.3 The Committee  is satisfied with the proposed redevelopment of old estates within 
Mombasa  County  belonging to the County  government and therefore recommends that the 
County  Assembly  approves the project.  
1.4 The Committee  recommends the  approval by the County  Assembly  of the project 
memorandum as annexed hereto and tabled herewith.  
1.5 The County  government of Mombasa  be and is hereby authorized by the County  
Assembly   to carry out the p roposed redevelopment of old estates within Mombasa  County as 
per details contained in this Report . 
1.6 The County  Assembly  to approve and adopt this Report . 
I ask Hon.  Jimmy Odari to second the Motion  thank you .  
Hon.  Odari : Hon.  Speaker  I rise to second the Motion  regarding the proposed 
development of old estate  within Mombasa . Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : I hereby propose the question that this House  adopts  the 
proposed development of o ld estate within Mombasa  County … 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj ? 
Hon.  Faraj : Thank  you very m uch Mr. Speaker . I would like to thank the Member s; it’s 
a very important Motion  which has been  moved by myself and my Committee . Housing is a very 
important aspect in everybody’s life and it has  also been entrenched in the constitution  that th e 
government will provide affordable housing to its people . Mr. Speaker  this project will enhance 
the liv es of our people and if you look at the status of the houses we have at the moment most of 
them are dilapidated a nd are in a very bad condition  and initially when we conducted a meeting 
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 with the representatives of the people l iving in those estate s one of the major issue s that came up 
was the status of the estate and we took that in to consideration as the representatives of the 
people and ma de sure that we brought this matter in this House  so that it can be deliberated  upon 
and the decision  arrived at , and we thank the Member s and w ill continue to thank the Member s 
for having taking this as a priority  for the Assembly  and it has also been made a priority  by the 
County  government throu gh the department of P lanning , Land and Housing. Mr. Speaker  the 
requirement that is needed or rather the number of houses that are needed annually in the County  
is around 25,000 twenty five thousand units (??) are about 35,0 00 and the private sector has 
played its part somehow b y coming up with several projects across the County  but as the 
representatives of the people and because o ur main objective is to make sure we change the lives 
of our people  on the ground i t is very cr ucial and very important for us  to decide and make this 
descion so that we can have th ese h ouses constructed b ecause the demand is too high and the 
private sector has not been able to meet that demand .  
Mr. Speaker  i wish to call up on all the Member s to take this venture which is also a 
public standard venture to pass it and make sure it goes through not only for the benefit of our 
people on the ground  but also for our benefit  because we are representative s of our people and 
that is part of our mandate . I take this opportunity to thank all and wish that all of us will support 
this wonderful venture f or our people. Thank you.   
Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Rajwayi) : Hon.  Karume . 
Hon.  Karume : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir I too rise to support this Motion . 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker sir in the first place we have a very positive gesture by this Motion  because 
going by the fact the mover and the seconder of the Motion  are directly affected by this 
Motion … 
(Applause ) 
...As you know Mr. Speaker  sir there was a lot of suspicion s; there was a lot of negative 
communication about this issue but then now that the mover and the seconder have come very 
openly in this House  they now confirm that the Motion  has got the support from the Hon.  House . 
Mr. Speaker  sir this is a very noble c ause which deserve s our support to the fullest because as the 
mover of the Motion  has well put it or has provided for the right agreement of this Motion  
because as it is, it is a constitutional requirement and you know our residen ts (??) which is the 
greater perc entage of our residen ts of  Mombasa  County  live in very poor sh elter and housing 
situations,  so we want to lead by example so as we seek for re -election it would be in order for 
this project to be implemented as soon as possible so that we can have somethin g to show to the 
electorate. Mr. Speaker  sir I cannot afford sitting down or resting my case before making my 
point to be heard very clearly among the needy constituents or residen ts of Mombasa  who are 
people living with disability … 
(Applause ) 
…Mr. Speaker  Sir I would urge the executives or the implementers when it comes to 
allocation , as we give priority to those who are already residing in these houses we also consider 
persons living with disabilit y because they do not have that strength to fight for thes e 
opportunities ; either financially or even physically. So Mr. Speaker  sir it is upon us to come  out 
clearly and fight for them . Mr. Speaker  sir as I rest my case I would like to urge my fellow 
colleagues to rise to the occasion and support this Motion . Thank you very much Mr. Speaker  
Sir. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Maimuna.  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 Hon.  (Ms.) Maimuna Salim: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi ningependa 
kushukuru wizara ya ujengaji kwa sababu sisi kama wakaaji wa Mombasa  ama viongozi wa 
Mombasa  tumekuwa t unalia kuwa nyumba  zinavuja , zina matatizo , hizi nyumba  zina matatizo y a 
muundo m singi wa maji taka, n yumba  zilikuwa na matatatizo me ngi kwa sababu zilikuwa 
zimejengwa tangu uhuru  mpaka dakika hii zile nyumba  hazijawa hi kujengwa . Leo hii sisi kama 
serikali  ya Kaunti  kupitia kwa wizara ya ujenzi na Mheshimiwa  Gavana ameweza kutafuta 
wafadhili ili tuweze kuangalia ni jinsi gani tunaweza kuing ’arisha Mombasa  na zile nyumba  zetu 
ambazo watu wengi walitamani kuwa nazo lakini hawakuweza kwa s ababu ya uchache wa z ile 
nyumba . Leo tumeweza kupata ufadhili ambao tunaweza kufanya nao ushirikiano wa ujenzi 
pamoja kusudi nyumba  ziwe nyingi , na ziwe ni nyumba  ambazo ni za kisasa , ni za kileo. Kwa 
hio mimi ninaunga mkono sababu zitakuwa ni za  kisasa , ni za  kileo zitaweza k uweka watu wengi 
ambao walikuwa hawajapata nafasi ya kupata hizo nyumba  na zitaweza kutupatia kazi nzuri 
kama Kaunti  ya Mombasa  kuweza kufanya hivyo na watu wetu watakua wanajua ya kwamba sisi 
tulikuwa tunawafikiria. Hivyo basi  ombi langu kubwa nawaomba wa tu wa Mombasa  waangalie 
hilo na wale wanasias a wanaopiga siasa zile ni siasa lakini tuangalie ule ukweli ulioko na tuweze 
kuunga mkono na tuunge mkono zaidi huu mjadala ili h uu Mswada  amba o umeletewa katika 
Jumba hili sisi ni watengezaji sheria na tunaha kikisha ya kwamba lazima tuhakikishe tumefuata 
sheria ili huduma njema iweze kuwafikia watu wetu . Kwa hio wale wanaopinga wanapinga tu 
kwa ubinafsi wao hata hao wangekuwa katika hiki kiti wasingeweza kufanya hayo ambayo sisi 
kwa wakati huu tumefinyiliwa na  serikali kuu  na tumeweza kujaribu kutafuta wafadhili ili 
tuweze kuhakikisha watu wetu wa Mombasa … 
(Applause ) 
...Kwa hio sisi tunaunga mkono na tunaomba ya kwamba Mheshimiwa  Gavana asirudi 
nyuma na executive  walio  mamlakani katika kitengo cha  ujenzi asirudi nyuma hili jambo 
lifanyike kesho , si kesho kutwa sisi tuko  tayari na tumejihami na watu wetu pia wako tayari.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Amur . 
Hon.  Amur:  Ahsante sana B wana Spika  mimi ni mmoja wa wale ambao  nyumba  hizi 
ziko kongole kwa ser ikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa ... 
(Applause ) 
…sababu dhana na fikra zilizokuwepo ni kwamba serikali yataka kunyanganya hizi mali 
lakini ukweli wa mambo tul ifanya mkutano  wa umma,  public  forum  na kwangu ilipitishwa hata 
tulikuwa tunataka ianze kesho. Walipo elezewa ukweli  wa mambo , uzuri wa mambo haya, wale 
wakaazi wangu walikuwa wako tayari kutoka hata kesho asubuh i ili Mradi huu uchuku e nafasi  
ile porojo  Mheshimiwa  Spika  iliokuwa ime wekwa hata kwa gazeti la leo iko n i wale 
mabwe nyenye wanaofanya kazi ya kuuza ma  nyumba  pia hao. Mombasa  saa hii tunataka kutoa 
changamoto katika Kaunti  ya Mombasa  waangalie mt andao kwa wale wanaouza nyumba , 
nyumba  chini kabisa si chini ya million kumi …  
(Applause ) 
...Pia uki login  katika website  ya nyumba  zinazouzwa Mheshimiwa  Spika  nyumba  ya 
rahisi ya chini kabisa ni milllioni  kumi na moja au kumi na tano s isi tukisema tunauza milioni 
nne bado nyumba  hii ni nyumba  ambayo mtu  anaweza kuimudu na kuichukua s iri ya o leo 
imekomeshwa ,  kwani kitabu hiki cha siri kiko dhahiri , kiko shwari wale ambao  wana  duku  duku 
na siasa duni wanaweza kuja wakakiona na kuangalia matakwa yao yale ambayo walikuwa 
wanatumia kisiasa sababu ni siasa. T unaelekea muda wa siasa na wanaogo pa yale mazuri 
yanayotendwa na G avana yatawamaliza kisiasa na uuzaji wa nyumba  zao za kibinafs i  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11 yamelengwa kuwa itakuwa magogo kwa sababu mwananchi hawezi kuacha nyumba  ya milioni 
tatu au milioni nne ak achuku e nyumba  ya milioni kumi na tano. Athari ilioko kwamba wale 
wanaopinga miradi hii wanaipinga ki mradi  wa kisiasa na wana  dhana ya kufa idi kibinafsi  
kwamba hao ni wauzaji wa ma nyumba. Kwa hi o mimi ninawaambia wakaazi wa Mombasa  sisi 
watu ambao tunawakilisha katika Bunge  hili ni kutoka eneo kumi na moja ambayo majumba 
haya yaliwakilishwa , mimi mwenyewe nilikuwa katik a mkutano, M bunge  wangu  alikuwepo na 
watu wakapitisha kwa kauli moja kwamba wak o tayari kuunga mkono mradi huu s iasa duni 
haitatusaidia hapa Mombasa  ikiwa umeshindwa na kutafuta kura usiharibu maendeleo ya Kaunti  
ya Mombasa … 
(Applause ) 
…naona wengine wanatumia njia hii kutafuta kura lakini hii si njia ya kura hii kitu iko 
wazi unasema ni cha ngamoto  kwa yeyote ambaye anaona kuna  ufisadi aje  aiangalie stakabadhi  
hii na ikiwa hatafuata sheria bas i ajiuzulu aache kusimama kuwa G avana wa Kaunti  ya 
Mombasa . Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. R ajwayi) : Hon.  Member s thank you and just try to convince the 
House  why you think this project is useful to Mombasa  County  at large s top politicizing 
whatever it is , you are politicizing just convince the House  that whatever good that is in this 
project for the wananchi  and the Member s to be convinced in this House , thank you. Yes Hon.  
Mary Akinyi.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika  ningependa kuunga 
mkono kwa dhati mjadala huu nikiwa nasema ama kweli tukiwa tunaangalia kwa sura na  nyuso 
nzuri ambayo serikali ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa  kweli ni 001 sababu ya kuwa 001 ni kuwa itakuwa 
ya kwanza kuweza kuleta uso wa riwaza ya  2030 … 
(Applause ) 
...Mheshimiwa  Spika  tukiwa tunaangalia yale manufaa ambayo serikali ya Kaunti  pamoja 
na wale watakao  kaa au wakaazi watakao pata kukaa katika hizi Nyumba  tunaona ni kweli zina  
manufaa kabisa na pia itaweza kusaidia watu katika hali ya uchumi. Mheshimiwa  Spika  tukiwa 
tunaziangalia  hizi nyumba  na pia wewe ukiangalia hizi nyumba  katika picha unaona kweli 
zitakuwa ni nyumba  ambazo ni nzuri ambazo kusema ukweli uso wa Kaunti  ya Mombasa  
utabadilika hata zile nyumba  ambazo tuko nazo ambazo ziko nyingi sana mpaka zinasifika katika 
Kaunti  hii yetu ya Mombasa  ambazo tuna ziita nyumba  za Kiswahili ambazo mpaka leo h ii ziko 
na zile choo za mashimo ambazo zile choo za mashimo hakuna mahali ambapo huwa zinalekea 
zinapofika. Ambapo tukiwa tuna nyumba  kama hizi zile nyumba  za Kiswahili na zile choo za 
shimo ambazo pia hakuna mahali zinaelekea ambapo kwa mara nyingi sana z inaweza kuleta 
maradhi katika binadamu. Kwa hio utapata kuwa tu tapata mafanikio me ngi sana katika hii 
Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa . Tukiwa tunaangalia hata yale mafanikio ambayo hii Kaunti  yetu ya 
Mombasa  itapata kutokana na wale wakaazi ambao hata hivi sasa wak o katika zile nyumba  
ambazo zilikuwa zimebomoka na ni Mungu tu ametusaidia kwa sababu zile nyumba  ambazo sa a 
hizi ziko ambazo zinataka kuletwa nyuso mpya ukiziangalia utapata kuwa gorofa hata ni “3 ply” 
zile mbao za “3ply” nd io zimewekwa kwa magorofa ambap o zinaweza kuleta ajali. Ambapo kwa 
hivi sasa hizi nyumba  ambazo zitakuwa zimejengwa na gorofa kumi na mbili watu watakuwa 
wanaenda kwa raha mstarehe ambapo watakuwa wanaenda tu na lift maji yat akuwa yanafikia 
watu ndani ya majumba , hata wakina mama ambao wanakuwa na kazi nyigi hawat akuwa na kazi 
nyingi kazi zitakuwa ni rahisi kutokana na hizi nyumba  ambazo zitakuwa zinajengwa . Manufaa 
mengi sana yat akuwa yanapatikana kwa sababu ku tokana na manufaa wale watu ambao 
watakuwa wanaishi kwa hizi nyumba  ambazo zi ko katika hali mbaya sa a hizi wakiwa 
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12 watatolewa kidogo kupeana nafasi kujengwa kwa hizi nyumba  kuna mapeni ambayo watapewa 
na baada ya hizi nyumba  kujengwa ni walewale nd io watapewa kipa o mbele kwa kurudi katika 
zile nyumba  ambazo zitakuwa zinajengwa. Kwa hio Mheshimiwa  Spika  ningeomba J umba hili 
tuweze kuunga mkono kwa dhati Ripoti  hii ili haya mambo ya ujenzi wa hizi nyumba  kwa 
Kaunti  zitaleta vibarua vingi sana kwa vijana wetu na watu wetu kwa sababu watakapo anza 
kujenga bila shak a kazi zitapatikana na watu wata kuwa wanapata kazi wakati watakapokuwa 
wanajen ga hizi nyumba , kwa hio tuunge mkono jambo hili na tuanze hata kesho , bali ianze kama 
si sasa ni sasa hivi. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya .  
Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa kuw eza kunipa fursa hii na mimi 
nichangie mjadala ambao uko katika Nyumba  hii. Mheshimiwa  Spika  bila w asiwasi nataka 
kusema kwamba na wakilisha sehemu ya Freretown ; mahali ambapo estate  ya kwanza Khadija 
Estate inastahili ku jengwa pale. Mhe shimiwa Spika  chanda chema huvishwa pete, m imi nataka 
kushukuru kinara wa serikali ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa  Mheshimiwa Gavana  Hassan Ali Joho kwa 
ule mkataba ambao aliweza kufanya mpaka twafika mahali ambapo tumefika leo . Mheshimiwa  
Spika  pia n amshukuru W aziri wa nyumba  na mipango ya miji Mheshimiwa  Tony Nj aramba kwa 
kuweza kuchukua jukumu kubwa la kuhakikisha ya kwamb a anashirikiana na serikali ili m radi 
huu uweze kufaulu. Z aidi ningetaka kumshu kuru Mwenyekiti wa K amati ya ardhi ya Bunge  letu 
la Kaunti  ya Mombasa  Mheshimiwa  Saad Faraaj A hmed kwa kuchukua nafasi kuleta Mswada  
huu rasmi katika Bunge  ili uweze kujadiliwa na uwe sheria. Mheshimiwa  Spika  changamoto 
kubwa ambayo ningetaka kusema ya kwamba wakaazi wa Mombasa  sisi kama wanasiasa 
tuliwez a kuwaahidi makao bora kabla ya kuchaguliwa na wakati umefika wa sisi kama W abunge  
wa Kaunti  ya Mombasa  tuweze kuhakikisha ya kwamba ile ahadi ya kuhakikisha ya kwamba 
wakaazi wetu wata weza kupata makao bora imetumia, n a ni jukumu letu kuhakikisha ya kwamb a 
tunafanya kile ambacho kinastahili ili tuweze kuleta sheria ambazo zitahakikisha ya kwamba 
wakaazi wetu wanapata makao bora.  
Hivi sasa Mheshimiwa  Spika  kule Khadija Estate zile Nyumba  za zamani choo zimejaa , 
mifereji ya maji taka imejaa ina toka nje mpak a mabarabarani; i takuwa vibaya iwapo tutasema 
kwamba tuweze  kuchukua majukumu ya kufanya ukarabati wa nyumba  zile ambazo ni duni hali 
ya kuwa tungeweza kupata nafasi hivi sasa kuboresha yale makao kwa sababu ya ujenzi wa 
nyumba  hizi za kisasa. Mheshimiwa  Spika hakuna mmoja wetu ambaye anapinga mradi kama 
huu, hata wale wakaazi wa estate  kama zile wao wenyewe pia wanakubaliana ya kwamba mradi 
wa nyumba  za kisasa ambao Mheshimiwa  Gavana ameleta katika maeneo hayo ni bora kuliko 
vile hali ilivyo hivi sasa. Cha ngamoto kuu Mheshimiwa  Spika  ni kwamba wale wa wekezaji 
ambao wanafanya kazi katika hii estate development  ndio ambao wanachochea mradi kama huu 
kwa sababu hao wanahisi kwamba iwapo nyumba  hizi zitajengwa na iwe mali ya Kaunti  basi hao 
moja kwa moja  watakos a biashara katika zile nyumba  zao. Nimeona baadhi ya o wakihisia au 
kuweza kuchochea wakaazi wakisema kwamba iwapo serikali ya Kaunti  itajenga nyumba  hizi 
basi mtaweza kuuziwa nyumba  kama hizi. Mimi nataka kuwaambia ya kwamba sisi kama 
viongozi tumesimama n a mradi huu, sisi kama viongozi tunasimama na uongozi wa serikali ya 
Kaunti , tunasimama pamoja na G avana kuhakikisha kwamba wakaazi wetu wanapata makao 
bora na wale ambao wanachochea tunasema kwamba sisi kama serikali tutasimama kulinda haki 
za wakaazi wet u, tunasimama kuhakisha kwamba ile ndoto wa ujenzi wa nyumba  hizi za kisasa 
zitatimia kwa sababu jukumu letu tusimame na Gavana, jukumu letu tusimame pamoja na 
wakaazi wetu ili mradi huu uweze kutimia , na s isi wenyewe kama viongozi tuweze kupata nafasi 
ya kuishi katika nyumba  hizi za kisasa.  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 Kwa hi o naunga mkono na namshukuru M wenyekiti wangu wa Housing and planning  
kwa kuweza kuleta mradi huu katika Bunge . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
(Applause ) 
Hon.  (Mrs. ) Zainab  Said : Leo Gavana wetu amefikiria watoto  wapate mahali pa 
kucheza, watoto wapate mashule ya karibu, watoto wapat e mahospitali pale pale mtaani….  
(Applause ) 
…Kwa hio amefikiria jambo la busara na Mwenyezi Mungu atamuongoza atapata cheo 
juu ya cheo kw a kufikiria watoto wetu. Kwa hi o tuunge mkono k wa sababu ni jambo la manufaa. 
Ahsante.  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Suleiman Boma . 
Hon.  Boma:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa kunipa nafasi mimi pia naunga 
mkono mia kwa mia …. 
(Applause ) 
Jambo hili kwanza tukiangalia katika historia Momba sa ni mji ambao una historia na 
Mombasa  ni mji wa pili nchini Kenya lazima mambo ambayo tunafanya sasa yawe ya kisasa , 
tunataka tuwe na majumba ya kifahari mji wetu uwe wa kupendeza , watalii wengi wanapenda 
kuzuru mji wetu huu wa Mombasa  na tukiwa bado na nyumba  zetu za makuti zitakuwa ni 
nyumba  ambazo zitakuwa zinatuletea aibu … 
(Applause ) 
Idadi ya watu Mombasa  inaongezeka na tukiangalia watu wengi wamehamia Likoni kwa 
sababu ni Mombasa  Kaunti , mimi pia nilitoka Kaunti  ya Kwale nikaja Mombasa  nikakosa 
nyumb a kwa sababu nyumba  ni kidogo lakini mradi kama huu utaniwezesha mimi kuishi katika 
mji huu wa Mombasa , ukiangalia Bandari ya Mombasa  ndio kubwa katika Africa mashariki  na 
ndio ambayo ina hudumia  katika nchi nyingi Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda , nyumba  za kisasa 
zikiwa hapa Mombasa  itakuwa ni mji wa kupendeza. Kwa hio mimi naunga mkono mradi huu na 
naunga mkono pia kwa kuleta kazi kwa vijana. Mombasa  kama vile nilivyotangulia kusema 
kuwa ni mji wa kihistoria Bandari iko hapa na sehemu nyenginezo , haya mambo ya kuk ataza 
mradi kama huu itakuwa ni hasara kubwa kwetu na hao ni wale watu ambao wanapinga 
maendeleo , hakuna maendeleo mengine ambayo yatatuletea sifa isipokuwa majengo kama haya. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Caroline . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Auma : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  pia mimi ni mmoja wao wa ku unga 
mkono  Mswada  huu ulioletwa na Mwenyekiti wa Ardhi …  
(Applause ) 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  tukiangalia kweli Gavana ni Gavana ambaye anaangalia maslahi ya 
watu maskini, tukiangali a katika Katiba yetu ni kwamba kuna vitu vitatu ambavyo ni vya maana 
sana kwa maisha ya mwanadamu ; kuna elimu, makaazi  na chakula. Kuna vitu ambavyo Gavana 
ameangalia na ameona ni kitu cha maana sana kukifanya katika Kaunti ya Mombasa . 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  kipao mbele ameangalia ma nyumba anaangalia kuwa lazima watu waishi 
kwa nyumba  ambazo zinafaa. Mheshimiwa  Spika  ukiangalia hii proposed development  nambari 
22 mpaka nambari 23 unaona vile tuna mipangilio ambayo inafaa siku hizi , nyumba  zinajengwa 
zikienda juu kwa sababu tutakuwa na nafasi na vile Gavana wetu anataka kuhakikisha watu wote 
wako sawa , ni sawa kwa kila kitu. Mh eshimiwa Spika  ndio Mheshimiwa  Gavana ameweza 
kuleta muundo huu ambao unafaa katika Kaunti ya Mombasa .  
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14 Mheshimiwa  Spika  namuunga mkono Gava na na mpango huu ambao ameuleta 
kuhakikisha umaskini utapungua katika Mombasa  yetu. Mheshimiwa  Spika  ukiangalia 
Observations  namba 2 hapo penye imeandikwa , ''Facilitating increased investment by the formal 
and in formal private sector, in the construction o f housing for low and middle income urban 
dwellers. '' Mheshimiwa  Spika  anahakikisha wale ambao wataishi katika haya majumba 
hawatakuwa na malipo ya hali ya juu , malipo yao yatakuwa ni ya hali ya chini , ni kwa sababu 
wanaangalia maslahi ya watu maskini na wa kiwango cha wastani. N ampongeza sana Gavana 
wetu awe na moyo huo huo na moyo wa 001 ambao unaweza fanya Mombasa  Kaunti  iwe Kaunti  
inayopendeza kwa wale watalii na wale ambao wanatoka nchi mbali mbali na kuweza katika 
Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari . 
Hon.  Odari:  Thank you so much Hon.  Speaker  for allowing me also to put my input 
regarding this issue by Hon.  Saad Faraj on proposed redevelopment of old e states within 
Momb asa County . Mr. Speaker  when i first entered this Assembly  my main agenda was to 
advocat e for affordable low cost of these  houses for the people of Mombasa  and my colle agues 
can bear witness that I have been in the forefront fighting for the rights of the people or the 
residents realising that Mombasa  population which is now estimation  of 1.3 Million which will 
affect the demand … 
(Applause ) 
The majority of Mombasa  residents are low income  earners , we have shortages of houses; 
in this County  the demand of ho using Mr. Speaker  at the moment is about 25, 000 per year as 
compared to the supply for each house is almost 600  per cent . Therefore Mr. Speaker  it is just 
prudent we as the County  government i want to congratulate the good will of His Excellency 
Hon.  Gove rnor Hassan Joho to have seen the need of having more modern House s… 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  i happen to be one of the  people affected because in my W ard i have these 
houses and my colle agues who happen to be  coming from  the W ards which have these houses  
all of us are in agreement in regard with this new development; Hon.  Saad here, Hon.  Amir 
Thoya, Hon.  Amur, Hon.  Tom Ogalo and Hon.  Siminyu all of us had the opportunity to go 
through various induction and many other visitation regarding the project. And ag ain Mr. 
Speaker  it was very important for someone to represent the tenants and you should know the 
project well so that you should be able to know what you are critici zing and there are so many 
who are critici zing but they should come and have an insight o f what is happening in the whole 
project and they can critic ize from an informed angle. Mr. Speaker  in my opinion i think this 
project is very important and Mombasa  County  should support it.  Mr. Speaker  these houses as 
we know are really in a bad state so we should not wait for a disaster to happen for us to realise 
the danger which is in these old houses, i think this project has come at the right time considering 
Mombasa  County  shall have new houses. Mr. Speaker  Changamwe estate covers about 32 a cres 
in this new project , we have almost 4 ,000 units, these 4 ,000 units the current tenants have 
guarantee and this is mutual agreement that they are going to be retained in the estates  and 
through co operation treatment their terms will be different with other peop le who will rent those 
4,000 units.  
Mr. Speaker  i think this is a good project and we as leaders are very grateful and even in 
our estates we have Committee s with knowledgeable people , with the best professionals so even 
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15 as soon as we enter this deal with  the government and the partners we are very much aware of 
the intimacy of the repercussion of this project and therefore i wish to say that this is a good 
project and we are looking forward for development of the project to start as soon as possible. 
Than k you , Mr. Speaker .  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Onje . 
Hon.  Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  nimesimama nikiunga mkono kikamilifu 
sana… 
(Applause ) 
 Kwa sababu ni faida kwa wakaazi wa Mombasa , ni faida kubwa ambayo Gavana 001 
anawalet ea. Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi kwa kuunga mkono kwangu ni kwa sababu ya kwanza hizi 
nyumba  zitafaidi sisi kama wakaazi wa Mombasa  hatutalipa kodi tena bali itakuwa tunalipa pesa 
tukimaliza kulipa nyumba  inabakia inakuwa ni yako . Kwa hio Bwana Spika  hili ni jamb o zuri 
sana na mimi naona Gavana wetu anajaribu kui nua watu wa Mombasa  ili waweze kutoka 
kwenye umaskini na kuwapeleka mahali kidogo waone wanafaa kuishi ndani ya Kaunti  yetu 
ambao tunapenda Mombasa . Mheshimiwa  ukiangalia na hata ukitazama hizi picha ya  michoro ya  
nyumba  amba yo imewekwa kwenye hichi kitabu ambacho kiko mbele yetu mimi nikiangalia 
nafananisha na zile nyumba  ambazo nilikuwa n ikiona kwenye picha kule London … 
(Laughter and a pplause )  
 …Kwa hio Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi nitakuwa na raha sana nikipat a nafasi ya kuishi 
katika Nyumba  ambazo naziona hapa Mheshimiwa  Spika  hata kwanza naona siku zitaongezeka 
kwa maisha yangu Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa sababu ya mazingira mazuri na masafi  na kila kitu 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  na hata bei ambayo anayozungumzia watu watal ipa ni kitu ambacho 
kinawezekana. Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono mradi uendelee mbele na wale ambao 
wanapinga Mheshimiwa  Spika  sisi gari letu likianza kuenda mbele halina  kurudi nyuma,  
ninaomba waheshimiwa wenzangu ambao wako hapa ndani kwa hili Bunge  tuweze kuunga 
mkono ili tuweze kusonga mbele wananchi wetu wapate faida na nyumba  zianze kujengwa 
haraka iwezekanavyo. A hsante sana.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Ahmed Omar (Meti ) are you opposing or supporting 
the Motion ?  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed Omar ): Mr. Speaker  i think first you  give me a chance to 
express what i have on my mind before concluding that whether am opposing or proposing that 
Motion . Mr. Speaker  i do stand to support the adoption of the proposed redevelopment of the 
County  Estates within Momba sa County  presented in the House  by Hon.  Saad Faraj which will 
benefit or help construct the modern housing in Mombasa  County  regarding Khadija Estate, 
Changamwe Estate, Tudor Estate, Likoni Estate, Buxton Estate, Nyerere and all other Estate s 
which are in  Mombasa  County . Mr. Speaker  my reason to support this is because currently our 
County  manage s 3,000 condemned houses and these houses are not in a good state . I can say that 
in 2009/2010 i was living in Buxton area Mr. Speaker , and i personally witnessed the condition 
of the houses because there  is a sewage problem, water problem even they were leakages in the 
roofs because i was living in a ground floor room  and even when my neighbour was showering 
you could see the water through the walls coming down . Mr. Speaker  we cannot let our citizens 
or electorates live in such a condition , so these 3 ,000 condemned houses the Governor intends to 
build 20 ,000 modern houses for our residents of Mombasa . It is a very good idea because most 
of our people will benefit fr om these houses compared to the only 3 ,000 who are benefitting now 
but they are living in a bad condition. Mr. Speaker  when these houses are ready am sure that 
March 31 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
16 most of Mombasa  residents will want to live in these houses because currently they cannot afford  
to live in such houses because of the market crisis you can find out that such houses that are 
proposed to be buil t might cost around Kshs 10-15 Million compared to this Kshs 4 Million 
which are going to be put for these h ouses. So this project Mr. Speaker  will be able to make the 
Mombasa  people to live in their own houses, due to the bad financial state they cannot be able to 
go to the market to obtain Kshs 10-15 Million for a house. Mr. Speaker  concerning this project 
and ensuring the people of Mombasa  do not have fear because t he tenants who are living in these  
estates when this project is complete will be  the ones who are going to be given the first priority 
to be given these apartments to live at affordable prices , at affordable rents which they will be 
able to afford. Mr. Speaker  i do also support this Motion  because when this project starts we all 
know that Mombasa  has a large number of unemployed qualified youths...  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Your time is up Hon.  Ahmed Omar Meti and am giving 
Hon.  Saad a minute to respond. Yes Hon.  Saad . 
Hon.  Faraj : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa kusikiza tu labda 
nigusie kuhusiana na wale wanaoishi maeneo ya miji ile ambayo sehemu yake ni asilimia 84 
ambayo hivi sasa katika miji yet u wanalipa kodi na asilimia 16 pekee yake ndio wale ambao 
wamebahatika kuwa na majumba yao wenyewe. Mheshimiwa  Spika  ukiangalia pia familia 
zinatumia zaidi ya asilimia 30 ya mapato yao kuhakikisha kuwa wamekidhi mahitaji ya kodi.  
Mheshimiwa  Spika  nafikiri masuala kama haya na kuiangalia kuwa kila mwaka katika Mombasa  
kunahitajika nyumba  zaidi ya elfu 25 na haya ni mambo ambayo kwamba yanafanya sisi 
tuwajibike tupitishe huu Mswada  ili nyumba  hizi kupate kujengwa na tupate nafasi kwa 
wananchi wetu. Mheshimiwa  Spika  ningependa kuwaunga waheshimiwa walioko hapa 
wapatishe Mswada  huu ili tupatie fursa Wizara ya Ardhi ili iweze kushughulikia mambo haya na 
ujenzi uweze kuanza mara moja. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you Hon.  Saad n ow that no one oppose s the Motion  
i would like to put a question that this Motion  be adopted as it is . 
(Question put and a greed  to) 
(Applause ) 
Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
The House  stands adjourned until next week Tuesday afternoon.  
The House  rose at 4: 20p.m. 
 
 
 
 