March 30, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 30th March , 201 7 
The House  met at 2:45p m. 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Members  you may sit down. Yes, 
Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Hon.  Members  I have a communication to make.  
 Hon.  Members , I wish to bring to the attention of this  Hon.  Assembly that we have 
visitors from Nairobi City County Assembly, Committee on Implementation.  
 I hereby recognize the presence of the delegation  which consists of: - 
1. Hon.  Elias O. Okumu   - Chairman (Leader of Majority Party)  
2. Hon.  Abdi I. Hassan   - Vice Chairman (Leader of Minority Party)  
3. Hon.  Pius Mbono    - Member  
4. Hon.  Susan Karimi   - Member  
5. Hon.  Celestine  Owino   - Member  
6. Hon.  Imeldah Wanjala   - Member  
7. Hon.  John Waweru   -  Member  
8. Hon.  James Kinuthia   -  Member  
9. Hon.  Marion Githinji   - Member  
10. Hon.  Peter Were    - Member  
11. Hon.  Alvin P. Olando   - Member  
12. Hon.  AntHon. y K. Karanja   - Member  
13. Hon.  David Mberia   - Member  
14. Hon.  Mike O. Guoro   - Member  
15. Hon.  Magdalene Mbogori   - Member  
16. Hon.  David Kitavi   - Member  
17. Hon.  Maxwell O. Ochar   -  Member  
18. Hon.  Ruth Njeri    -  Member  
19. Hon.  Amos Mbuthia   - Member  
20. Monica Muthami    - Principal Clerk Assistant  
21. Jolinda Wangui    - Clerk Assistant  
22. Kevin Wasike    - Clerk As sistant  
 On behalf of the Assembly, I welcome you all to the County Assembly of Mombasa.  
Karibuni Sana.  
(Applause ) 
 Members  I have another communication.  
 Hon.  Members , we have now come to an end of our first part of the last session. The 
House  will be resu ming on 18th April, 2017 for the last part before proceeding for recess Sine 
Die. As you are all aware, the Assembly to date has been a ble to pass 41 Bills and 221 
substantial Motions. We have been exercising oversight and have seen that the Executive has  
been kept on toes to discharge their mandate. In  the last part that shall end on 15th June, 2017 
we expect to pass any pending Bills.  During the recess, we are all aware that party primar ies 
will be taking place. My prayer  is, let the nominations be peac eful and I wish you all the best. 
Let us preach peace and also be close to our constituents during the recess.  With God first, I 
believe that Mombasa as a County will succeed and all the hurdles which are currently in 
March 30, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 place we shall be able to overcome. Hon.  Members , thank you for your diligence and co -
operation in discharging our Constitutional mandate,  
 I look forward to seeing you in the last part but in the meanwhile Members  we can 
proceed w ith the order of the day. Yes, C lerk. 
STATEMENTS  
 Hon.  Saad Faraj  Ahmed, Hon.  Saad Faraj Ahmed…  
(Silence ) 
 Yes, Clerk .  
STATEMENT  
 Hon.  Ahmed O. Ibrahim, Hon.  Ahmed O. Ibrahim…  
(Silence ) 
 Yes, Clerk…  
MOTION  
 Members  we are in order number nine, Procedural Motion but this Order number nine 
I will make it to be the last busi ness of the day. Yes Clerk you may proceed.  
BILL  
 Chair Committee on Finance? Hon.  Hatimy?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Chairman, Speaker pursuant to  Standing 
Order 117 I ask this Assembly to resolve that we reduce the publication period of The 
Mom basa Supplementary Appropria tion Bill 2016/ 2017 from seven days to one day Mr. 
Speaker.  Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Hon.  Hatimy I think you are supposed to 
read the  Bill first.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Yes I think Mr. Speaker I think it’s the Clerk.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Okay , okay , yes Clerk?  
(Clerk introduced the Bill)  
FIRST READING  
THE MOMBASA SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL 2017  
 Clerk : Mr. Speaker Sir, The Mombasa Supplementa ry Appropriation Bill 2017, an 
Act of the Co unty Assembly to authorise the issue of certain sums  out of County Revenue 
Funds and the application towards the service of the year ending 30th June 2017 and to 
appropriate those sums  for certain public services and purposes.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Than k you, after the First R eading I 
commit the Bill to the C ommittee on Finance Budget and Appropriation, Chairman?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. Speaker I beg this House  pursuant to Standing Order 
117 I ask this Assembly to resolve that we reduce th e period of the Mombasa County 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill, the County Assembly Bill number 12,  2016 /2017 from 
seven days to one day,  thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Granted.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr Speaker Sir this is a 
Supplementary Appropriation Bill 2017.  The main budget estimate 2016/ 2017 was taken for 
public participation before passage of Appropriation Bill 2016. Mr. Speaker Sir I therefore 
request that since a report had been issued and this is just allocation of votes as per section 
135 of PFM I request that the Bill be read a  second time and there after we proceed to 
Committee of the Whole House . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Members  I put the question that the 
Mombasa County Supplementary Appropriation Bill 2017 be read a second time.  
(Question put and agreed)  
 
March 30, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 THE MOMBASA SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL 2017  
SECOND READING  
 Clerk : Mr. Speaker Sir the Mombasa County S upplementary Appropriation Bill , an 
Act of C ounty Assembly to authorise the issue  of certain sums  out of County revenue f unds 
and the application towards the services of the year ending 30th June 2017 and to appropriate 
those sums  for certain public services and purposes.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Members  already the Bill has been read 
the second time I think the House , the Bill is committed to the C ommittee of the Whole 
County Assembly,  so the House  will dissolve itself into a Committee of the Whole.  
(Sergeant At Arms lowered the Mace on the Table ) 
(Deputy Speake r (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ) exited the Chair)  
COMMITTEE OF THE W HOLE HOUSE  
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ) in the Chair)   
 Chairperson:  Members  welcome to the Committee of the Whole House, the B ill now 
is in the stage of Committee o f the W hole House. Mr. Chairman of the C ommittee.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you…  (Inaudible ) 
 Chairperson:  So there is no need of going clause by clause Chair?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 Chairperson : Yes Hon.  Kasagamba . 
 Hon.  Kasangamba: Chair person I ascertain the Chairman of Finance C ommittee 
what says is very true we have come to a consensus that we have already scrutinize d this as  a 
Whole House  and Mr. Speaker we look forward for approval in this House . 
 Chairperson:  Yes Saad Faraj.  
 Hon.  Faraj : Mr. S peaker as part of Budget and A ppropriation Committee I want to 
ascertain the fact that we’ve been able to go through the document thoroughly and therefore 
there is no need for us to go through the same process again, and I second thank you .  
 Chairperson:  Yes Mheshimiwa Meti  
 Chief Whip  (Hon.  Ahmed Omar ): Thank you Mr. Speaker as a friend of  the 
committee I also con cur with  my colleagues because we’ve gone through this document and 
we’ve seen that it is okay and I also wish to tell my Members  we pass this Bill for our C ounty 
to move on . 
 Chairperson : Yes Lucy .  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Chireri:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, mimi hata naona twachelewa  
yaliyo zungumuzwa ni ya kweli na kweli kabisa  nayaunga mkono tuyatekeleze , ahsante . 
 Chairperson : Ok Members  since we have come to the  conse nsus that the Bill has 
already passed so ma ny stages am left with no other rea son not to propose the question.   
 Members  I propose a  question now , I propose a question that all clauses of this Bill be 
part of the day ... 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. S peaker thank you I think I hereby request the House  
to read the Bill for the T hird time.  
 Chairperson:  Hon.  Hatimy I’ve just proposed a question and I was waiting for 
anybody to raise but since I have pro posed the question I have to put the question first, 
Members  I now put the B ill, as many a re of the opinion that all clause s be part of the Bill. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 We have come to the end of the Committee of the W hole House , thank you very 
much . 
March 30, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 PLENARY RESUMED  
(Sergeant At Ar ms raised the Mace on the Table ) 
(Deputy S peaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid)  in the Chair)  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Yes Chairman of Finance C ommittee.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you  Mr. S peaker . Mr. Speaker  I wish to report to 
this Hon.  Hous e to the Hon.  Members  during Committee of the W hole House ….(Inaudible ) i 
beg to move ... 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : I think you should request for the Bill to 
be read for the T hird time.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker am reporting on the Whole House .  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Okay . 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I wish to report to this Hon.  House that the Hon.  Members  
during the C ommittee of the Whole House  approved all the clauses Mr. S peaker, thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Can you request for  the Bill to be read for 
the T hird time.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Hon.  Members  are supporting this Bill as it will enable the 
residen ts of Mombasa to continue receiving uninterr upted services from the County 
government. Mr . Spea ker sir, I now request for the Bill to be read for the T hird time.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy, as per your 
request I propose a question that the Bill to be read for the T hird time.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 I now p ut the q uestion that the Bill be read the T hird time . 
(The Question put and agreed  to) 
 Yes Clerk.  
THE MOMBASA SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL 2017  
THIRD READING  
 Clerk:  Mr. Speaker sir, The Mombasa Supplementary Appropriation Bill 2017, an  
Act of the Cou nty Assembly to a uthorize the issue of certain sums  of money out of County 
revenue funds and the a pplication towards the service of the year ending on the 30th June 
2017 and to a ppropriate those sums  for certain public services and purposes.  
 Deputy Speake r (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Thank you. Yes Clerk, can we go back to 
business number nine.  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
 Yes Leader of Minority.  
 Leader of Minority  (Hon.  Maimuna Salim ): Pursuant to S tanding order 25(3) the 
Assembly adjourns its normal sittings until 17th April 2017 and will resume its normal 
sittings on 18th April 2017. I beg this House  to move the M otion.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Fatma K ushe.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Thank you Mr . Speaker sir, I do second the M otion.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj.  
 Hon.  Faraj:  Mr. Speaker I think the Motion has  already been seconded.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : I thought you were up, the M otion is on 
the floor now.  
 Hon.  Faraj:  I was actually down Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : I said the M otion is on the floor.  
 Hon.  Faraj:  Ooh For the purpose of discussion.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Yes. 
 Hon.  Faraj:  Thank you.  Mr. Speaker  thank you for this opportunity.  Mr. Speaker due 
to the fact that we will be going for nominations on 11th of April, we needed the time to go 
March 30, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 back to our people and inform them on what we’ve be able to achieve in past four years, our 
challenges and the fact that we still want to come back here and serve them for ano ther term, 
so Mr. Speaker I do support this M otion, and I would like to ask other Members  of this Hon.  
House  to support this Motion  so that it can allow us time, proper time to be with our people 
on the ground. Thank you so much.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Kasangamba . 
 Hon.  Kasa ngamba:  Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika langu  
kwanza ni kutakia kila Mheshimiwa kila la h eri katika safari tunayo kwenda  na 
kinyan’gany’iro kilichoko  mbele yetu cha mchujo wa chama  tarehe k umi na moja. Mwenyezi  
Mungu ajaalie W aheshimiwa wote kwa nguvu zake basi wawe ni wenye  kurudi kama vile 
vile walivyo Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshi miwa Spika ni safari ndefu tuliyo pitia, na ni kazi 
nzuri tuna  imani kwamba kila  mmoja  alionyesha kazi nzuri kwa w ananchi wake mashinani, 
na kwa kupitia ile tajriba tuliyo  nayo na nguvu tuliyo  nayo na matumaini makubwa kwamba 
Waheshimiwa walio mamlakani wana  nafasi kubwa ten a nafasi ya mbele ya kuhifadhi nafasi 
zao katika chama na vile vile pia mbele mbele katika ucha guzi mkuu. Mheshimiwa Spika, pia 
kuna wale wanaosubiri marupurupu yao yale yaliyo  simamishwa tunaomba yatoke mapema 
maana tunavyo jua siasa ni pesa, pesa za kujisaidia usafiri na kazi, kwa  hiyo twatarajia kila 
kitu kiwe  kiko sawa, na tutakapo rudi hapa ba ada ya mapumziko tuwe na nyuso za f uraha na 
bashasha, na tuwe wenye ari na nguvu zaidi. A hsante.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Ndanda Chiro.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, hata mimi pia nataka 
niwaombee na tujiombee soteni kwa sababu safari ilikuwa ni  ndefu lakini hatimaye tumefika, 
na mimi pia nataka nitambue pia wale wenzetu tuliokuwa  nao lakini siku ya  leo hatukuweza 
kuwa  nao kwa sababu Mwenyezi Mungu aliwapenda. Pia nataka tuwakumbuke kwa  sababu 
tulianza nao safari hii, Mheshimiwa Marehemu Amina Zuberi, vile vile Mama Sada na pia 
wa juzi Mama Sera Nyamvula ambao walituwacha, n i sikitiko kubwa lakini kwa sababu ya  
Mwenyezi Mungu  ni lazima tushu kuru kwa lile ambalo anatupatia.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
wakati umefika ya kwamba sis i kama watu wa Wodi  ya Mombasa kinyang 'anyiro chetu 
kinakuja mwezi huu wa nne tarehe kum i na moja basi ni kuombeana tu m azuri kwa  sababu 
hata mimi pia mpinzani wangu anisikia hii kauli Fatuma Kushe yuko pale karibu lakini pia 
namuombea kila la kheri akinis hinda ni Ms.hinde sote ni ODM ... 
(Applause ) 
 Na sisi twawakilisha na kuongoza watu wa Kenya ambao wako katika Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa, s hukra n sana Mheshimiwa na tuweni na a mani. Ahsante sana.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Kithinzi.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab Kithinzi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa hii fursa, 
Mheshimiwa Spika sote tunaj ua ya kwamba wale wenzetu wanao simama wanatufanya sisi ni 
kuwa ni target na hatungependa tuwe target hii nafasi tul iopewa . Mheshimiwa Spika, nafikiri 
ni naf asi nzuri ya kwenda mashinani kushindana nao na kueleza wananchi tumewafanyia nini 
ili waweze kuturudisha mara ya pili kwa sababu kila mmoja ana  hamu ya hiki kiti lakini 
hakielewi kiko vipi . Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwa hii nafasi muda tul iopewa 
unatosha kabisa kupambana na wenzetu ili  tuhakikishe tumewa weka kando na tumerudi tena 
kama jamii moja na Mwenyezi Mungu atujaalie turudi tena kama vile tulivyo ili  tuweze 
kuendeleza mas uala yal iobakia. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Mheshimiwa mama Kaunti Zainab Ali 
Darwesh.  
 Hon.  (Mrs .)Zainab Said : Ahsante sana Bwana Sp ika kwa kunipa hii nafasi mimi pia 
natoa shukran kwa wenzangu wote na pia twashukuru miaka min ne yote tul iofanya kazi 
pamoja kwa wenzangu wote tulikuwa pa moja tulikuwa vizuri na hivi sasa nawaombea wenye  
March 30, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 kusimama na wenye kushindana wasigombane yaani itakuwa wewe wakitaka kile kiti mimi 
nakitaka lakini nataka tuishi pamoja tutasaidiana lau kutukanana kwenye jukwaa sitoweza 
kukusaidia ama ukinitukana sitawez a kukusaidia tuna  khiyari kiti kiende kwengine . 
 Kwa hivyo nawaombea nyote,  sote tuwe kitu kimoja na  turudi salama. Shukran.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Kondo.  
 Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spi ka kwanza ni  
kupongeza wenzangu kuhakikisha tumeweza kupitisha kuhusu ugao wa matumizi yetu katika 
Bunge  la Kaunti kwa sababu ndio chanzo kikuu na ndio nguzo ya  kuhakisha mambo yetu 
yanaenda sawa . Mheshimiwa Spika  pili ni  kuwatakia na kuwapongeza wenzetu walioku wepo 
na kwa uwezo wa Mwenyezi  Mungu wakati wa mchujo  unaokuja najua tuna imani kubwa 
tutarudi te na katika Nyumba yetu hino hino ili kuendeleza gurudumo la Mombasa la 
Mombasa Kaunti. Mheshimiwa Spika mwisho ni  kupongeza wale wenzetu wa kutoka Kaunti 
047 ambao si wengine bali wa lio tutembelea katika N yumba yetu na ambao tuko nao hapa, na 
tumekuwa nao..  
(Applause ) 
 Kwa mazungumzo m azuri kuanzia asubuhi mpaka kipindi hichi. Mheshimiwa Spika 
langu la mwisho ni kusema mgeni akija kwako leo utamchinjia kuku na k esho nawe uende 
kwake akatafute mbuzi , kwa hivyo ningeliomba kupitia kwa Nyumba hino na hekma ya 
Nyumba hino kupitia kwa kiti cha ko huu mda mfupi wa wiki mbili W aheshimiwa wetu wa 
Mombasa tufanye safari fupi ya siku tatu , nne na sisi twende tukawatembelee ndugu zetu wa 
Nairobi. Kwa haya machache Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nachuku a 
fursa hii mwanzo kuwashukuru W aheshimiwa wote tume fanya kazi tukielewana na hivi sasa 
twaenda kwenye vita . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika langu ni  ombi kuwaomba kama mwenyekiti wa ODM ndani ya 
Mombasa K aunti ukitukanana na mwenzako tukana  na uwache nafasi kidogo ya kupatana ...  
(Applause ) 
 Sio kutukanana mpaka kukawa hakuna nafasi ya watu kukaa chini kusikizana , kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba na nawaombea wote waregee hapa na ushindi na tupate 
kufanya kazi kuhud umia watu wa Mombasa ; la pili kama unavyojua tunakwenda mapumziko 
kupitia kiti chako naomba kuna bajeti am bayo inakuja na pengine huenda tukaita public 
participation  wakati wa mapumziko  kwa hivyo kamati mbili ya bajeti pamoja na mwenyekiti 
wangu wa kamati ya PAC hayuko na kama unavyojua kuna vikao ambavyo vinaendelea 
naomba Nyumba hii itupatie ruhusa ili  tuend elee na kazi zetu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Kushe.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma S waleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia nimesimama 
vile vile kusema kwamba tumshukuru  Mwenyezi Mungu kwa kutufikisha m uda huu wa sasa  
safari tunayokwenda ni nzito na vile  vile ningependa pia kuwash ukuru ndugu zetu ambao 
wameweza  walioweza kufanya kazi na  sisi; ma askari wetu ambao wako hapa ndani , 
makarani wetu ambao wako hapa ndani nawashukuru sana na  ningependa kuwaomba 
Ms.amaha kwa ni aba ya wenzetu kama tumewakwaza kidogo maanake sisi ni binadamu 
haujatolewa nyongo aliyetolewa nyongo ni Mtume Mohammad tunawaomba mtusamehe 
maanake safari tunayo  kwenda ni nzito roho zenu zikiwa na  vifundo wengine tunapata tabu, 
kwa hivyo naomba mtusamehe  na vile  vile Mheshimiwa Spika kabla hatujamaliza muhula 
wetu kama kuna haki zao hawa wenze tu waweze kupewa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Thank you. I think we have come the end 
of the debate , we have come to  the en d of the debate for the Procedural M otion. Thank  you 
March 30, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Yes Clerk. Order Number 13.  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Thank you very much, Members  there being no other business this House  is 
adjourned.  
The House rose at  2:40pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 