September 23 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday 23rd  September , 2020  
The House met at 2:39p.m. 
      [The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes, Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATE MENT  BY VICE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON LABOUR AND SOCIAL 
WELFARE , HON. RAPHAEL BWIRE ON MEASURES BEING TAKEN  TO SAFEGUARD THE PUB LIC 
AGAINST THE EXPLOITA TION BY UNSCRUPULOUS FOREIGN  JOBS RECRUITMENT AGE NCIES 
 
 Yes, Chairperson Committee o n Labor and Social Welfare ? 
[Silence ] 
 The Vice Chair Committee on Labour and Social Welfare? Yes Hon. Bwire please give a 
response on the Statement.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker indeed we had a meeting yesterday 
and we resolved to invite th e Labour o fficer and here is the response.  I wish to give a statement 
response to a request by Hon. Amriya Boy, Nominated Member who on Wednesday 19th 
February, 2020  sought to know what measures were being taken to safeguard the public against 
the exp loitation by unscrupulous foreign jobs recruitment agencies.  Hon. Speaker, t he 
Committee has made efforts to come up with this response t hrough research efforts by our 
Secretariat, our County g overnment Department of Youth, Gender and Sports and the County  
Labour Office of the National g overnment.  Hon. Speaker, w e wish to deliver a response as 
follows:  Labour standards are a national g overnment function pursuant to Schedule Four of the 
Constitution of Kenya , 2010. Further Hon. Speaker employment matters are regulated under the 
Labour Institutions Act, 2007, Employment Act, 2007, National Employment Authority Act, 
2016 and the Labour Institutions (Private Employment Agencies) Regulations, 2016.  
 Hon. Speaker , due to scarcity of employment opportunities locally, citizens have resorted 
to seeking opportunities in foreign countries , mainly the Middle East.  Hon. Speaker , local jobs 
recruitment agenci es which are registered by the national governm ent and licensed by the 
County government enable most of the foreign jobs  seekers to get jobs abroad.   

September 23 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Speaker most of the jobs provided in the Middle East are unskilled and open to 
exploitation and abuse since they do not pass through the formal government channels.  Hon. 
Speaker the Committee was informed that some of those s eeking jobs abroad do not follow laid 
down government channels for seeking employment but go abroad on tourist visas, stow away or 
go abroad through illegal means thus making them vulnerable to exploitation and abuse. Some of 
the foreign recr uitment agencies use informal and unprofessional means to engage and recruit 
job seeke rs who they abandon once abroad.  Some unscrupulous people and agencies have 
conned and frequently  collected funds from unsuspecting members of the public promising non -
existent foreign job and vacancies.  There have been several cases highlighted in the media over 
the years of people employed abroad who were abused or killed by their employers and left 
unassisted.  Some of the recruitment agencies have sent job seekers abroa d to work for positions 
other that those which they sought ending up in menial jobs where they are abused and exploited.  
Hon.  Speaker S ir, the  County government of Mombasa has partnered with the National 
Employment Authority, Ministry of Labour, T race Kenya , International Organization of 
Migration an d local foreign jobs recruitment agencies and held three awareness forums on 
human trafficking and exploitation.  The national government is implementing a software system 
to store information and track those wor king abroad with a view to offering necessary services 
and assistance when in need. This has significantly reduced incidents of exploitation of abuse 
and incidences especially in Saudi Arabia.   
Hon.  Speaker Sir, in 2015  the Ministry of Labour formed a Task Force to  implement 
labour migration policies to the Middle East and review effectiveness of policies on jobs 
recruitment agenci es. Prior to that in 2014, the national government revoked the license on 930 
recruitment agencies for violating regulations in recruitin g Kenyans for jobs in the Middle East.  
The existing policy and legal framework is good but should be enhanced to address the problem ; 
heavy fines and severe jail terms should be preferred against bogus and rogue agencies. A 
requirement that these agencies should be responsible for safe return of job seekers should be 
legislated.  Hon. Speaker both level s of government and stakeholders need to enhance 
sensitization on the problem of human trafficking, labor malpractices and exploitation by 
unscrupulous employe rs and agencies. Further, the two levels of government should enhance 
vocational training to equip job seekers with skills that will make them employment locally and 
abroad.  The Committee will continue engagement with stakeholders to hopefully find a 
susta inable solution to the problem. Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
[Applause ] 
 The Speaker  (Hon . Khat ri): Thank you Hon. Bwire . Yes Clerk, next order.  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY THE CHAIRPERSON C OMMITTEE ON HEALTH H ON. KIBWANA SWALEH 
ON THE STATUS REPORT  ON MEASURES TAKEN BY  THE COUNTY GOVERNMEN T TO CURB THE SPREAD  
OF CORONA VIRUS IN T HE COUNTY  
 Yes, Chairperson Committee on Health  Hon. Kibwana?  
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand on behalf of my Chairman on Health and 
the Committee at large to give the response to a statement that was brought to this House . I will 
read...Mr. Speaker Sir , I stand to give a status report o n measures taken by the County 
government to curb the spread of Corona Virus in the County as requested by Hon. Tobias 
Samba MCA Tudor Ward on Wednesday, 4th March , 2020 during the 12th sitting.   
September 23 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  Mr. Speaker , the Committee on Health wrote a letter to the Chief Officer, Medical Health 
requesting the status of the above stated matter.  The department of public health respon ded on 
the ma tter as per the attached report , we received it on 17th September ; I will go through  and 
containment measures of Covid19 at Technical University I solation Centre. The following 
mitigation measures that are put in p lace to protect our frontline  workers from cont racting Covid -
19 in the line of duty : 
 Provision of appropriate PPEs for the clinical team and the support staff , 
 Regular training and sensitisation of staff on infection prevention and control, training the 
clinical staff on the proper proc edure for donning and doffing ; 
 Regular Covid 19 test for staff at the facility and quarantine for a fortnight  after 
completion of 16 days of duty ; 
 The clinical team is divided into two separate teams that work in different shifts to avoid 
exposure to the entire team in case  a member turns positive  for C ovid-19; 
 Training support staff on IPC , meaning Infection Prevention Control measures and 
handl ing of different types of waste ; 
 Clear demarcation of the green and red zone to reduce unnecessary interaction wit h 
Covid patients admitted at the facility ; 
 Staff in the green zone area are provided with surgical masks, hand sanitisers and hand 
wash points ; 
 CCTV provided within the ward to minimise  patient  staff interaction ; 
 The facility uses a paperless system  for re cording  patient’s  clinical data .  
 Most of these run across all the hospitals and for Likoni hospital  I will only touch on the 
number five because mos t of t hem have been touched in Technical University there is regular 
disinfection of clinical areas and IEC ma terials displayed to remind staff and clients  on 
preventive measures.  Then  for Port Reitz Hospital we have weekly CMEs , meaning Continuous  
Medical Education to sensitize  medical staff regarding Covid-19 and for the same hospital one 
that was not mentioned initially , the provision  of suppo rt to set up hand washing areas /stations at 
all entry and reporting points of hospitals and departments . Finally at Tudor Sub County Hospital 
which  is of  interest to H on. Samba who requested for the statement and this is his ward t here is 
provision of PPEs , testing of hospital staff,  training and sensitization  of staff , regular  support 
supervisor  for Infection Prevention Control (IPC)  implementation measures , provision of hand 
sanitizers  and sensitization  of community members through provision of displayed materials . 
 Thank you H on. Speaker.   
 
[Applause ] 
The Speaker  (Hon. Kh atri): Thank you H on. Milkah Moraa,  Yes Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members , this H ouse stands adjourned until Tuesday 29th of September , 2020 at 
10:00a.m. 
The House rose at 2:55p.m. 