June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 20th June, 2018  
The House met at 2:38p .m. 
 
(The Deputy  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats, yes Clerk.  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon. Members, I wish to bring to the attention to this Hon. Assembly that we have 
visitors from Burhaniya Primary School, Ronald Ngala Primary School and Fahari Primary 
School all from Tudor Ward...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 And I hereby recognize the presence of t he delegation ; if you hear your name stand and 
bow so that the Hon. Members acknowledge your presence.  
From Burhaniya Primary School we have;  
1. Salome Adhiambo  
2. Dorcas Ikholi  
3. Esha Amir  
4. Hannan Omar  
5. Rashid Issa  
6. John Otieno  
7. Sharon Evert  
8. Husna Jamal  
9. Michael Chi te 
10. William Odhiambo  
11. Miguel Ogoso  
12. Perez Achando  

June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 And from Ronald Ngala primary School we have;  
1. Ramadhan Mwero  
2. Geoffrey L’usengo  
3. Dickson Jilani  
4. Maxwel l Mwanduka  
5. Zawadi Kenga  
6. Mwanaidi Saidi  
7. Elizabeth Adhiambo  
8. Aisha Ahmed  
9. Mwanahamisi Mohamed  
10. Abdulrazak Ismail  
From Fahari primary School  
1. Nasra Umazi  
2. Debora Mwende  
3. Calvin Munene  
4. Moses Nyambu  
5. Violate Akoth  
And the head of delegations , the teachers we have,  
1. Sheila Myriam  
2. Lydia Odhiambo  
3. John Mwakio  
And on behalf of the Assembly I welcome you all to the County Assembly of Mombasa, na 
nasema karibuni sana...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Before we proceed we have the Hon. Member from that ward i'll give him a chance to say 
a few words. Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for at least acknowledging and also apprecia ting 
the effort that you’ve done at least to bring the young debaters, actually these are young debaters 
we started debating club and so far these are the Schools that have achieved that but hopeful we 
are going to do it within the school within my W ard an d hopefully will have the County as a 
whole, to my student welcome, karibuni  sana, thank you so much and feel free you will enjoy 
how Hon. Members debate. Thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): And I will also ask H on. Rosemary to  at least 
say something to the s tudents.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me the chance to welcome the 
students who have come to be with us today to at least learn how we debate our issues in this 
chamber because you have  just ambushed me on the issue let me leave you with those few 
words.  
 
(Applause)  
 
June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you, yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
DECENTRALIZATION OF THE SEWERAGES SYSTEM  IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Faith Mwende, Kipevu Ward?  
 
(Hon. (Ms.) Faith Mwende moved the M otion)  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this chance, I 
would like to move the following Motion about decentralization of the sewerages system in the 
County.  
 
(Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface moved the M otion)  
 
THAT AWARE that the County Government is mandated with the responsibility of 
County health Services, including, in particular refuse removal, refuse dumps and solid 
waste disposal under part 2 (g) of the fourth Schedule of the constitution of Kenya , 2010;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that the  sewerage system in the County was constructed in colonial 
era and has been concentrated in a few areas of the island;  
 
NOTING THAT sewerage system and the general sanitation has al ways been coordinated 
from the C ounty level ; 
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT the existing infrastructure is inadequate and dilapidated and 
cannot adequately cater for the ever increasing demand for the service;  
 
CONCERNED that the current state of sewers in the County may pose a threat to both 
the residents and the environment in the County;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
 
1. The County Government constructs and decentralizes the sewerage system to all 
the W ards in the County.  
 
2. The C ounty Government transfer sewerage systems management to W ard level.  
Mr. Speaker I beg Hon. BMW to second.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Faith Mwende we don’t have Hon. BMW 
in this House.  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Faith  Mwende : Am sorry Hon. Speaker, I urge Hon. Thoya from Mikindani Ward 
to second the Motion. Th ank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Thoya?  
June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, am in the preparation of making that name BMW 
a legal one so in the near future you will allow it , may be next year but I beg to support.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members, I n ow propose a question that the 
Motion on decentralization of the s ewerage systems in the County be discussed in this House . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Faith?   
 Hon.  (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa tena hii fursa 
niweze kuchangia hoja hii nilio leta kwenye Bunge hili kuhusiana na sewerage  za Kaunti ya 
Mombasa. Mheshimiwa Spika hapo nyuma tumekuwa na  taarifa  nyingi za kuhusu sewerage , 
nyingi zime  block   zingine hazina vifiniko, kwengine hakuna sewerage  kwengine zina  
connectiwa  kimakosa  na nikaona ni vizuri kwa sababu hili ni ja nga la Mombasa nzima si sehemu 
fulani. Ningeomba hii Nyumba iweze kupitisha huu Mswada ndio uweze kufanyiwa kazi ndio 
tuweze kukaa katika mazingira masafi kwa vile tunajua Mombasa Kaunti ni mahali pa watu 
wastaarabu na watu wasafi na kama tutakaa kwa mazingira ambayo kuna harufu ambazo 
hazieleweki Mheshimiwa Spika itakuwa ule ustaarabu wetu wa Mombasa Kaunti haupo te na. 
Kwa hivyo Waheshimiwa wenzangu naomba tujadili na tuweze kupitisha huu Ms wada ndio 
tuweze kupata mazingira masafi katika jamii yetu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 Hon. Samba : Yes thank you once a gain Mr. Speaker actually decentralization of the 
sewerage system is something that could have happen long time ago; actually the pioneers of the 
devolution who came up with idea of devolution wanted to bring the services closer to the people 
and s o far our country has tried but at least we have some steps to make. When everything has 
been decentralized at least it brings services closer to the people , in respect to that we know the 
Motion that Motion mover has just moved it is a problem that may be  it is affecting our County 
as a whole and of late we have seen County Government trying but the ir effort is not enough we 
need to at least give them some mandate or some powers to actualize and to bring the services 
closer to the people.  
 When we talk abo ut sewerage system especially  in my Ward I just recently  had some 
rehabilitation in my Ward but they are not doing these things as per the standard that is required, 
may be to the contractor or may be who gave out the contract may be might say that they are 
doing us some favor . Hon. Speaker we need  to bring these things down to Ward level, because 
you might find there might be just a m ere blockag e and it will take you some  time or it will take 
County Government to respond something actually that c ould have been decentralized at least 
cannot even take a minute for the action to be taken.  
 Another thing we will also be creating job opportunities for our youths and this thing we 
should have a regular unit that will be responsible for the services of t he County projects by 
doing so also will be ensuring that we have a clean environment and our youths who are jobless 
will also get the opportunity also to get employment through that , so I think the timing is also the 
best and I beg to con cur with my fello w Hon. Member. Hon . Speaker I beg to support the 
Motion, thank you so much.  
June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 (Applause)  
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Naliaka?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mary Naliaka:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for granting me this chance to 
contribute. Mr. Speaker when it comes to matt ers of resp onsibility people will always a pportion 
blame  where there is no direct responsibility but when there is decentralization there will be 
somebody who will be directly responsible down there . When it comes to those sewerages being 
blocked or may be if there is anything that is not working right.  So Mr. Speaker Sir  I urge the 
House to pass this Motion given tha  t it will enable the work to be done easier. Another thing, it 
will also incorporate the involvement of members of the public on the ground g iven that at the 
Ward levels we just deal with electorates who are our mothers, our sisters and our brothers. So I 
tend to believe that that they will also be there to give a hand. Thirdly this decentralization will 
also make our kids also to learn about taking care of the environment right from home given that 
there w ill be a policy ma ybe from the Ward representatives on how the work should be done or 
how the environment should be catered for. So these things will just enhance the easiness in 
working and doing this work, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ):Hon. Ahmed?  
 Hon. Ahmed Salim:  Ahsante Bwana Spika, mimi nataka kumuunga mkono Mheshimiwa 
mwenzangu kwa kuleta Mswada  huu. Kama alivyosema Mheshimiwa Samba hili jambo liko kila 
mahali sio mahali pamoia pekee yake kwa sababu hata upande wangu pia vile vile tangu niingie 
lawama ni nyingi kuhusu hizi illegal connection  hata mpaka naambiwa mimi ndio ninafanya hizi 
kazi huko eneo langu na shida yote inatokana na wakaazi pahali ambapo hiyo kitu i nafanywa na 
pia vile vile askari  wa inspectorate  pia wako katika hili jambo pia wao wanahusika na 
ikiwezekana hili jambo tulichukulie mkazo sana kwa sababu bila hivyo naona Mombasa nzima 
itaharibika maanake kila ukienda kazi ikifanywa unaambiwa ni ya mkubwa n a hatujui ni 
mkubwa gani? Kwa hivyo upande wangu ndio naweza nikasema kuwa imekuwa imeathirika 
sana kwa hivyo hili jambo lazima tulichukulie mkazo nataka kusema tuunge mkono tupitishe 
Mswada  huu. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes t he Member from Frere Town Ward, Chief 
whip?  
 Majority Chief Whip  (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi leo nitakuwa mchache wa maneno kuweza kutili a mkazo na kuweza kumuambia ali eleta 
hoja hii kwamba kama serikali tumeweza kujitahidi kwa juhudi zetu kuhakikisha kwamba hasa 
mfumo wa maji taka unaweza kufanya kazi bila kubagua kata ndogo yoyote.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika vile vile kama serikali pia kuchukua hoja kwa wakaazi na hatua kama 
hii iliweza kufanyika mashinani hivi  majuzi na hivi sasa tayari tunaweza kuweka bajeti ya 
kutosha kuweza kuangazia kila sehemu na ku na itil afu itaweza kutokea katika bajeti yetu 
ambayo tuna  jukumu sisi kama Wabunge  wa sasa tutahakikisha kwamba kila sehemu sio sehemu 
moja pekee bali sehem u nzima ya Kaunti ya Mombasa. Lakini Mheshimiwa Spika la  kushangaza 
mfumo wa maji taka sio janga la kuweza kutiliwa mkazo na viongozi pekee ila wananchi kwa 
sababu wananchi wametumia njia hizi kutupia takataka alafu baadae sisi ndio tunal etewa lawama 
hizi.  
June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  Kwa hivyo tungependa pia hawa wananchi waweze kuhamasishwa ya kwamba njia hizi 
ni sehemu za mfumo wa maji taka lakini wan apotuma matakataka Mheshimiwa Spika inakuwa 
nini jukumu ambalo kila mmoja anastahili kuweza kuliteke za lakini sio jukumu au kidole cha 
lawama kuelekezwaa sisi kama serikali. Hivyo basi ni jambo zuri nani hoja nzuri lakini 
tungependa pia wakati anaijibu ambaye ameweza kuleta hoja ya leo aweze kutueleza 
tunapokagua utenda  kazi wa mfumo wa maji taka, je ina  maana kuweza kujenga maofisi 
mashinani? Maana serikali yetu wafanyi  kazi wako tayari kufanya kazi kila kata ndogo 
Mheshimiwa Spika atueleze vizuri anapoleta hoja hii ni kwamba je ina maana kwamba kila 
Wodi  iweze kujengwa ofisi? Au kugatuliwa kwa mfumo wa maj i taka utagatuliwa kwa njia gani 
Mheshimiwa Spika? Ahsante sana.   
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you I can see the Chief Whip taking the 
roles of the Majority Leader. Hon. Junior Wambua?  
 Hon.  Wambua : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika ningelitaka kuunga  mkono hoja hii, sehemu 
zengine kama zetu za Chaani ambapo yalijengwa wakati watu ni wachache saa hizi imekuwa ni 
kazi yetu sisi tunafanya ukiamka asubuhi unakuta wananchi wako pale unatakikana kwa 
mashimo na wakati huo nao unahitaji katika Bunge ni jambo ambalo nataka kumpongeza 
Mheshimiwa Faith Mwende kwa kuleta hoja kama hii...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa sababu itaweza kusaidia ili ipanuliwe tuweze kupata huduma nzuri kwa sababu 
mambo kama haya ijapokuwa Kinara wa Bunge amesema wananchi nao wanachangia sana 
katik a mambo haya ya kuharibu mitaro, wanajaza matakataka hapo kama juzi kwangu kulikuwa 
kunasafishwa nilienda katika sehemu hiyo nikaona zile takataka zilizokuwa zikitoka mahali pale 
nikaona nikashangaa sana.  Kwa hivyo hamasisho linastahili pia ili tuweze kuhi miza watu wetu 
wasije wakaharibu maji taka tu weze kupata huduma bora katika mji wa Mombasa. Naomba 
kuiunga mkono ahsante sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hamida?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Hamida Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity . I 
cong ratulate my fellow Member of the Assembly who has brought this Motion. It is true that we 
need to decentralize  these sewerage systems because the sewers are running a lot and the people 
have increased and we need to do this thing like yesterday , so I do supp ort this Motion and 
congratulate Member of the Assembly for bringing this Motion. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Thoya, you the reason as to why I 
have not given you time to at least say something it's because we are guided by Standing O rders 
and in our Standing Order 78 (1) it clearly show that you cannot speak twice on the same issue 
but for today Hon. Thoya and this will be an example to all the Hon. Members when you second 
you can just nod by seconding or any sign of seconding so that  you are not exempted from 
building your issues when debate time comes, you can proceed Hon. Thoya.  
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Spika naona hiyo ndio sababu ingekuwa mimi ni askari wa 
peponi unapata tikiti ya moja kwa moja kuingia. Nataka kuchukua naf asi hii kuunga mkono hoja 
hii na kusema ni hoja ambayo imekuja wakati unaostahili na ni vizuri kama tunazungumzia 
tuzungumzie . Tukiangalia eneo nzima la Mombasa kuna sehemu ambazo masuala haya ya maji 
taka ama mabombo ambayo yanazungumziwa hapa hayajafika n i sehemu ndogo sana ya 
Mombasa ambayo kufikia saa hii huduma  hii iko na kule ambako iko pia ilijengwa miaka ya 
nyuma sana kwamba ilikuwako itahudumia watu kama 1000 . 
June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  Saa hii sehemu hi zi ziko ni watu zaidi ya 50,000 kwenda juu, ipo haja kwamba ukarabati 
huo uf anywe na pia ningependa kukumbusha Jumba hili sio wakati wa kunyoosha vidole 
mwananchi kwa sababu sisi tuko na asasi zote, yule mwananchi anatupa taka kuna kitengo 
kamili hapa cha kinahakikisha kwamba zile sheria zinatiliwa mkazo. Tuko na kitengo cha 
Inspectorate  wale wahalifu ataka e onekana anatupa taka anatakikana ashikwe aletwe kortini 
tunataka tuanze kuona hiyo kama kuna watu ambao si watiifu wanachafua mazingira tuone kile 
kitengo kile ni wajibika .  
 Kila mmoja anavyojua mwananchi wa kawaida anakosa ufa hamu na kukosa ufahamu uko 
isiwe ni hukumu kwetu sisi kwamba hatutawajibika kama Kaunti au serikali ya Kaunti ya 
Mombasa ni lazima tuwajibike na ninaomba iwezekanavyo sehemu nyingi za Mombasa Kaunti 
ziweze kupewa huduma hii ya maji taka na pia tuweze kuang alia hawa watu ambao wako katika 
kutengeneza hizi sehemu nyingi sana ziko na ile kitu inaitwa illegal connection  sijui kwa 
Kiswahili tutaita vipi? Utanisamehe ni kosa lengine hilo lakini nasikitika kwamba juzi nilikuwa 
nafanya msako huo kila ukichukua maof isa wetu ukienda hapo wanasema kosa ni letu, ukienda 
wanasema kosa ni letu sasa ile illegal connection  haifanywi na wananchi wa kawaida inafanywa 
na maofisa wetu.  
 Nataka kuchukua nafasi hii kusema shida iko nyumbani, shida iko nyumbani na ipo haja 
tujipang e kama nyumbani kabla tutoke, tutoke wasafi. Hawa maafisa wetu hususan  ile Kamati 
husika najua kitengo hicho kiko sehemu ya maji tuwaite tuwaambie mbele ya m acho yao kwa 
sababu hii iko wazi kwamba kuna mtu alitoa mlungula  akaunganishiwa choo chake inamw agika 
sasa leo unaona kinyesi wazi kabisa ndio hicho kinaelea kwa maji, kinaelea kwa maji kila 
kukicha, kwani atakuwa Gavana akitukanwa kila siku si Gavana kuna watu ambao 
wanamuwakilisha Gavana kule nyanjani ? Kila mmoja amefika wakati awajibike na ambaye 
hatawajibika kuna watu wengi ambao wako tayari kuwajibika hatutakubali Kaunti hii ya 
Mombasa iregeshwe nyuma na watu wawili , watatu.  Tunampa kongole Waziri wa Mazingira hii 
sehemu ya takataka amejaribu Kibarani sasa tunaona maua yanapandwa pale ni lazima tuipe  
kongole hiyo Kamati na Wizara husika...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Huku kwengine huku nako ni lazima twende tutazama kuzama mpaka pale mambo 
yatakuwa sawa Kaunti  Mombasa ama sivyo  sitaregelea tena nikiambiwa ni unge mkono  
nitakataa...  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Manake mimi napenda kuc hanja masuala. Ahsante.   
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members I can see you have exhausted the 
debate of Motion, I would now call upon the Mover of the Motion to respond before we proceed. 
Yes Hon. Faith?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kushuk uru Waheshimiwa wote 
ambao wamechangia na kuunga mkono hoja hii ; najua pia wale hawajaongea walikuwa na nia 
hiyo hiyo kwa vile mahali tunapotoka kuko hivyo hivyo na kama hili jambo litatiliwa manani 
hatutakuwa na majanga ya mikurupuko ya magonjwa ambayo ha yajafika Kaunti zengine na 
tutakuwa tukiongoza kwa mambo ya usafi na watu watakuwa wanakuja ku  benchmark  huku  na 
wale ambao wamepatiwa hiyo kazi ya kutuhakikishia mazingira ni mazur i. 
June 20, 2018                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           44 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  Hizo connection utaniwia radhi kama hawawezi kufanya kazi waweze kupumz ishwa 
wengine wapatiwe hiyo kazi kwa vile jina la Gavana haliwezi chafuliwa kwa watu wachache 
sababu kila kitu kikiwa kibaya unasikia ni Gavana. Kwa hivyo kama hawawezi kufanya kazi ni 
wapumzishwe wengine wachukue hiyo kazi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
(Question put)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members I now stand to put a question that the 
Motion by Hon. Faith Mwende on Decentralization  of the sewerage systems in the  County be 
approved in this Hon orable  House . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Having there no other business the House stand s adjourned until tomorrow the 21st 
Thursday at 2 :30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 3 :10p.m. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 