July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesd ay, 18th July, 2023  
Third Assembly – Fourty Fifth Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:26p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Speaker ( Honourable  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Members you may be seated.  
 
[Silence]  
 
Serjeant -At-Arms, please ring the bell for ten minutes . 
 
[The Serjeant -At-Arms rung the q uorum bell] 
 
Yes, Clerk please confirm if we  have the q uorum?  
 
[Quorum confirmed]  
 
         Next order please,  Clerk?  
 
PAPER S  
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF ENGINEER ALBERT  KENO , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
CHIEF OFFICER TRANSP ORT AND INFRASTRUCTU RE 
 
Yes, Chairperson C ommittee on Transport and infrastructure or any other Member to lay 
down the Paper.  
 
[Silence]  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I wish to lay down the P aper, Report 
on the vetting for E ngineer Albert Keno for the position Chief Office Transport and 
infrastructure , Mombasa County.  
 
[Paper laid]  
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very muc h Honourable  Juma Manuari for laying 
down the P aper. Yes, Clerk next order please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . ALI ABDULRAHMAN , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
CHIEF OFFICER LANDS , URBAN PLANNING AND H OUSING  
 
Yes, Chairperson Committee on Lands, Urban Pl anning and Housing . 
 
[Silence]  
 
If, she is not there, any  other Member to lay the P aper.  
 
Hon. Ngugi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I wish to lay Paper of the R eport of vetting of 
Mr. Abdulrahman , the Nominee for the position of Chief Officer Lands, Urban plan ning and 
Housing.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Solomon Ngugi for 
laying down the P aper. Yes Clerk, next order please.  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . KHAMIS KURICHWA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
CHIEF OFFICER Y OUTH GENDER AND SOCI AL SERVICES  
 
Honourable  Members, Chairperson Committee on Youth, Gender, Sports and social 
service or any other Member l ay the P aper.  
 
Hon. Moraa:  Thank you Mr. Speake r Sir. I wish to lay the P aper, Report on the vetting 
of Mr. Hamisi K urichwa , the Nominee for the position of Chief Officer Youth Gender and social 
Service s in Mombasa County.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Milka Mora a for laying 
down the P aper. Yes, Clerk next order please.  
 
REPORT  ON THE VETTING OF MR S. JUSTINA MWIKYA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
CHIEF OFFICER PUBLIC  SERVICE ADMINISTRATI ON 
 
Honourable  Members , Chairperson Committee on Labour and Public Service 
Administration or an y other Member, please lay the P aper.  
 
Hon. Nusu ra Mwinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I wish to lay the Paper,  Report on the 
vetting of Mrs. Justina Mwikiya the nominee for the  position Chief Officer Public Service 
Administration as Vice -Chair Nusura Mwinyi Kimuswa C ommittee on Labour and Public 
Service  administration.  
 
[Paper laid]  
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Nusura , Vice -Chair 
Committee on Labour and Publ ic Service for laying down the P aper. Yes Clerk, next order 
please.  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . SWALE H MWALIZUMA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSI TION OF 
CHIEF OFFICER TOURIS M, CULTURE AND TRADE  
 
Yes Honourable  Abdirahman Hussein , Chairperson Committee on Trade, Tourism and 
Culture  please lay the P aper.  
 
Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir:  Thank you Mr. S peaker. I wish to lay down the Pa per 
on the R eport on vetting of Swale h Mwalizuma , Nominee for the position of Chief Officer 
Trade, Tourism and Culture. Thank you.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Abdulrahman Abdulkadir , 
Chairperson Committee on Trade, Touri sm and Culture for laying down the Paper. Yes, Clerk 
next order please.  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . JIMMY WALIAULA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
COUNTY ATTORNEY  
 
Yes Honourable  Members.  
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim: I wish to lay the Paper on v etting of Mr. Ji mmy Waliaula , the 
Nominee for the position of County Attorney.   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Maimuna for laying down the Paper. 
Yes Clerk , next order please.   
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF NOMINEES FOR ME MBERS OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE  
BOARD REPRESENTING T HE PUBLIC : MR. SWABIR MASOUD AND MS . LYNETTE KAMADI  
 
Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I would like to lay the Report on the v etting of 
Nominees for Members of the  County Assembly Service Board r epresenting the Public. Thank 
you. 
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi for 
laying down the P aper. Yes Clerk next order please.  
 
NOTICE S OF MOTION  
 ADOPTION OF REPORT O N THE VETTING OF ENG INEER ALBERT KENO , THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF CHI EF OFFICER , TRANSPORT AND INFRAS TRUCTURE  
 
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon ourable  Members , any Member from the 
Committee on T ransport and infrastructure ? Please issue the Notice of M otion.  
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota: Thank you Chair, thank you Mr. Speaker . I la y the M otion , 
adoption of Report on the vetting of E ngineer Albert Keno, the Nominee for the position of 
Chief Officer Transport and Infrastructure.  Mr. Speaker, I beg t o give notice of the following 
Motion;  
 
THAT this House adopts the Rep ort on the v etting of Engineer  Albert Keno, the Nominee 
for the position of Chief Officer , Transport and Infrastructure laid on the T able on 
Tuesday, 18th July, 2023.   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Member for giving the 
Notice of M otion . Yes Cl erk, next order please.  
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT O N THE VETTING OF MR . ALI ABDULRAHMAN , THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF CHIEF OF FICER LANDS , URBAN PLANNING AND H OUSING  
 
Yes Honourable  Solomon Ngugi.  
 
Hon. Ngugi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker, I beg t o give notice of the 
following M otion;  
 
THAT this House adopts the Report on the v etting of Mr. Ali Abdulrahman, the Nominee 
for the position of Chief Officer Lands, Urban Planning and Housing laid on the T able 
on Tuesday, 18th July, 2023 . 
 
Thank you, Mr. Sp eaker Sir.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Y es Clerk , next order please.   
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT O N THE VETTING OF MR . KHAMIS KURICHWA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF CHIEF OF FICER YOUTH , GENDER AND SOCIAL SE RVICES  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Milka Moraa.  
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I beg to give Notice on the  Adoption on Report 
on the v etting of Mr. Khamis Kurichwa, the Nominee for the position of Chief Officer Youth, 
Gender and Social Services;  
 
THAT THIS House adopts the R eport on the v etting  of Mr. Khamis Kurichwa, the 
Nominee for the position of Chief Officer Youth, Gender a nd Social Services laid on the 
Table on Tuesday, 18th July, 2023 . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Milka Moraa . Yes Clerk , 
next order please.  
 
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 ADOPTION  OF REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MS . JUSTINA MWIKYA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF CHIEF OF FICER PUBLIC SERVICE  ADMINISTRATION  
Yes, Vice C hair please give the Notice of Motion.  
 
Hon. Nusura Mwinyi: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker, I beg t o give notice of  the 
following M otion;  
 
THAT THIS House adopts the Report on the v etting of Ms. Justina Mwikya, the Nominee 
for the position of Chief Officer Public Service Administration laid on the T able on 
Tuesday, 18th July, 2023.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir.   
 
The Sp eaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Nusura Mwinyi . Yes Clerk , next 
order please.  
   
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . SWALEH MWALIZUMA , THE NOMINEE FOR 
THE POSITION OF CHIE F OFFICER TOURISM , CULTURE AND TRADE  
 
Yes Honourable  Abdulrahman Abdulk adir, Chairperson Committee on Trade, T ourism, 
please issue the Notice of M otion.  
 
Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir:  Thank you.  Mr. Speaker as the Chairman of the 
Trade, Tourism and Culture C ommittee , I beg to give notice of the following Motion;  
 
THAT THIS House adopts the Report on the v etting of Mr. Swaleh Mwalizuma, the 
Nominee for the position of Chief Officer Tourism,  Culture and Trade laid on the T able 
on Tuesday, 18th July, 2023 . 
 
Thank you.   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Abdulrahman 
Abdulkadir. Yes, Clerk next order please.  
   
ADOPTION OF REPORT O N THE VETTING OF MR . JIMMY WALIAULA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF COUNTY A TTORNEY  
  
Yes Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi, Member of the Committee on A ppointment , please 
issue the notice.  
 
Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker, I beg t o give notice of the 
following M otion;  
 
THAT THIS House ad opts the Report on the v etting of Mr. Jimmy Waliaula , the Nominee 
for the position of County Attorney laid on the T able on Tuesday, 18th July, 2023 . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable Ibrahim Omondi. Y es 
Clerk , next order please.  
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6  
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF NOMINEES FOR ME MBERS OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE 
BOARD REPRESENTING T HE PUBLIC ; MR. SWABIR MASOUD AND MS . LYN ETTE K HAMADI  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi , please give the N otice of Motion.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker once again. Mr. Speaker, I beg t o give notice of 
the following M otion;  
  
THAT THIS House adopts the Report on the  vetting of Nominees for Mem bers of the 
County Assembly Service Board Representing the Public: Mr. Swabir Masoud and M s. 
Lynette Khamadi laid on the T able on Tuesday, 18th July, 2023 . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Ibrahim Oyugi . Yes 
Clerk , next order plea se.  
 
MOTION   
ADJOURNMENT OF THE C OUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes Honourable  Maimuna.  
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim : Mr. Speake r, I beg to move the following M otion;  
 
THAT pursuant to Standing Order 25 (4), this House RESOLVES to adjourn today, 18th 
July, 2023 and resume its s ittings on Tuesday, 25th July, 2023.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Honourable  Maimuna Salim , Deputy Leader of M ajority 
party can you please read again your Motion?  
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Mr. Speaker S ir, I beg to move the following M otion; 
 
That pursuant to Standing Order 25 (4), this House resolves to adjourn today 18th July, 
2023 and resume its sittings on Tuesday, 25th July, 2023.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, t hank you. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes, who is the Seconder? Yes Hon ourable  Fadhi li? 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M akarani) : Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker. Hon ourable  
Speaker , I stand to second the M otion by Hon ourable  Maimuna Salim on adjourning from 18th 
July, 2023 and resuming on Tuesday 25th July, 2023. Thank you.   
 
The Speaker  (Hon. K hatri): Thank you very much. Hon ourable  Members , I now  propose 
the question that the M otion by Hon ourable  Maimuna Salim on adjournment of the County 
Assembly be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same term as moved . 
 
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 [Question proposed and agreed t o] 
 
Yes Hon ourable  Maimuna , the Deputy of the M ajority party, please  make your 
contribution to the M otion?  
 
 Hon. Maimuna Salim : Mheshimiwa Spika nishukuru. N imeomba kwamba Bunge hili 
kidogo twende katika mapumziko kulingana na kazi ambazo ziko kwa  wananchi za siku moja 
ama siku mbili ili tukirudi hapa tuwe na maoni yale ambayo tutakua tumechukua kutoka kwa 
wananchi.  Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika ninaomba ya kwamba Bunge hili liende kwa 
mapumziko mpaka tarehe ishi rini na tano ambayo itakuwa ni J umanne i takayo kuja.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Maimuna . Yes Hon ourable  Fadhili 
Mwalimu Makarani , the seconder of the M otion please give your contribution?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M akarani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika , mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii iliyoko mbele yetu.  Mheshimiwa Spika twajua 
kuwa tuko na majukumu ya kuwawakilisha wananchi wetu ndani ya Bunge letu na vilevile  
kutengeza M iswada. Mheshimiwa Spika , katika kuwawakilisha wananchi wetu tumeona ya 
kwamba tumepokea stakabadhi nyingi muhimu ambazo ni stakabadhi ambazo zitaweza 
kusongesha Kaunti yetu mbele ; mimi katika kupokea stak abadhi hizi nashukuru N aibu wa 
Kiongozi wa W alio Wengi B ungeni ameleta hoja hii. Mheshimiwa Spika itatupatia wakati 
muafaka wa  sisi kurudi na kupitia stakabadhi am bazo zimeletwa mbele ya Bunge  letu ili 
tutakapokuja siku ya J umanne tut akuwa ni wenye kuelewa kuisoma R ipoti vizuri na tutakuja 
hapa Mheshimiwa Spika tuwe  tutakuwa ni wenye kujadili hoja hii ama hoja hizi zi takapoletwa 
mbele ya Bunge letu . Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa hiyo na sababu nyengine ambazo Naibu wa 
Kiongozi wa W alio Wengi amesema naomba W aheshimiwa wenzangu tushirikiane pamoja 
tupitishe hoja hii ambayo iko mbele yetu ili tuweze kurudi mashinani tuone wananchi wetu. Pia 
tuweze kupitia hizi R ipoti ambazo ziko mbele yetu na tutakapokuja Mheshimiwa Spika tuwe  
tutakuwa tumerudi na ari mpya na nguvu mpya na vilevile kuweza kutekeleza majukumu yetu 
kama waliochaguliwa na wananchi . Ahsante sana kwa hayo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba 
wenzangu tuunge mkono . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Frankline , please make your 
contribution.  
 
  Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Pia mimi nasimama kuunga hoja hii 
mkono ya kw amba Mheshimiwa Spika tumepewa R ipoti hizi ambazo  zinachangia pakubwa 
katika uendeshaji serikali yetu ya G atuzi la Mombasa. Vilevile Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ka ma 
Mheshimiwa Wadi wa wana  Chaani nikiwa naomba wananchi wangu wamenikumbusha 
kwamba kati ka Katiba yetu ya Kenya kwenye Article 37 na  nimeisoma hapa  ikanikumbusha 
kwamba kesho pia kuna shughuli muhim u ya kitaifa ambayo imeitwa na Raisi wa W engi ambaye 
ni Mheshimiwa Raila Amolo Odinga i kiwa ni kati ya shughuli muhimu. Mimi kama mwakilishi 
Wadi wa Chaani ambayo nitafanya kesho kuenda kuweza ku tembea na wananchi wangu 
kuishi ndikiza serikali kushukisha bei ya bidhaa na kuondoa kodi ambazo si za kisheria ili maisha 
ya wananchi wa chaani  waweze kupata haki yao.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika u ahirishaji huu 
umekuja wakati wa sawa na nakushukuru Mheshimiwa Maimu na. Mimi kesho niko tayari 
kukimbia kimbikimbi pamoja na wananchi wangu tuweze kuhakikisha kwamba Zakayo 
ameshuka na uchumi um eweza kuimarika . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Frankline for your 
contribution . Yes Hon ourable  Ibrahim Oyugi?   
 
Hon. Omondi:  Okay Mr. Speaker , thank you for the opportunity that you have given me . 
Once again Mr. S peaker , I want to start with fellow M embers who have just echoed  what the 
mover of the M otion had in mind abou t the adjournment Motion and I bond in fully support with 
the reasons; one of  the reasons is that my fellow M embers have just said  we have responsibility 
as M embers of C ounty Assembly to go through these R eports that has just been forwarded to us 
for perus al. A s you know , there is a bulk of work that needs time for us to go through line by line 
before we come and make decision ; also following from the call by Hon ourable  Raila Amollo 
Odinga , the opposition leader about the strike that will be there. Mr. Spea ker even us as  
Members we are not sure about the security that actually will be on the way when we shall be 
driving into this particular Assembly, we can never tell what is likely to happen , these M embers 
are coming to this House and it is in record th at last time even some life was  lost and therefore it 
is important that we stay away and some of us who are the crusaders of the same also participates 
in that very important call by Hon ourable  Raila Amolo Odinga.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, God 
bless you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Oyugi . Yes Hon ourable  Milka 
Moraa?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker for giving me this chance  to make my 
contribution. F irst, I want to congratulate the Deputy Majority leader Hon ourable Maimuna for 
bringing this M otion of adjournment, it is nec essary having received so many Reports 
concerning the C hief Officers, they are quite bulky and we need some valuable time to go 
through them so when we come back on Tuesday we have a proper understanding of vettin g all 
of them and so that we can also make informed decisions.  Secondly , just a s my colleagues ha ve 
said tomorrow we also need to participate in a very important activity ; that is demonstrations 
because it is our democratic right and as leaders, we need to  lead from the front so that we can 
call for the cost of living to come down because our citizen s are suffering just as much as we are 
also suffering to try and support them so we need also to participate in that activity to ensure that 
our citizens cries are high and action taken upon them.  It is an activity that is people driven and 
we cannot afford to stand here and say it has been called by former Prime Minister our party 
leader Raila Amolo Odinga. It is a people driven activity and we must go out there  and support 
our people and I am calling upon our colleagues that we meet tomorrow without fear of what is 
being spread to us on social media so that we also pick it we demonstrate to show that we are not 
satisfied with what this punitive government runnin g its activities with that I ask that we may 
meet tomorrow . Thank you so much Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much. Yes Hon ourable  Mbaya, please make 
your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Hamisi Mbaya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. 
Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi ningependa kumuunga mkono Mheshimiwa mwenza ambaye ni 
kiongozi ama ni mdo go wa Kiongozi wa Wengi katika B unge hili. Mheshimiwa Spika naiunga 
mkono hoja hii kwa asilimia tisini kwa mia kwa sababu kutokana na majukumu ambayo tuko 
nayo hasa mimi ambaye nimetoka katika Kata ndogo ilio  kubwa kwa idadi ya jamii na pia kwa 
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 ukubwa wa mipaka . Mheshimiwa Spika nikijiangalia mimi naona niko na vijiji arobaini na tisa 
ndani ya kata yangu ndogo ambayo nime toka; naona nitakuwa nimepata fursa ambayo si  mbaya 
kwangu hasa kwa ule uwakilishi ambao ndugu zangu waliweza kunichagua niwawakilishe wa 
kata ndogo ya Timbwani. Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika sina sababu yoyote ya  kuweza kupinga 
kwamba tusimamishe Bunge hili mpak a Mungu akipenda mpaka tarehe 25 ambayo tunatarajia 
ambayo tutarudi.  Mheshimiwa Spika , hatujasema leo tunafunga Bunge hili kwa sababu ya 
kwenda kwa mapumziko , bali tumefunga Bunge hili haswa kwenda kuchapa kazi zaidi kama vile 
tunavyochapa kazi tukiwa tuko katika Bunge hili. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasema a hsante sana 
na pia niwaombe Waheshimiwa wenza katika mazungumzo ambayo tunaendelea nayo saa hii 
waweze kuliu nga mkono swala hili kama vile a mbavyo nimeweza kutangulia kuli unga mkono 
kama vile ndugu zangu ambavyo wameweza kuunga mkono hoja hii ambayo imetolewa na 
Naibu wa Kiongozi wa wengi ambaye ni Mheshimiwa Maimuna. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Arwa , please make your 
contrib ution.  
 
Hon. Ojala:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to also contribute . 
Before I proceed I want to congratulate the Deputy Majority Leader for this Motion and I also 
stand to support this Motion because it has stated that we have a lot  of work to do outside there 
to our electorate . And again I want to join hands with our fellow Honorable Members who have 
said that tomorrow according to Article 37 of the Constitution tomorrow there is a very big day 
for us as leaders in this Country. We m ust show solidarity as the Mombasa County Assembly 
because Mr. Speaker I want to make it very clear, this issue is not about Hon ourable  Raila 
Odinga or Hon ourable  William Ruto, our people are suffering and we must stand by our people 
and we must show them love…  
 
[Appl ause]  
 
That we are the true leaders they elected. Mr. Speaker , before I rest my contribution, I 
also want to thank you as Hon ourable  Speaker, always you standing with us. Always you give us 
the right direction and we are very happy as the Hono urable Members of th e Mombasa County to 
have a very wonderful Hon ourable  Speaker in this House…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
And Hon ourable  Speaker , it is not that I have said because you  are there, we are proud of 
you, you are our dad, we love you, we adore you Mr. Speaker and we shall continue to stan d 
with you . Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Applause]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Honourable Member. Yes 
Honourable  Priscilla , please make your contribution.  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nimesimam a 
kuunga mkono hoja hii iliyoletwa na Queen Mother of the House  ambaye ni Naibu Kiongozi wa 
walio wengi na ametupa jukumu la kuwa tufunge kwa muda kwa ajili ya ile kazi ambayo leo 
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 tumepewa mikononi ya kuangalia hawa ma Chief Officers  ambao wamependekezwa n a 
wakapitisha na mambo yao na kuelimisha watu wetu katika Wadi zetu ili waweze kuelewa  
ikijaliwa Jumanne nikirudi hapa, napitisha mtu wa aina gani na ni mtu gani na ana visomo vya 
aina gani na ana ujuzi ya kazi gani ? Kwa sababu hayo ni maswali huwa tunakut ana nayo katika 
Wadi zetu wakati tukipitisha viongozi hapa wanatuuliza, “huyo uliyepitisha, je ulimjuaje? Yuko 
vipi?” Kwa hivyo tunapatikana na hizi changamoto lakini leo Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimekushukuru sana  kwa kukubali hoja hizi zichuku e muda kiasi cha s iku nne, siku tano 
tukiomba ruhusa ya Nyumba  hii ili tuweze kwenda kuchambu a makaratasi haya vizuri na tuje 
hapa ikiwa bongo zetu ziko sawa na wawakilishi wetu wakiju a tunaenda kuwapatia watu wa 
kufanya nao kazi na kusaidiana na sisi ili tuweze kuendeleza K aunti yetu ya Mombasa.  
Pili, nikimshukuru pia Mheshimiwa Maimuna ambaye ni Naibu wa Kiongozi wa Wengi 
katika hili Bunge, ningesema na unga mkono kwa mambo ya hata maandamano ambayo 
yatakuwa hapo kesho kutwa nikiwa mimi ni askari mmoja ambaye tumekuwa katika  harakati 
hizo Mheshimiwa Spika ; na nakumbuka vizuri sana wakati mmoja tukiwa na yeye Nairobi 
nikipinduka mara tatu nae akaja akanikalia juu na kusema wacha niuawe mimi ili wewe upone 
bado wewe ni mdogo. Tulianguka na akawa juu yangu na Mheshimiwa Maimuna ali kanyagwa 
kisawa sawa na tukatoboa ; baada ya pale akanishika akanibeba kama mtoto na akahakikisha 
ameniweka mahali pazuri. Kwa hivyo nina imani hata hiyo kesho kutwa nikikanyagwa 
Mheshimiwa Maimuna tafadhali nakuomba, Mheshimiwa Spika arudie ile kazi yake i li niweze 
kutoboa kama alivyotuamrisha leo tuende tukafanye ile kazi. Kwa nini nasema vile? Ni kwa 
sababu ya upendo wa kushirikiana katika Jumba hili. Tumekaa hapa Mheshimiwa Maimuna 
mimi na  yeye saa hizi ni mara yetu ya tatu tukiwa na yeye pamoja tumejenga u husiano m zuri 
Mheshimiwa Spika na tunaju a kuna juu na chini tunapitia kama viongozi lakini tunapotoka ha pa 
tunatakikana tuwe na upendo wa kushirikiana tukiwa pamoja. Tukiona mwenzako anaumia, 
tukiona mwenzako amezidiwa hata katika Wadi ya ke twendeni tukasaidiane na tukab ebane 
maana safari hii musione huwa ni safari rahisi. Kwa sasa utajiona uko sawa, kwa sasa utaona 
Wadi yako iko sawa, lakini itafikia wakati utataka nguvu za wenzako.  
Kwa hivyo umoja ni nguvu na utengano ni udha ifu; wacha tuwe pamoja na ikiwa ni 
kubebana, ikiwa wale tunajulikana tuko wanyonge kidogo, tusaidiane maana yake wengine 
shock absorbers  zaenda zikiisha si kama zile za juzi na jana. Twayataka kweli lakini tukifika 
pale lazima niwe nyuma ya Mheshimiwa Manuari akipigw a tear gas  mimi nahepa naju a yeye 
atanibeba kama mwanangu ahakikishe mama yuko pahali pema. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika 
naomba hata hawa vijana wawe mstari wa mbele na sisi kina mama tuwe nyuma tukisimama na 
wao ili tuhakikishe kama ni jambo hilo kesho kut wa likipita, isiwe kuwa tunaonekana mbona 
kina mama hawaonekani? Aaha! Sisi tushakula tear gas  za kutosha wanangu hata nyinyi sasa 
mukiziramba sisi tuwe nyuma yenu….  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Honourable  Member, you are not giving us a speech here , 
you are not in a rally. So please when you are addressing, you address the Hon ourable  Speaker…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): So wind up…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Chief Whi p (Hon. Mumba ): Nilikuwa tu najaribu kuchangawiza tu ili watu angalau 
waone umuhimu wa hiyo s iku Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi naju a wewe unaelewa kila kitu 
kinachoendelea. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo , please give 
your contribution.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Going by the mood of the House, would I be 
in order to seek your permission to invite the mover of the Motion to respond. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Honour able Members … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Leila , you want to make your contribution please then I can give the 
chance to…  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi k uweza kunipa nafasi. Kwanza 
naunga mkono hoja iliyokuja na Mheshimiwa mwenza ambaye ni Naibu wa Kiongozi w a Wengi 
Bungeni namp ongeza sana kwa sababu  sisi hapa kwanza tunawakilisha wananchi wetu na pia 
tunawakilisha mashinani hata na Bungeni. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hata wale wananchi 
pia wanatuhijati wak ati mwengine tuwe karibu na wao , hivyo basi  mimi ningeomba tukifunga 
hapa hili Bunge, turudi mashinani twende tukakae karibu na wananchi wetu na tuone ni 
changa moto gani zingine zimechipuka kule maana changa moto haziishi. Kwa hivyo mimi pia 
nauunga mkono hio hoja hio na upande mwengine pia  nimesikia wenzangu wakisema maswala 
ya maandamano. Maandamano yako kesho, ni kuanzia kesho na mimi pia nitakuwa mmoja wao 
kama kiongozi nikiwakilisha wananchi wangu pale mashinani na pia sio kwamba kama vile 
wenzangu wamesema sio kwamba ni maandamano ya Mheshimiwa Raila na Mheshimiwa Ruto 
ni maswala ya wananchi wetu. Kusema la kweli Mheshimiwa Spika uchumi umepanda, maisha 
yamekuwa magumu kwa wananchi wetu , kama vile unavyosikia bidhaa zimepanda, nauli ya 
usafiri imekuwa juu mambo yamekuwa magumu zaidi. S asa sisi kuandamana kwetu sio kwamba 
tunapigana ama tunafanya nini? Tunataka wananchi wetu waweze kupunguziwa vile vitu kama 
ni hayo maswala ya bidhaa, ushuru na usafiri vyote vishuke sisi tutakuwa tu na amani hatuna 
shida na wala hatuna vita na mtu na hat upuri mawe, hatupigi polisi tuna andamana kwa amani.  
Kwa hivyo hapo pia tunahitaji usalama wa kutosha kama vile wenzangu wamesema sisi 
kina mama shock absorbers  zinaenda zikiisha, tunahitaji vijana watulinde kama mimi nahitaji 
Mheshimiwa Ogutu pale mbele a weze kuwa mbele na kunilinda nisiweze kupatikana na lololote. 
Ni juzi tu nimeumia mguu hapa nafikiri mumeniona hata kwa facebook , nimeumia mguu hapa, 
tumetolewa mbio pale na ma tear gas  lakini unaelewa umri tena Mheshimiwa Spika , siwezi 
kukimbia kama vile v ijana. Kwa hivyo ningeomba usalama uwe wa kutosha na ma bouncer  wetu 
hapa tunao Waheshimiwa waweze kutulinda pale mbele tufanye maandamano yetu kwa amani. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair ] 
July 18 , 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Re port is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 [The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fad hili M akarani) in the Chair]  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Makarani ):  Thank you Hon ourable  Leila. Yes Hon ourable  
Maimuna please reply to your Motion.  
 
The Deputy Leader of Majority  (Hon. Maimuna Salim) : Mheshimiwa Spika 
ninashukuru Waheshimiwa wenza kwa kuunga mkono hoja  hii na n inaomba Mwenyezi Mungu 
atujaali e masikizano ya kudumu na atujaali e sote tutakao kwenda kwa maandamano, wananchi 
wetu na sisi tufanye maandamano ya amani malengwa yetu ni vitu vishuke na wananchi wetu ni 
lazima tuonyeshe ya kwamba tumeshikana na wao. Kwa hivyo mimi ninaomba Mungu 
atuhifadhi, atulinde na atujaali e maandamano yawe ya amani kulilia haki na kama tunavyo ona, 
umri unaendelea kusonga . Mheshimiwa Maimuna yule wa jana si wa leo , kwa hivyo 
tunawahitaji Waheshimiwa wenza hawa wa  kiume waweze  kutuangalia kwa jicho la huruma 
akiona ya kwamba tumelemewa sisi kama kina mama waweze kutusaidia. Kwa hivyo ninauu nga 
mkono na tuko pamoja kesho ’ nitaweza kusema ya kwamba sisi kama kina mama tujipange na 
twende kwa maandamano kwa sababu tuna watu ambao p ia wanatuangalia na sisi tunale a kwa 
sababu ya wananchi wetu. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , nina washukuru Waheshimiwa 
wenza wote.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Maimuna, The Deputy 
Majority Leader. Honourable Members, I now put the qu estion that the Motion by Hon ourable  
Maimuna Salim, The Deputy Majority Leader on Adjournment of County Assembly  be approved 
by this Honourable House in the same terms.  
 
[Question put and agreed t o] 
   
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hono urable Members , the House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 25th July, 2023 at 
10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:20 p.m. 