April 18, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 18th April , 201 7 
The House  met at 2:45p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ): Members  you may  sit down. Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Thank you, I have got a number of communication s. Hon.  Members  of this First 
Assembly of Mombasa, welcome to the commencement of th e last Fifth Session of this first 
Assembly.  As you  are aware we did pass the calendar of the Assembly for the year 2017 and 
we have just come  from a recess which commenced on 31st March 2107. The recess was very 
necessary  as it accorded us an opportunity to go back to our electorate  and seek a fresh the 
mandate to serve them for another term.  I am proud to report that in Mombasa we have 
maintained peace and we intend to continue being peaceful . Divisive politics and incitem ent 
have no place in our County .  
We are in  the process of party nominations. We p ray that peace prevails. This week 
the nominations will be taking place a As a House we must agree on how we shall conduct 
our business and preferably adjourn to enable nominations to take place.  Hon.  Members  this 
Assembly has business , especially Bills that it has to pass before its term ends. We are all 
aware that we shall be proceeding for recess sine die  commencing 16th June 2017 and by then 
we ought to have finalized transa cting the pending business. Each Committee with pending 
business to expedite their conclusion , before 15th June 2017.   
May the Al mighty God guide us in all our endeavours . Hon.  Members  once again 
welcome to the last part of the fifth session which also marks the end of the First Assembly.  
Thank you . Yes Clerk ? 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
Yes Leader of Majority . 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I stand on a  
Procedural Motion , adjournment of the County Assembly . 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ) moved the Procedural Motion)  
Pursuant to the provisions of Standing Orders 28 and 49 (b) this House adjourns and 
will resume its normal sitting on Tuesday 25th April, 2017.  In fact Mr. Speaker am happy to 
move this  Motion because we are as  an Assembly from  the ODM party and actually upto now 
we have never gone for the nominations and we are ex pecting our nominations starting from 
tomorrow so that is why I have just stood up to move this adjournment . Thank you Sir.  
(Consultation s) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ): Yes Hon. I brahim Kondo , you want to 
second the Motion?  
(Hon. Ibrahim Kondo seconded the Motion by bowing ) 
Yes Hon.  Leader of Majority.  
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank  you Mr. Speaker . I move  the Motion 
Pursuant to the provisions of Standing Orders 28 and 49 (b) that this House adjourns and will 
resume its normal sitting on Tuesday 25th April, 2017. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ): Thank you sir, Members  as move d, yes 
Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
April 18, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              45 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Thank you, Members  there  being  no other business this House is adjourn ed as per the 
Motion  which has been passed . Thank you.  
The House rose at  2:51p.m. 
 