July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesd ay, 25th July, 2023  
Third Assembly – Fourty Sixth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  9:57a.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Speaker ( Honourable  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Honourable Members , we may be seated . 
 
[Silence ] 
 
Clerk , please confirm if we have quorum?  
 
[Lack of  quorum ] 
 
Serjeant-At-Arms , under Standing Order 31 (2) please ring the bell for 10 minutes?  
 
[The Se rjeant -At-Arms rung the quoru m bell] 
[Silence ] 
 
Clerk , confirm if we have quorum?  
 
[Quorum confirmed]  
 
 Yes Clerk next Order please?  
 
PAPER S 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . JIBRIL MAALIM , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF CHIEF 
OFFICER POLICY AND P LANNING  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Yes Member on a Committee on Appointments, yes 
Honourable  Ibrahim Oyugi?  
 
Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker , I stand to lay the R eport on the 
vetting of the Nominee for the position of Chief Officer Policy and Planning of Mr. Jibril 
Maalim.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 [Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Honourable  Ibrahim Oyugi for laying down the 
Paper. Yes Clerk , next Order please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MS . RUKIYA ABDULRAHMAN , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION 
OF CHIEF OFFICER GOV ERNANCE  
 
Yes again Hon ourable Ibrahim Oyugi?  
 
Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker , thank you. Mr. Speaker , I would like to lay the R eport on 
vetting the position of Chief Officer Governance Ms. Rukiya Abdulrahman.  
 
[Paper Laid]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Ibrah im Oyugi for laying 
the Paper. Yes Clerk next Order please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . HAMID NANDA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF CHIEF 
OFFICER BLUE ECONOMY , AGRICULTURE AND LIVE STOCK  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Mbaya , please lay the Paper?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to lay Paper Report on the vetting 
of Mr. Hamid Nanda , the Nominee for the Position of Chief Officer Blue Economy, Agriculture 
and Livestock . 
 
[Paper Laid ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you very much Vice Chair for Blue Econ omy, 
Agriculture and Livestock Honourable  Mbaya for laying the Paper. Yes Clerk next Order please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MS . MARIAN MAPENZI , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
CHIEF OFFICER , WATER AND SANITATION  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Juma Mwalimu, Chairperson C ommittee on Environment and Solid 
Management.  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand to lay the Paper , Report on 
vetting of Ms. Pauline Oginga , the N ominee for the position Chief Officer Environment a nd 
Solid Waste Management.  
 
[Paper  laid]  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Clerk, next order please?  
 
REPORT OF MS MARIAN MAPENZI , THE NOMINEE OF THE P OSITION CHIEF OFFICE R WATER 
AND SANITATION  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes M ember Committee on Water,  Natural resources and 
Climate Change Resil ience, please lay the P aper?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand to lay the P aper,  Report on 
vetting N ominee the Chief O fficer , Renewable E nergy , Climate Change R esilience Mr. John 
Kipyegon Kiprop . 
 
[Consultations ] 
 
The Chair is he re now.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon ourable  Leila Nyache , the Chairperson Committee 
on Water Natural Resources and Climate Change Resilience , please lay the P aper?  
 
Hon. Nyache : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , I wish to lay the Paper on R eport o f 
the vetting of Ms . Mirian Mapenzi , the N ominee for the position of Chief Officer Water and 
Sanitation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Leila Nyache for laying down the 
Paper. Yes Clerk , next order pl ease?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . JOHN KIPROP , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF CHIEF 
OFFICER , RENEWABLE ENERGY NAT URAL RESOURCES AND C LIMATE CHANGE RESILI ENCE  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Leila Nyache , the Chairperson Committee on Water , Natural Resources 
and Climate  Change Resilience , please lay the P aper?  
 
Hon. Nyache : Thank you Mr. Speaker once again.  Mr. Speaker I wish to lay the Paper, 
Report on the vetting of Mr. John Kiprop , the N ominee for  the position of Chief Officer 
Renewable E nergy , Natural Resources and C limate Change R esilience . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Paper  laid] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you again Honourable  Leila , Yes Clerk next Order 
please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF DR . SHEM PATTA , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF CHIEF 
OFFICER OF CLINICAL SERVICES  
 
Yes?  
 
Hon. M akanga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to lay the Paper on R eport on the 
approval hearing of Dr. Shem Onyango Patta , the N ominee for appointment as County Chief 
Officer for the County Department of Health Clinical services.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 [Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very mu ch Vice C hair, Committee on Health 
Honourable  Frankli ne Makanga for laying down the P aper.  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . ABDALLAH DANELO , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION 
CHIEF OFFICER OF PUB LIC HEALTH AND DISEA SE PREVENTION  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon ourable  Ngugi?  
 
Hon. Ngugi : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to lay P aper on R eport of the vetting of Mr. 
Abdallah Danelo , the N ominee for th e position of Chief Officer of Public H ealth and disease 
prevention.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Solomon Ngugi , Member of 
Comm ittee on Health for laying the P aper. Yes Clerk , next order please?  
 
REPORT OF DR . ROSELINE RANDU , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF CHIEF OF FICER 
EDUCATION  
 
Yes Honoura ble Allen Katana Chairperson Committee on Education and Digital 
Transformation please lay the P aper?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity and considering the 
fact that time is overdue and because of that I also wish to lay the  Report on vetting of Dr. 
Roseline Randu , the Nominee for the position of Chief O fficer Education. Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
[Paper  Laid]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. K hatri): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Allen Katana for laying 
down the P aper. Yes C lerk, next orde r please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MR . ANWAR SAID , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF CHIEF 
OFFICER DIGITAL TRAN SFORMATION  
 
Yes again Hon ourable  Allen Katana , Chairperson Committee on Education and Digital 
Transformation please lay the P aper?  
 
Hon. Katana : Thank you Mr. Speaker and my C ommi ttee is among the heavy weight 
Committees which has two Chief O fficers and because of that I also wish to lay down the R eport 
on vetting of Mr. Anuar , the N ominee for the position of Digital Transformation.Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Allen Katana for laying down the 
Paper. Yes Clerk , next order please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTIN G OF MS GLORIA MWASI , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF CHIEF 
OFFICER OF FINANCE A ND ECONOMIC PLA NNING  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Abdilrahman Abdulkadir , Committee on Finance Budget and 
Appropriation , please lay the P aper?  
 
Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir : Thank you . As an active Member of Finance 
Committee , I wish to lay the Report on the vetting of Ms Gloria Mwasi , the Nominee for the 
position of Chief Officer , Finance and Economic Planning.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Abdilrahma n Hussein for 
laying down the P aper. Yes C lerk, next order please?  
 
REPORT ON CORRUPTION  RISK ASSE SSMENT FOR MOMBASA C OUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Ali Sharif f? 
 
Hon. Ali Sharif f: Thank you Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Majority Leader, al low me to lay 
the paper of the Report on Corruption Risk Assessment of Mombasa County Assembly.  
 
[Paper laid]  
 
The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Ali Shari ff. Honourable  
Members , the Report on Corruption Risk A ssessment for Mombasa County Assembly  is 
committed to the Committee on Justice a nd Legal Affairs for consideration and to report back to 
the House in due cause. Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
MOTION S 
ADOPTION REPORT OF T HE VETTING OF ENGINEE R ALBERT KE INO, THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF CHIEF OF FICER TRANSPORT AND INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
Yes Honourable  Hassan Mohammed , Chairperson Committee on Transport and 
Infrastructure please move the M otion?  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speak er I beg to move the 
following M otion;  
 
That this House adopts the R eport of th e vetting of Engineer Albert Ke ino, the N ominee 
for th e position of Chief Office r of T ransport and Infrastructure laid on the T able on 
Tuesday 18th of July , 2023.  
 
The Speaker ( Hon. Khatri) : Who is your Seconder?  
 
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Hon. Hassan Mohamed : I ask my friend Honourable  Manuari to second.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Mr. Spe aker Sir I raise to second  the M otion.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable  Members . Honourable  Members , I 
now propose the question that the M otion by Hon ourable  Hassan Mohamed on adoption of 
Report of the vetting of Engineer Albert Keino , the N ominee for the position of Chie f Officer of 
Transport and Infrastructure be considered by this Honourable House in the same term as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Hassan Mo hamed, Chairperson Committee on Transport and 
Infrastructure please  make your contributi on to the M otion?  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed : Ahsante Bwana Spika kulingana na R ipoti ambayo iliweza  
kuandikwa kuhusiana na Engineer Albert Keino nafikiri nitaweza kupitia tu seh emu ya mwisho 
ambayo ni tamati na mapendekezo na vilevile mimi kama  Mwenyekiti ninge penda kuomba 
Bunge W aheshimiwa wenzangu kwamba nina imani kubwa Chief Officer  Albert Keino ana  
tajriba ya kutosha kwa nafasi hii ili kuweza kufanikisha mengi katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa .  
‘After thorough vetting of E ngineer Albert Keino , the Nominee for t he position of Chief 
Officer Transport and carefully considering the procedure used in the selection process 
including the criteria for shortlisting candidates, their credentials , experience, capacity , 
suitability , integrity and abilities the Committee on Transport and I nfrastructure is pleased to 
announce its recommendation p ursuant to section 9(2) of the Public Appointments County 
Assembly Approval Act number 5 of 2017, the C ommittee in its meeting held on Friday 2nd June , 
2023 is satisfied with the N omin ees suitability for the position . Therefore , the C ommittee 
recommend s to the County Assembly the approval of Engineer Albert Keino ’s appointment by 
His E xcellency t he Governor to the position of Chief O fficer , Transport and Infrastructure. 
Additional ly, the  Commi ttee urges the adoption of the R eport on the vetting exercise’ ,  
 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon ourable  Member , make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Kimari: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi ni mmoja wapo 
wa K amat i ya Uchukuzi  na Chief O fficer  ambaye R ipoti yake imeletwa hapa siku ya leo  aliweza 
kupitia katika K amati yetu na tukiangalia zile qualification  zilikuwa zina hitaj ika katika kwake 
ndio aweze kupata nafasi ukiangalia upande wa academic qualifications  utaon a yuko na 
Bachelor Degree S cience Engineering kutoka Chuo Kikuu cha Nairobi. K wa hivyo hii ni moja 
wapo wa hizi qualification  zilikuwa zahitajika ako nazo. Tukiangalia upande wa records za kazi 
mahali amefanya Mheshimiwa Spika utaona amefanya katika K aunti  ya Mombasa tangu 2013 
hadi sasa. Kwa hivyo ni mtu ambae yuko na uweledi kw a mda mrefu tajriban tangu 2013 
amefanya ; vilevile na K aunti ya Nairobi, Kisii, Machakos na Mombasa.  
Mheshimiwa Spika , tukiteremka kidogo professional association  Engineer mwenyewe  
yuko katika zile association zinahitajika kwa ma Engineers wale we ngine kuwa katika nchi ya 
Kenya. Ut aona kwa mfano amesajiliwa katika bodi ya E ngineer s hapa nchini  kuanzia mwaka wa 
2005, amekuwa corporate M ember  Institution of Engineers of Kenya tangu 14th January 2005.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Hiyo ni kuonekana amekuwa katika hii kazi kwa mda wa miaka ishirini kwendelea na 
tukiangalia upande wa integrity  nitateremka kidogo upande wa integrity , Engineer mwenyewe 
hajawahi patikana , hajawahi pelekwa ko rtini, hajawahi kushtak iwa kat ika ukiukaji yaani  
kutowa jibika vizuri katika kazi yake. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika mimi kwa niaba ya K amati ya 
Uchukuzi naunga huu M swada mkono.  Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you, Yes Hon ourable  Manuari.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. K wanza nimshukuru Mwenyezi 
Mungu kwa Juma a hili; p ili, tumuombe sana Mungu atupe amani katika nchi yetu. Mheshimiwa 
Spika mimi kama mmoja katika Wanakamati hii ya uchukuzi  namuunga mkono ndugu yangu 
Engineer Hassan kw a kutuletea jina la ndugu yetu E ngineer Albert Keino . Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi  kama Mwana kamati hii kwanza katika maisha yangu nimekuwa katika maswala ya ujenzi 
wa mabarabara na ujenzi wa  manyumba na ninavyomjua huyu Bwana Albert Keino  ni mtu 
mwenye tajriba ya kutosha na sioni sababu y a sisi kama vio ngozi ndani uya N yumba hii tuwe 
tutakuwa na nafasi ya kumjadili sana ama tumpinge ama tumfanye nini isipokuwa sisi kama 
viongozi ambao tuko hapa tumpatie nafasi mzee wetu Albert Ke ino kwa sababu umri alionao 
unatosha kusema kuwa Mombasa tutakuwa na barabara  za kutosha na tutakuwa na mi undo 
msingi ya kutosha na tutakuwa na mwelekeo wa kimaswala ya uchukuzi na yote yata kuwa yako 
vizuri kwa sababu ya u jeledi wake na uzee wake na zile fikra atakazozileta kwa sababu ana fikra 
za zamani na fikra za sasa kama tunav yojua wazungu walisema ana ile ya zamani na sa a hii ya 
digital  kulingana na mwelekeo wa ndugu yetu hapa alioleta hapa katika hizi hoja yake alioleta 
leo. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kumuunga ndugu yangu mkono na pia niwaombe nyumba 
hii tulipitisheni hili s wala kwa pamoja. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Honourable Manuari.  Yes Hon ourable Ibrahim 
Oyugi.  
 
Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker , thank you very much fo r this opportunity. Mr. Speaker , 
when we adjourned last tim e I was one of th e Members who emphasiz ed on going through the 
Report which had delayed by that particular time and I reall y stressed that each and every 
Member should read line by l ine so that we understand the P aper well and the report well so that 
when we come back we a re in position to give the right decision . Mr. Speaker , the M otion today 
is about the vetting of Engineer Albert Keino  and it is true that I did a lot of research ; I went 
through the R eport line by line , I read the R eport comprehensively and I understood, t herefore if 
I stand here Mr. Speaker I stand here with a lot of authority to make my point that Mr. Engineer 
Albert Keino  is capable for that p articular position in our good County Mombasa as the chief 
Officer of Transport and I nfrastructure.  
Mr. Speaker , first of all the Committe e that vetted him and also the Report that the 
Comm ittee read is a very competent C ommittee and therefore I do not have any doubt that the 
recommendation that they have made are upto task . Mr. Speaker, number two the competence  of 
Albert Keino  is very competent in this position; personally, I happened to be a Member of this 
Committee of Roads and I nfrastructure in the last regime and indeed Mr. Keino  held the same 
position and he was a very competent Chief O fficer . Mr. Speaker , so I do  not have doubt again if 
he gave him the same position. Mr. Speaker , as my fellow Member of C ounty Assembly has said  
I would like to echo him on the same on the issue of integrity. Engineer Keino , having served in 
the last regime and also this regime I hav e not heard any issue touching him on integrity Mr. 
Speaker and therefore, I recommend him for the position.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 Mr. Speaker also experience is a very important factor when you are considering 
somebody for a certain position in our country that is one of the b est practice in our country;  and 
it is indeed true as Hon ourable  Manuari has stated that Mr. Keino  has vast experience in the 
same field and he has also been a lot of networking in the same fi eld in our C ounty . Mr. Speaker , 
finally  he is also suitable for t he same position since he has a very good relationship with other 
workers i n the same department and also M embers of the C ounty Assembly. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker , I recommend him.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon ourable  Hamis i Mbaya from  Timbwani W ard. 
 
Hon. Hamis i Mbaya: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . Kwanza 
kabisa nimshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu, pili niwashukuru W aheshimiwa wenzangu kwa dalili za 
mapenzi ambayo tunaoneshana. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii 
ambayo tun amzungumzia ndugu yetu E ngineer Albert Keino  ambaye ameweza kumiminiwa sifa 
tele tele na sif a ambazo ilikuwa zikimwagwa na W aheshimwia wenza zinafanana  ukweli 
kutokana na tabia zake E ngineer Albert Keino . Mheshimiwa Spika , kawaida W aswahili 
wanasema , cha kuj aa hakina lazima ya kuchungulia,  Engineer Albert Keino  yale maneno 
ambayo yamezungumzwa yana  sura ya ukweli kwa sababu hiyo nimesimama kumuunga mkono 
Engineer Albert Keino  kutokana na nafasi ambayo amew eza kupigwa pigwa nao msasa na 
Kamati ya Uchukuzi.  Mhesh imiwa Spika, nimeunga mkono hoja hii kwa asilimia  90 kwa 100. 
Ahsante sana . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Yes Honourable  Makanga , Chaani W ard please 
make your contributions.  
 
Hon. Makanga: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand to support the M otion bro ught in this 
House by Hon ourable  Mohammed , Chair T ransport. Mr. Speaker , first I want to congratulate the 
Commi ttee for doing an excellent job;  I think this is the on ly Committee so far that has deliver ed 
within the period that we have been in office. Mr. Speaker Sir , I want to confirm that Hon ourable  
Engineer Albert Keino  is a great leader, he is a team player, he is down to earth and I think he is 
the only person or E ngineer in his department who picks calls from all of us here irrespective of 
time. Mr. Sp eaker, I happened to attend the C ommittee hearings and we could see a man full of 
wisdom not only because of grey hair but from his articulation from how he responded to 
questions and everything about him we can say Hon ourable Speaker that we have the C hief that 
we need for that department.   
Mr. Speaker , without much ado,  I want to take us to paragraph 34 of the R eport which 
states that when he was asked about what plans he has to ensure the stalled   projects under the 
department are completed  within the s tipulated timeline, h e was able to come out clear and say 
that most of these stalled projects have been as a result of being awarded when there are no funds 
and over expectations from the side of the government and the public. I think this is an honest 
opinion that he gave and out of it Hon ourable  Speaker we have seen now that everything that is 
happening every tender that has been awarded in this first year of our administration and we can 
confirm in this House that there is no contractor with a pending bi ll in this period of our 
administration . So this was an honest opinion and we believe as a technical person he is in a 
position to continue advising our able Governor that we may have such a track record of having 
our business people doing business with th e County g overnment and getting back their funds in 
due time so that we can grow our C ounty going forward.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 Further Mr.  Speaker, I want to appreciate E ngineer Keino  who has been the head of this 
department for having come out clearly and strongly to ensure that the  stalled project s in my 
Ward that have stalled for the last seven years being an ECD E I can confirm to you that the 
contractor has now been paid after a period of six years where the leaders who came were not 
able to get this matter addressed . The contractor is now fully paid and he is coming back to the 
site this week and very soon I will call Hon ourable Members here so that we can come and eat 
mbuzi choma  as we celebrate the good doings happening under the stewardship of Engineer 
Albert Keino . Ther efore Mr. Speaker I stand to support with all my body organs. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Y es Hon ourable  Pamella, please make your 
contributions.  
 
Hon. Arwa:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity also to contri bute. 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the A lmighty God for having given us this wonderful moment ; again when 
I go straight to my contribution , last time you gave us a very ample time to go an d scrutinize well 
whether this N ominee is qualified or not and I want to confirm to t his House that the N ominee 
Albert Keino  is a competent person, qualified person because even if you look at the academic 
qualification s, the profession, the guy is right for that position. Again , I want to congratulate the 
Committee of T ransport for doing a  very wonderful job because the Report they gave us and they 
tabled before us is very important R eport and without us wasting mor e time this N ominee is 
qualified for this position and I can confirm with a lot of confidence that he is going to deliver 
becau se in the few days that we have been here we had a slight of interest wanting to know  
whether the guy will deliver or not and even my fellow Hon ourable  Members I think they were 
given some tenders to do some roads on the community based but I think the wo rk… 
 
[Loud consultations]  
 
Mr. Speaker , sorry I withdraw that statement, sorry for going out of the point, am very 
sorry for that.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon ourable  Allen Katana, are you on a point of 
information?  
 
Hon. Katana:  I cannot let  this go on record because I think  it’s not in order when the 
Honourable  Member who I respect so much  is saying that the Hon ourable e lected Member s were 
given any work to do . So, I think Mr. Speake r the Hon ourable  Member is not in order by saying 
that. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon ourable  Pamella?  
 
Hon. Arwa:  I am sorry Mr. Speaker Sir . I withdraw the statement.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Continue please.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Hon. Arwa:  I am sorry it is only that I missed the point, they were doing overs ight Mr. 
Speaker, now if I finalize my c ontribution I also support the Motion. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much. Yes Hon ourable  Katana , please 
make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spika, kwanza nimshuku ru ni shemeji yangu Mheshimiwa 
Pamela kwa changizo zake za maana na nikiwaacha hawa Waheshimiwa  hawatampongeza lakini 
nataka kumpongeza mimi mwenyewe kwa sababu aliyonena ni ya maana na zaidi ya hizo ya sifa 
zilizotolewa za kumuhusu Engineer Keino  ni nyingi na mimi kwa sababu fulani nisipo simama 
kuunga mkono hoja hii kwa sauti itakuwa naonyesha r oho mbaya sana kwa sababu huyu 
Engineer nataka ijulikane kwamba  anaishi 200 metres kutoka ile State House ya Shanzu . Kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika mbali na h ayo kazi zake Engineer tumezif uata na kwa kuwa hili Bunge 
si Bunge la kupitisha watu tu, twataka tueleze umma na  Kaunti ya  Mombasa kwa jumla iju e ya 
kwamba Ripoti hii iliyopeanwa ni ya kweli kwa sababu kazi zake ni thabiti . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimi wa Spika sitaki nito e muongozo wa kuzidi uwezo wangu lakini kwa kuwa mimi ni 
jirani ya Engineer  ningekuomba ikiwa itawezekana mjadala ukomee hapo ili tu kaweze kupitisha 
swala hili na Engineer Keino  aendelee kufanya kazi . Nakushukuru Mhesh imiwa Spika kwa 
nafasi hii.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you, Yes Hon ourable Joshua Mosee from Jomvu Kuu 
Ward please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Mose:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this op portunity to  contribute to 
the Motion. I  would  like to congratulate our Committee for good job that we d id, most Members 
have said the Report is good. When I go straight to the point, we look ed at the qualification of 
the Engineer, the academic qualification s, employment record, profession association, sui tability 
for the position and we realized he is very suitable for the posi tion so I stand to support the 
Motion.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much, Yes Hon ourable  Prischilla Mumba, 
The former Chair Committee on Transport, please make your contrib utions.  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika hasa kwa kukumbu ka kazi yangu kwa Bunge 
lililop ita na kwa kazi ya Kamati hii ya uchukuzi na nimeona ni vyema nichukue fursa hii hata 
mimi kuweza kuunga mkon o hoja hii  nikiwa vile vile ni Mwanakamati k wa sasa wa Kamati hii 
ya Muundo Msingi na vile vile ni kiongeza sauti yangu kama Mwenyekiti aliyeku wa kwa ajili 
nilifanya kazi na Engineer Keino  kwa karibu sana . Kwa hiyo  miaka mitano iliyopita na naju a 
uzoef u wake, naju a ukali wake, naju a urahisi wake, najua mie nendo yake ya kikazi na katika 
Wadi  zetu wakati huo nilipokuwa nikisimama kutetea majukumu yale yaliyokuwa niko na yo 
hakika ni kazi ngumu lakini Engineer ni mtu hachoki kwa wakati wowote unao muhitaji ni mtu 
yuko tayari akisikize, ni mtu yuko tay ari afanye kazi inavyotakikana  kama vile wenzangu 
walivyosema . Kuna kazi nyingi  ambazo yeye amekuwa akisimamia ; kuna zile ambazo zimeisha, 
kuna  zile ambazo bado zinaendelea, kuna zile ambazo tunataka kuanzisha na tuna  imani kuwa 
badala ya kupatia mgeni ambay e hatakuwa anajielewa na hana uzoefu wa kikazi ni heri 
kuendelea na mtu ambae tayari anajua ile kazi na anaju a pahali ambapo ameachia na pahali 
ambapo anaendelea ndio tuweze kuona urahisishaji wa kazi ile kwa mda huu ambao tumepewa 
manake kama sasa hivi t unaju a mwaka mzima umepita, tumebakia miaka kama mitatu ama  
minne ya kufanya zile kazi zetu tuwez e kusimamia, kuona majukumu ya Wadi  zetu 
yametekelezwa . Kwa hi vyo mimi pia ninaongeza sauti yangu kama Mwanakamati kuwa 
Engineer Keino  anatosha kuendelea na k azi. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you . Yes Hon ourable  Mwamwiri , Leader of Majority 
party.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Awali ya 
yote nire geshe shukrani zangu kwa Jala Jalali kutuwezesha kujumuika kwa mara nyegine tena 
kuitendea haki serikali yetu lakini pia wale waliotupatia mamlaka ya kuwa hapa. Pili, 
Mheshimiwa Spika niombe Kiti chako radhi kwa kufika kuchelewa kwa sababu nilikuwa na 
ugeni kutoka shirika la uzalishaji umeme K ENGEN wakiwa na mipango ya kutaka kuwekeza 
maeneo yetu ya L ikoni Mheshimiwa Spika ambayo b ado ni faida kwa watu wetu wa Mombasa , 
ndio maana nimechelewa…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Tatu, Mheshim iwa Spika, niipongeze Kamati iliyoongozwa na Mwenyekiti Mheshimiwa 
Hassan ulkh er kwa jitihada ya kazi njema  waliofanya kwa Kamati hii inaongozwa na 
Mheshimiwa ambaye yeye binafsi ni Mhandisi la kini pia wanachama wake katika Kamati hii 
wana  tajriba ya kutosha katika maswala kusudio katika kuwezesha Mombasa yetu  Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika , katika Ripoti hii mimi nitaangazia mambo mawili kwa sababu kikuu 
katika Ripoti Kamati ilipaswa kuangalia uwezo wa mwakilishi ama mteule katika nafasi hii ya 
kutekeleza majukumu yale . Mheshimiwa Spika, tukipitia katika was ifa wa mlengwa Mhandisi 
Albert Keino  tunaona alianza majukumu yake ya uhandisi mw aka wa elfu moja kenda mia 
them anini na saba, ni wachache miongoni mwetu ambao  tulikuwa tumezaliwa wakati huo ! 
Wengi wa Waheshimiwa walioko hapa Mheshimiwa Spika pia walikuwa ha wajazaliwa na umri 
alio nao katika weledi huu ni sawia na umri wa baadhi ya Waheshimiwa walioka katika hapa ; hii 
inaonyesha ya kwamba hakuna shaka ama shauku katika utenda kazi wake, kwa weledi alio  nao 
katika nafasi hii am bayo Mstahiki Gava na aliyompa na Kamati ikatekeleza jukumu lake kumpiga 
msasa kuweza  kubaini uwezo wake katika hiki . 
 Pili, Mheshimiwa Spika Mwakilishi Albert Keino  yeye mwenyewe katika maswala ya 
kihisani pia tumeona katika Ripoti hii amekuwa akijishughulis ha sana na maswala ya kijamii ;, 
ikiwemo kusaidia baadhi ya watoto wasiojiweza ambao wanatoka familia masikini kuwalipia ada 
ya masomo yao vile vile amekuwa akisaidia baadhi ya watu wasiojiweza kuweza kuhimili na 
kukabili kulipa ada za maswa la  ya matibabu Mheshimiwa Spika na pia kuhusika katika faradhi 
ya maswala ya maziko, iwapo kumetokea dharura ya kijamii ya mtu miongoni mwetu ya mtu 
kupoteza maisha yake. Kwa hayo Mhes himiwa Spika binafsi nipongeze Kamati lakini pia 
niungane nao katika ma pendekezo yao ya kuliomba Bunge hili kuweza kuafiki na kumpa fursa 
muwakilishi huyu nafasi hii ya Afisa Mkuu katika idara ya Uchukuzi na Miundo Msingi,  kuweza 
kutut endea haki katika Gatuzi la Mombasa na yale ambayo alianzia kwa Bunge la kwanza, la pili 
na hili la tatu aweze kuendeleza kwa sababu ana  kumbu kumbu bayana ya jinsi miundo msingi 
na barabara zet u zinavyostahili kuwepo katika Gatuzi letu ili na sisi tuweze kusonga mbele. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very m uch. Yes Hon ourable  Fadhili Makarani , 
Deputy  Speaker and Member from Port - Rietz Ward please make your contribution.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Makarani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono Ripoti hii iliyoletwa mbele  yetu na Kamati hii ya 
uchukuzi . Mheshimiwa Spika, mengi yamesemwa na wenzangu ambayo sina  budi kuunga 
mkono.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 Mheshimiwa Spika , Engineer Keino  amekuwa katika Kaunti hii hata mimi nikija mwaka 
elfu mbili na kumi na tatu kumbukumbu zangu zaniam bia Engineer Keino  alikuwa wakati wa 
Manispaa . Mheshimiwa Spika , hii inaonyesha wazi kuwa Engineer Keino  amebobea kwenye 
kazi hii na tunaona kazi ambayo chini ya uongozi wake k azi ambayo imefanyika ndani ya Kaunti 
yetu ya Mombasa , kazi kadha wa kadha nyengine zimetajwa na Waheshimiwa hapa tumeona 
miundo m isingi ya Mombasa vile inazidi kuimarika . Kwa hayo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga 
wenzangu nas imama na wenzangu kuunga  mkono Ripoti hii na kama  alivyosema Kiongozi wa 
Walio Wengi, Kamati hii Mheshimiwa Spika n i Kamati ambayo … 
 
Hon. Ngugi:  Tukija Kongowea pia tunajua pia tuna changamoto za barabara 
zinatuumisha kichwa, nataka nimuhakikishie Ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa wa Kongowea  
Mheshimiwa Samuel Mwaura tumepata jembe la kazi Bwana Albert Keino  atatatua hizi shida. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Samuel Mwaura please make 
your contribution.  
 
Hon. Mwaura: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika na pia namshukuru ndugu yangu 
Mheshim iwa Ngugi kwa  sababu ya kutambu a ya kwamba Kongowea kweli tunahitaji mtu 
mchapa kazi kama jinsi tunavyoona kwa Ripoti hii i liyoletwa na Kamati ya Uchukuzi . Hivyo 
niwashukuru sana wana Kamati wa Kamati hii kwa sabab u ya kazi nzuri walioifanya na pia 
nisimame pamoja nao katika kuunga mkono Mswada huu wa ku mpitisha ndugu yetu Bwana 
Albert Keino  ili kwamba ashike nafasi hii ya Chief Officer  wa Mi undo Msingi . Tuna imani na e, 
tumeona kwa muda mchache ule tumekuwa hapa, wakati amekuwa akishikilia hio idara kazi 
imesonga na sisi sote k ulingana na vile nimesikia kwa Waheshimiwa wengi nilifikiri kwamba 
mimi peke yangu ndio nimeona kazi yake l akini kumbe kazi imeonekana na Waheshimiwa wote. 
Kwa hivyo mimi Mheshimiwa Spika nas hukuru kwa kunipa nafasi hii na ninauunga mkono. 
Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Mwa ura from Kongowea 
Ward. Yes Hon ourable  Florence Kachumbo , please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Kachumbo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this  opportunity. I want to plead my 
apology for coming late ; there were some matters that needed my full attention that  i had to 
attend  to. I want to agree with this Report that has been submitted, I see that Engin eer Albert 
Keino  is well versed with his job, he  has quite a good experience and we believe that he is going 
to do his work well. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Florence. Yes  
Honourable  Bernard Ogutu from Changamwe Ward , make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsant e sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwanza kabisa niweke wazi kwamba ni 
Mwanakamati  wa hii Kamati ambayo imefanya hii kazi nzuri ambayo imeletwa mbele yenu siku 
hii ya leo . Pili niseme kwa binafsi namju a Engineer  Keino , ni mtu mchapa kazi na tunatarajia ya 
kwamba ile kazi  nzuri ambayo amefanya katika muhula uliopita atazidisha muhula huu na 
tunamtakia mema na tunaomba Jumba hili liweze kupitisha hii Ripoti yetu. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Ogutu. Yes Hon ourable  
Mariam  Baimu from Frere Town Ward , please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Baimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii. Mimi kwanza 
ningependa kuwapongeza Mwenyekiti na Kamati yako ya Miuundo Msingi kwa kazi nzuri 
muliofanya kwa kuweza kuweka  pendekezo la kumteua Bwana Albert Keino  kama mteule wa 
hio nafasi ya Afisa Mkuu wa Uchukuzi na Miuundo Msingi. Kwanza ningependa kusema, 
tukiangalia, viko vipengee ful ani ambavyo hii Kamati vimekagu a ndio kuweza kuleta hapa 
mbele yetu tuweze kupitisha ; ya kwanza ni hiyo personal background  ya mtu, tunaona huyu 
Bwana mwaka aliozaliwa 1963 Alhamdulillah  ki umri amesonga mbele kwa hivyo ni mtu ki 
imani yangu ana hekima na busara ya hali ya juu . Tukienda upande wa pili, academic and 
professional qualifications  huyu Bwana amesoma Chuo Kikuu cha Nairobi na ana Shahada ya 
Science in Civil Engineering .  
Kwa hivyo yeye kuweza kuwan ia huu wadhifa wa upande wa miu ndo msingi nafikiri 
amewekwa pahali ambapo patamsaidia ama ana uzoefu napo.  Tukienda upande wa ajira, si at i ni 
mgeni katika hu u uwanja wa mambo ya mabarabara ; tunaona kwamba amefanya katika Kaunti 
tofauti katika nchi yetu ya Kenya. Kwa hivyo ki ima ni yangu kuanzia 2013 mpaka leo  huyu 
Bwana nina imani ana uzoefu mkubwa katika hio hali ya field ambayo kazi an atakikana afanye. 
Tukiangalia hapa pia katika professional associations  and memberships,  kusoma tu si mwisho 
wa kila kitu ; huyu Bwana pia amejiingiza katika ma associations  kadha wa kadha na 
membership  wa kadha wa kadha ili azidi kupata ujuzi ama tajriba ya  kufanya hii kazi yake. 
Nikimalizia integrity , ambacho ni kipenge e kikubwa sana katika kuandika mtu yeyote kazi. Nina 
imani huyu Bwana alivyopelekewa makaratasi yake kwenda kukaguliwa kwa watu wa integrity  
amepatikana hana shida yeyote, hajawekwa kortini am a kupelekwa kortini kwa kukosa nidhamu 
kwa upande wowote ule. Kwa hivyo mimi sina budi kuunga na Mwenyekiti mumefanya kazi 
nzuri na watu wako, tuweze kumpitisha huyu Bwana Keino  azidi kutufanyia kazi nzuri Mombasa 
Kaunti. Ahsanteni.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much. Yes Hon ourable  Hamida Noor , 
please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me the oppo rtunity to put my views on 
the Nominee, Mr. Albert Keino . Mr. Albert Keino  has been in our County for quite s ometime 
and in the last regime even we have seen the kind of work he has done and supervising all the 
roads those have been built within the Mombasa County Assembly . Looking at his background 
on academic s Honourable  Speaker he is the suitable person for this job and coming to his 
professional association, he has joined a lot of associations in engineering fraternity as the ir 
Member. Mr. Speaker , for me I can see this is the right Nominee for the job , with those few 
remarks, I support the Motion.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank very much. Take it back to Hon ourable  Mohamed to 
reply to the Motion.  
 
Hon. Hassan Mohamed:  Ahsante Bwana Spika kwa kuweza kunipatia fursa ya kujibu 
hoja ambazo zimeweza kuletwa na Waheshimiwa wenza kuhusiana na mteule Bwana Engineer  
Albert Keino . Kwanza kabisa nawapongeza na kuto a shukurani zangu za dhati katika moyo 
wangu kuhakikisha kwamba sote tuna msemo mmoja wa kusema kwamba Engineer  Albert 
Keino  anaweza katika Idara ya Uchukuzi na Miu ndo Msingi.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14  Mimi kama Mwenyekiti katika Kamati ya Idara hii vile vile nato a pongezi zangu kwa 
Kamati yangu kuweza kufanya kazi nzuri na tuna imani kubwa kwamba ndani ya miaka hii 
ambayo tuko, tutaweza kuona mat unda zaidi na zaidi kwa sababu Waheshimiwa washa weza 
kuonja asali wanataka kuju a mzinga uko wapi? Na  ni muda mchache tu wameweza kuona kazi 
ya Engineer  Albert Keino  kulingana na Idara hadi sasa ndio Idara peke inaweza kufanya vizuri 
bila kupingwa na yeyote hapa , Mheshimiwa Spika kulinga na na hoja ambazo wameweza kuto a. 
Kwa hivyo nawaomba Ndugu zangu wawez e kuunga mkono hoja hii ya Engineer  Albert Keino  
kuweza kutumikia watu wa Mombasa na kututumika sisi kama vile tulivyoweza kuwahidi 
wananchi. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Hassan Mohamed and 
Honourable  Member s for your contribution into this Motion. Honourable Members, I now put 
the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Hassan Mohamed, on Adoption of Report on the 
Vetting of Engineer Albert Keino, the Nominee for the Position of Chief Officer, Transport and 
infrastru cture  be approved by this Honourable House in the same terms . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT O N THE VETTING OF MR . ALI ABDULRAHMAN , THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF CHIEF OF FICER LANDS , URBAN PLANNING AND H OUSING  
 
 Yes Hon ourable  Amriya Boy Juma , Chairperson, Committee on Lands, Urban Planning 
and Housing please move the Motion.  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. S peaker.  Mr. Speaker I beg to move the Motion;  
 
That this House adopts the Report on the Vetting of Mr. Ali Abdulrahman, the Nominee 
for the Position of Chief Officer Lands, Urban Pl anning and  Housing laid on the Table 
on Tuesday, 18th July, 2023.  
 
 And I ask Hon ourable  Allen to second.  
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair ] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Makarani) in the Chair]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Yes Hon ourable  Allen?  
 
 Hon. Katana:  I Second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you. Honourable Members , I now 
propose a question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Amriya Boy be debated in this House.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
 Yes Hon ourable  Amriya Boy?  
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wis h to inform the House 
that Mr. Ali AbdulRahman Shariff, Nominee for this position appeared before the Committee on 
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 Monday, 21st March 2023 at 2.00 p.m. and he was vetted under oath.  Mr. Speaker , I also wish to 
inform the House that the Committee observed the following: that Mr. Ali has a Masters Degree 
of Science Mobile Telecommunication, innovation from Strathmore University, he is also a 
holder of a Bachelor of Engineering, Electrical and Telecommunication Engineering from the 
Moi University. On his work  experience Mr . Speaker, Mr. Ali has been an Information Analyst 
at Mombasa County Public Service Board and also has previously worked as the Assistant 
Director Board operations at Mombasa County Public Service Board; very briefly he has also 
worked as a D irector street lighting operations at the County Government of Mombasa. And 
whether he is knowledgeable on the position he has been nominated? The Committee observed 
that he is knowledgeable in the subject area and also i n other vast areas relating to land and urban 
planning and he is also conversant with the duties of the said post. Whether he has potential 
conflict of interest? The Committee observed that he has no conflict of interest and he has fully 
complied with laws and all tax obligations.  
 Finall y as per the gazett e notice  whether he has cleared with all relevant bodies as per the 
advertisement? The Committee observed that he has been cleared by the Ethics and Anti 
Corruption Commission EACC, Kenya Educations Board and also certified certificate of good 
conduct by the Criminal Investigation Department CID. Finally . The Nominee had a net worth of 
Kshs 9Million  and also the Committee found the Nominee suitable for appointment as the Chief 
Officer Lands, Urban Planning and Housing. So on the Committee recommendation: we 
recommend that this House approves the nomination of Mr. Ali AbdulRahman Shariff as Chief 
Officer for Lands, Urban Planning and Building as nominated by His Excellency the Governor 
of Mombasa County. Thank you very much and I wish the Honourable Members  to support the 
governments’ venture to develop our good County. Thank you very much.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker , thank you very much. Mr. Speaker , I happen to be one 
of the Members of the very Committee of Lands, Urban Planning and Housing, and indeed I 
want to affirm to this Honourable House that what the Chair has said is true . We met and went 
through the Report and we actually did the vetting  on the Nominee on the  said date and we 
realised that  the Nominee met almost all the threshhold  and I think he has reasonable minimum 
qualifications  for this particular position Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , before I actually rally or 
request my fellow Members to support thi s particular Motion briefly I would just like to go 
through some of the points th at made me actually affirm that  the Nominee is capable of the 
position when you read the Report you will find that in academic as a Chair has stated that  he is 
very qualifi ed and he has a Masters of Science  Degree  in Mobile Telecommunication 
Renovation from Strathmore University.  
 Mr. Speaker , also I would like  to inform this House that the Nominee before the House 
also has g ot a vast experience in the  respective field and the best practice I think we can give him 
the job and I know he will be up to the task to that particular job . Mr. Speaker , he has worked in 
both private and public sector s and he has also been a Director of Street Lighting from Jan uary,  
2019 from the same Mombasa Co unty and that means that has built a very good networking with 
the Mombasa County employees and the people who live in this County.  Mr. Speaker , on the 
issue of integrity , the Nominee has never been charged in a court of law and neither has he been 
also ment ioned on any investigative report of the County Assembly or any commission of 
enquiry. I therefore Mr. Speaker recommend and rally this House to support Mr. Ali 
Abdulrahman Shariff to be the Chief Officer of Lands, Urban Planning and Housing in Mombasa 
County. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Mwaka 
Mwalundonda?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika kunipatia fursa hii na mimi 
niweze kuweka kauli yangu . Kama niliposimama hapa pia mimi ni Mwanachama wa Kamat i ya 
Ardhi ; Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kusema Ali Shariff tuweze kumjua tangu akiwa ni 
Director  wa Transport  na katika ile kazi yake ya  uchukuzi  alion yesha juhudi nzuri sana kufanya 
kazi yake ambayo kwamba ilikuwa inaonekana, ndi posa leo hii yuko hapa kwa Wizara ya Ardhi  
na nina imani kwamba ataweza kufanya kazi nzuri zaidi. Kwa hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika 
nasimama kuunga mkono kwa kuweza  kuteuliwa na kulingana na hii Ripoti yake iliyokuwa 
hapa, haina hata doa, kwa hivyo anatosha kuweza kufanya kazi hii ya Chief officer  wa Ardhi . 
Naun ga mkono na naomba Waheshimiwa wenza waweze n ao kumuunga mkono na kupitisha 
Ripoti hii. Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Morgan Matsaki?  
 
 The Leader of Minority (Hon. Matsaki ): Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Kwanza 
napeana shukrani kwa kufika salama ; Bunge hili kuna mambo mawili na matatu yameniwezesha 
kuchelewa. Kwa ufupi mimi nashukuru pia, kwa sababu ya huyu Mhe shimiwa  Ali Shariff na 
naunga mkono sababu hata ukiangalia Mwenyekiti wa Ardhi  alivyozungumza na Mheshimiwa 
mwenza  alivyozungumza pia mimi pia ni M wanakamati  wa hiki kitengo  na ninaunga mkono . 
Ukiangalia hasa kwa upande wa elimu anafaa na nina imani kubwa sana kwake kwamba ataweza 
kufanya kazi kwa Kaunti hii ya Mombasa,  Kwa hivyo Waheshimiwa wenza tuzidi tu kumuunga 
mkono aweze kufanyia wana  Mombasa kazi. Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Leila Nyache?  
 
 Hon.  Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika kwa kunipa fursa nyengine ya kuweza 
kuchangia. Kwanza nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja h ii iliyokuja na Mhe shimiwa  mwenza 
Amriya Juma Boy wa Mjambere . Nataka nimpe kongole sana pamoja na Kamati yake kwa 
kuweza kutuletea hii Ripoti ya huyu  Bwana, amekuja na hii hoja ya Ripoti ya huyu Chief officer  
wa Ardhi Bwana  Ali Shariff. Mimi kwanza nimesimama pia kum uunga mkono kwa sababu 
nikiangalia katika hi vi vigezo vyake ni  mtu ambaye pia amesoma ak o na Bachelor ’s Degree  ya 
Engineering, Electrical and Telecommunication  kutoka Chuo Kikuu cha  Moi, hio inaashiria wazi 
kwamba huyu ni msomi na hii kazi ataweza kuelewa vizuri Mh eshimiwa Spika. Pia nikiangalia 
kigezo chengine  cha pili ana uzoefu wa hizi kazi za serikali na pia za nje ; kwa hivyo mimi pia 
niko pamoja na wenzangu, ninaunga mkono nikiangalia hapa hak uwa mfisadi pia, ni mtu 
ambaye Ripoti yake pia inaonekana ni nzuri na inaele weka na mimi vile ninavyo mfahamu ni 
mtu mwenye hekima na heshima na huwa ni mtu mw enye kusikiza ni msikilizi sana . Kwa hivyo 
mimi sina budi kuunga mkono Mhe shimiwa  Spika na nau nga mkono hoja hii. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank y ou. Yes, Hon ourable  Makanga?  
 
 Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Mimi pia vile vile nasimama kuunga 
mkono, Ripoti ambayo imeletwa na Mwenyekiti wa Masuala ya Ardhi na Mipangilio ya mji. 
Mheshimiwa Spika , nimesimama nimuunge mkono ndugu yetu huyu ambaye ameteuliwa kuwa 
Chief Officer  katika Wizara  hii ya Ardhi  na nikiangalia ni kwamba huyu ni kijana mwenzangu 
July 25, 202 3                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        46 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified  version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17 hilo ndio jambo ambalo limenivutia kwamba sisi vijana tunaweza na tukipewa nafasi tuna  uwezo 
wa kudhihirisha uongozi . Amezaliwa mwaka wa themanini na nane hivyo nama anisha ako na 
miaka thelathini na tano, na tunaona kwamba kulingana na Ripoti hii, ameweza kuwa katika 
maswala ambayo moja kwa moja inaathiri mkaazi wa Mombasa , amekuwa kama Director  katika 
ile Wizara  ya mataa ya barabarani  na nishukuru Mhe shimiwa Spika kwamba nimeweza kuwa na 
mazungumzo na huyu Mhes himiwa kabla hata tujue kwamba  anakuja kuteuliwa na tukiwa na 
hali tata ya shida ya mataa katika Wadi yangu eneo la Chaani, aliwajibika yeye m wenyewe 
huweza kutembea katika Wadi ile, tukazunguka na yeye n a akanipa ahadi ya kwamba tutapata 
suluhisho . Mheshimiwa  Spika ninavyoongea Ch aani inang’ara kwa sababu huyu Chief Officer  
anayekuja alichu kua jukumu ya pia kumpa mkono kijana mwenzake ili tusongeshe Mombasa 
mbele.  
 Kwa hivyo nina imani kwamba anapokuja katik a Wizara  hii ya mashamba, ambayo 
Kamati hii inaongozwa na Wakili mwenye akili katika Bunge hili, tunaamini kwamba tutaweza 
kupata suluhu ya yale matatizo ambayo tumebaki nayo ya maswala ya hati miliki  katika maeneo  
yetu na habari njema ni kwamba  Mheshimiwa Spika akiwa katika acting capacity  kufikia sa a hii 
nawa alikeni in advance  kwamba miezi miwili ijayo  tutatoa hati miliki katika Wadi ya Chaani 
kwa sababu ya juhudi zake na wale ambao wako katika idara hii. Kwa hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika 
namuunga mkono mia fi l mia na Mungu amjalie utenda kazi ambao wataendendela kugusa 
maisha ya wananchi na wakaa zi wa M ombasa. Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you , I now call upon the mover of the 
Motion to respond . Yes, Hon ourable  Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amr iya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to thank the Members of Lands 
Committee for their timely and their dedication towards this cause Mr. Speaker ; secondly , I wish 
to thank the Hon ourable  Members for supporting this venture and also thank the Governor for 
appoi nting Mr. Ali Abdul rahman . When he came before the Committee, i  was very impressed 
and pleased that he was very v ersed  and competent and he was top of his game, so we wish to 
congratulate him for the looks of the things, things are good. So I thank Hon ourable  Memb ers  
for their support , thank you very much Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now st and to put a 
question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Amriya Boy Juma, on adoption of Report on the vetti ng 
of Mr. Ali Abdulrahman, the Nominee for t he position of Chief Officer , Lands, Urban Planning 
and Housing be approved by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question put and a greed to] 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Honourable  Members , the House stands adjourned until Tuesday 25th  July at 2:30 p.m.  
 
The H ouse rose at 11:40 a.m 