June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
    
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 26th June, 2018  
The House met at 2:38p .m. 
 
(The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your sea ts. 
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
Yes order  Members ! Good a fternoon M embers.  As you can see in the Order paper , we 
have important business to transact and I know you are fully prepare d so we shall start our 
businesses , yes Clerk proceed.  
 
PAPERS  
COUNTY INTEGRATED DEV ELOPMENT PLAN  (CIDP)  
 
Yes Chairpers on Committee o n Finance , Budget and Appropriation.  
 
(Laying of Papers)  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay the County Integrated  
Development  (CIDP)  Plan for 2018/2022.  
 
 (Hon. Mohamed Hatimy laid the CIDP 2018/2022)  
 
The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Chair on Committee on Finance, Budget 
and A ppropriation.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker again I wish to lay today the 
Annual Development P lan (ADP) . Thank you . 
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy laid the ADP)  
 

June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mwalimu ): For which financial year?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  This is 2018/2019 . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you.   
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
What is it Chairman?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker . Mr. Speaker I wish to  apply for a 
leave to grant  permission to  amend  the O rder paper to read 2 018 instead of 2017 . Thank you.  Its 
order number six Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Question put)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members, as  the Member has risen to seek lea ve 
to the House, I stand to put a qu estion that O rder number six be a mended to read, Mombasa 
County Annual Development Plan for the year 2018.  
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPER  
 
Yes Chairperson Committee on Finance, B udget and Appropriation.  
 
(Silence)  
 
Hon. Hatimy you have to  lay first . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I have already laid the 
Paper, thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Chairman Mohamed Hatimy , I think it is 
supposed to be with the report , the s…..  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  It’s already in there Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): The report is not here . 
Yes Chairman thank you, I know you know it is supposed  to be accompanied by a report 
and it was missing in the estimates. Yes Clerk.  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
MOMBASA COUNTY INTEGRATED  DEVELOPMENT  PLAN  
 
The Chairperson , Committee of Finance, B udget and Appropriation.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker again I wish to give 
notice, I beg to g ive a notice of the following M otion ; 
 
That this House, adopt the Mom basa I ntegrated Development plan 2018/2022 . 
I beg to move Mr. Speaker.  Thank you  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk.  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 NOTICE OF MOTION  
MOMBASA COUNTY ANNUAL  DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2018/2019  
 
Chairperson , Committee  on Finance,  Budget and Appropriation.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker again I wish to give 
notice of the following Motion ; 
That this House , adopt the Mombasa County Annual Development plan 2018/2019 . 
Mr. Speaker and I seek leave to amend the O rder paper Mr. Speaker, tha nk you . 
 
(Question put)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Member s, Hon. Chairman has sought leave 
from the House to amend the O rder pap er to read, The Mombasa County Annual Development 
plan for the year 2018/2019.   
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
Yes Clerk.  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
Chairperson , Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. S peaker.  Mr. Speaker I beg to  give notice of 
the following M otion ;  
That this House adopt the report on the Mombasa Budget Estimate f or the year 
2018/2019 , thank you . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk.  
 
STATEMENTS  
(Silence)  
  
Yes Clerk.  
 
MOTION  
MOMBASA INTEGRATED DE VELOPMENT PLAN , 2018  
 
Chairperson , Committee on F inance, Budget and Appropriation.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank yo u Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speak er I beg to move the 
following Motion;  
That this House adopt the Mombasa Integrated De velopment Plan 2018, I request my 
vice Chair to second.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. M ajority leader.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwid ani): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I arise here to second the 
Motion. Thank you sir.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I now propose a question that the Motion on that  
Mombasa County integrated  Development Plan  2018/2022.  
 
(Question  put a nd agreed  to) 
(Applause)  
 
Yes Chairman.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika kabla 
sijaendelea naomba ruhusa Nyumba hii utakuta kuwa kuna stakabadhi moja a mbayo imeandikwa 
Health Sector F lagship Transformative  Project  kuwa ina  marekebisho  kuwa walisahau kuweka 
kitengo cha Afya vyengine. K wa hivyo tume weka hii na naomba Nyumba hii itukubalie 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Nikianza nataka kusema ku wa leo itakuwa ni m wisho wa siasa il iokuwa 
watu wakizungumza juu yakuwa hakuna  ati CIDP!  CIDP ilik uwako na iko na itakuwako kwa 
muda wa miaka mitano Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kusema kuwa CIDP imekuwa imebeba Kaunti ya Mombasa ; 
Kaunti ya Mombasa imechukua hii stakabadhi imechukua W odi zote za  Kaunti ya  Mom basa na 
nafikiri tu kiendelea  kutaka kuichambua Mheshimiwa Spi ka m wanzo  unajua W aswahili 
wana sema ukimuamsha alielala utalala wewe . Nataka kuwaambia W aheshi miwa kama waingia 
kwenye tovuti  yetu ya  Kaunti ya  Mombasa watakuta zile stakabadhi  zote ambazo walikuwa 
wakipiga kelele zimo  ndani yake na kama watu hawajisumbui kutafuta basi wataendelea 
kubweka bweka na kupiga kelele Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kusema…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Mr. Chairman address the Chair please.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika  najenga hoja y angu simlengi  mtu y eyote. 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): You are addressing the Chair don’t start pin 
pointing.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I am not pin pointing Mr. Speaker  lakini najaribu kujenga hoj a 
yangu k wa sa babu kum ekuwa na siasa nyingi kwa hivyo leo nas ema iwe ni mwisho wa siasa hizi  
na kama ni kuendelea tuko  tayari kuendelea na hizo siasa . Mheshimiwa Spika  nataka kusema 
kuwa sector zote zimepeana kila mtu amepata kitu , mukitaka nisome kitengo kwa kitengo 
naweza kuz isoma ama mki taka tuendelee tutaendelea . Kama kuna mtu yeyote ana jambo lolote 
Mheshimiwa Spika ana haki ya kusimama hapa na kuzungumza.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): For the sake of Hansard records it’s better to 
note some department s or something fr om a diferrent department you can mention at least for the 
Members to hear what h as been allocated to their sub C ounties and the House to have records 
please.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kitengo  ambacho sana wat u wanaangalia 
ni ch a Uchukuzi na Mu undo Msingi;  tukiangalia kwenye Uchukuzi na Muundo msingi  ukurasa 
wa...., Mheshimiwa tukiangalia Department on Transport and Infrastructure and Public Works 
ukurasa wa kwanza tutakuta K isauni ,  tukia nza na M jambere ina sema improvement of access  
road…  
 
(Interruption)  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Chairman with due respect we are in the 
Motion of CIDP so the page that you are referring to does not indicate what you are talking Hon. 
Chair.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Pole Mheshimiwa Spika stakabadhi zi meku wa nyingi  hizi. 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwenye CIDP ukurasa nambari 10,  Energy infrastructure and CIT  utakuta 
imebeba Paving of existing cabro  ambayo in akwenda kwa Sub C ounties zote amba zo ni Sub 
Counties  sita, four line divided car riage way  imewekwa kwa Mvita na  Changamwe na Jomvu. 
Alafu tukiangalia tena six la ne divided way  iko kwa Mvita,  Nyali na Kisaun i Sub – Counties.  
Tukiendelea Mheshimiwa Spika unapata  four la ne tunapata Changamwe na Jomvu Sub C ounties 
alafu tunakwenda kwa procurement of water house water bus ambayo  ni Kaunti ya Mombasa . 
Tukienda kwa ukurasa un aofuatilia Mheshimiwa Spika (11) tukiangalia tuko na mambo ya ICT 
ni Kaunti  yote connectivity  ni Kaunti yote , network structured cabling ni Kaunti  yote, tukienda 
kwa upande wa Afya  (Health) na hizi ni mipango ya miaka mitano sio mwaka mmoja … 
 
(Loud consultation ) 
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia Afya kuna ujenzi wa  regional  oncology centre .  Hii 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni mam bo ya kuhusiana na ugonjwa wa kansa oncology . Alafu tukiangalia 
kwa construction of a 50 b ed private wing  with D octors P laza. Halafu Mwembe Tayari 
rehabilitat ion dispensary  Mheshimiwa Spika, h alafu tunasema refurbishment of  ward number 9 
constructions and equipping cardiac ; hapa ni mambo ya moyo na nini ambayo tumeiweka. 
Mheshimiwa Spika tukien da kwenye kitengo cha Mazingira utakuta kuna mambo ya M akurabu 
hiyo ndio ilikuwa imezungumzwa sana lakini nataka kusema kuwa hii ilikuwa imeletwa Public 
participation  hawa watu wanaosimamia mande ge hawa wanaitwa Kenya nini? Kenya A irport 
nini? Aviation h uwa wamelia sana hawa M akurabu wanaingia sana ndani ya ndege na pia 
mahoteli. Hawa ni kama washika dau  Mheshimiwa Spika na watu wanapiga kelele milioni 30; 
milioni 30 hizo zitakwenda kwa muda wa miaka mitano. Mheshimiwa Spika ukizigawanya hizo 
utakuta ni kil a Mwaka utapata ni pesa kidogo sana halafu uje uzigawanye mwaka kwa miezi 12 
pengine utapata ni laki tatu laki nne kwa mwezi zakushughulikia  hawa makurabu Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri Waheshimiwa wako na hizi stakabadhi na pia 
wanaweza kuziangalia kwenye tovuti yetu wakitaka kitabu kizima kina zaidi ya karatasi 200 
wataweza kwenda kupitia nakuangalia yale mambo ambayo wataka kuangalia. A hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba W aheshimiwa waunge mkono hino stakabadhi ili  tupate kuipitisha. 
Ahsante sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Fahad . 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mwenyekiti wetu wa F edha na 
Kamati ya Fedha  nimesimama kuomba kitu kimoja tu kuwa hi zi stakabadhi tumezipata dakika 
tano zilizopita. Kwa h iyo kitu tunaomba ni nafasi ya hapa mpaka kesho tuweze kukagua hizi 
stakabadhi vizuri , tuna imani ya kuwa Mwen yekiti wetu na Kamati ya fedha amefanya kazi nzuri 
lakini kwa niaba ya wananchi waliotutuma hapa tunaomba tuweze kwenda kukagua hizi karatasi 
turudi kesho tuweze  kupitisha hizi makaratasi nitashukuru sana kwa wakati huo. Ahsanteni .  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 Hon. Amur:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kwa heshima na 
taadhima. Msemaji mwenzangu aliy eondoka sasa hivi tulikuwa tum eelezwa awali na 
Mwenyekiti na K amati iliy ofanya kazi hii kwamba hata kwe nye tuvuti yetu stakabadhi  hii 
ilikuwa tayari iko kwa tovuti (website) . 
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 (Applaus e) 
 
 Ni jambo  la kusikitisha Mheshimiwa kwamba yeye anaweza kusimama aseme kwa mba 
stakabadhi hii ameipata saa hii wakati kuna tovuti ambayo anaweza kuingia masaa ishirini na 
nne akaona na akawa na ufahamu wa  kutosha Mheshimiwa. Kwa hayo machache ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Maimuna?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Salim : Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kwanza kupeana kongole 
kwa Kamati hii ya fedha kazi nzuri waliyofanya. Kwa sababu kila jambo liko wazi kabisa kwa 
hiyo mimi nitasema ya kwamba haya mambo yalikuwa yako tumetoka kwa public participation  
tumekuj a katika Kamati, tumekuja katika Nyumba. Kiasi cha tufikie hapa leo m imi naona ya 
kwamba ni sisi tuiangalie na tui  peruse lakini kama nikuingalia tumeiangalia kwa muda huo 
wote ndio maana tuka weka public participation  haiko ma hsusi kwa watu wengine ni maks usi 
kwetu sisi na wale watu ambao tunawawakilisha.  
 Kwa hiyo mimi nimesimama kupeana kongole na hii ndio kazi ile tuliwaahidi watu wa  
Mombasa ya kwamba tutawafanyia; kila W odi imeguswa, kila sekta imeguswa kwa hiyo mimi 
kibinafsi nataka ipite ili kesho watu  wetu wa Mombasa waweze kupata huduma bora. Hivyo basi  
mimi naiunga mkono mia fil mia na ninaipigia upatu kusudi tuipitishe leo kesho kazi ziendelee 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. the Chief W hip is up , so yes Chief 
Whip?  
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika nitatumia muda mchache kulingana na 
muda ambao nimeweza kupatiwa na kitabu chetu katika Bunge hili. Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza 
ni kuweza kuunga mkono na kuweza kutilia mkazo katika swala nyeti ambalo limeweza kuwa 
mashinani. Swala nyeti ambalo limeweza kuwa mashinani M heshimiwa Spika ni kuhusu hawa 
Makunguru lakini CIDP ni lazima tuweze kufahamisha wananchi wetu ya kwamba sisi kama 
Serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa  hii CIDP huwa inapelekwa kwa wananchi na kila wadau 
wanahu sishwa katika swala hili. Kwa hivyo haiwezi kuwa mwan anchi aweze kulalamikia 
kuhusu M akunguru wakati wadau wameleta pendekezo kwamba wangependa wao wen yewe 
waweze kuhakikisha kwamba M akunguru hawa wameweza kutolewa ili  idara za ndege zetu 
ziweze kuwa safi.   
 Mheshimiwa Spika sasa hili limekuwa ni dukuduku huko mashinani na mimi kama 
Mwakilishi wa kata ndogo ya Frère Town ni kweli eneo langu hali athiriki,  lakini eneo la Port  
Reitz , eneo la Changamwe wanaathirika. Ndio swala kuu wakap endekeza ili M akunguru wale  
waw eze kutolewa katika maeneo yale . Kwa hivyo mimi ningependa sana kuweza kutia sauti 
yang u kuhusiana na maswala haya ya M akunguru ni kwamba inastahili sawa kweli, kulingana na 
sisi tunapata ndege na wageni wana okuja katika eneo letu.  Hivyo basi ni jukumu  letu kama 
serikali kuweza ku weka bajeti ili kuweza kuondoa M akunguru haya Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante 
sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, awali ya vyote 
ningependa kupea na risala zangu za rambirambi kwa Mheshimiwa Samba kwa kumpoteza 
mkewe katika hali ngumu akiwa anamshughukia katika maswala ya matib abu, tunamuombea 
kwa Mwenyezi   Mungu ampe subra na nguvu wakati huu mzito wa msiba alionao.  
 
(Applause)  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka ifahamike ya kwamba Bu nge hili ni Bunge la sheria na 
Waheshimiwa walioko hapa waliapa kwa kitabu kitakatifu ya kwamba watailinda sheria katika 
kutekeleza majukumu yao ya kuwakilisha wananchi. Mheshimiwa Spika Bunge hili 
linaendeshwa kana kwamba ni b iashara  ya mtu binafisi. Hibara katika ... 
 
(Interruption)  
(Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swalehe stood ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): You are on a point of order or?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma  Swalehe : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi nimesimama kuwe za kumuambia Mheshimiwa mwenzangu hili Jumba haliendeshwi na 
mtu wala si biashara ya mtu. Ikiwa yeye kama Mheshimiwa Spika anaendeshwa na mtu ni 
yeye… 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Fatma Order! If you are up on a Standing 
Order,  quote the S tanding order. You are informing the House without any permission. Yes Hon. 
Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri : Nina imani Mheshimiwa Spika umenihifadhia muda w angu 
kwa sababu najua badhi ya W aheshimiwa wana njama ya hujma ya kukatizakatiza ili ma azimio 
yasifikiwe. Ahsante Mh eshimiwa Spika, k ulingana na kanuni za Bunge hili hibara ya 41 sehemu 
ndogo ya pili (a) inatoa maelekezo jinsi ya biashara ama shug huli katika Bunge 
zitakavyoendeshwa. Mheshimiwa Fahad alikuwa  sahihi ya kusema hatujajiandaa, k wa sababu 
taarifa hizi na makablasha haya tumepewa tulipoingia hapa. Mheshimiwa anazungumzia ya 
kwamba maswala haya yali wekwa katika utanda  wazi wa Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa. Swali ni je 
lini ilifanyika zoezi hilo la ku  upload  kwenye hiyo system website ? Swali  ni je walimtaarifu nani 
ya kwamba iko updated  pale?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes there is a point of order!  
 Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa ningependa kuweza kumuarifu Mheshimiwa 
kwamba ikiwa yeye hajajiandaa ni yeye Mhes himiwa Spika aweze  kujiongelea kama M wakilishi 
wa Likoni laki ni sio kwa nia ba ya Bunge zima. Ahsante . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Mwamwiri before you proceed just read 
the Standing Order that you have referred it to this House.  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Nikiinukuu kwa ru husa yako Mheshimiwa Spika; hibara ya 
41 sehemu ndogo ya pili (a) inasema , 'A member of the County Assembly Business Committee 
designated by the C ommittee for that purpose shall ... naregelea shall ... naregelea mara ya  tatu 
kwa heshima yako shall ... every Thursday or on the last stage sitting day for not more than 10 
minutes present and lay on the T able a statement informing the County Assembly or the business 
coming before the County Assembly in the following week '. Kwa hivyo kwa hali hii yalipaswa 
tuyafahamishwe tangu juma lil ilopita.. . 
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 (Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Before Hon. Mwamwiri you proceed under the 
same Standing Orders just read 78(1) please ! Just a minute!  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  71 Mhes himiwa?  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): It is 71 . 
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  71? 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): 71. Just hold on. You have to notify the Speaker , 
I am giving you the Standing Order. Yes Hon . Mwamwiri . 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Naam Mwenye kiti. 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): On the same note, I do agree with the Standing 
Order you have recently read but I would like also you read Standing Order number 40 sub-
section two.  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Forty?  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Sub section two . 
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  'A Member who wishes to seek leav e to raise a matter under 
this Standing order shall before 3: 00p.m on t he day the S tatement is not made hand to the 
Speaker written noti fication of the matter but the S peaker shall refuse to allow the request unless 
satisf ied that the matter may properly be di scussed in the County Assembly’ . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Proceed as I am looking for the Standing Order. 
Proceed . 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Kwa hii yako Mheshimiwa…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Just proceed with the M otion.  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Nikiendelea katika hii hibara 40, mbili. Nisingekuwa na 
ufahamu haya yangejiri kitambo niandikie barua Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hivyo nisingeweza 
andika hiyo  barua kulingana na muda. Pili Mheshimiwa Spika nataka ifahamike ya kwamba 
asilimia kubwa katika Bunge hili wanawakilisha sehemu, w alichaguliwa kupitia kwa chama 
mahsusi.  Kwa hivyo tunapo simama hapa ama tukiwa hapa sisi ni s erikali moja na h atuna hujma 
wala nia mbaya kwa s erikali yetu na Mheshi miwa Spika i fahamike ya kwamba uzalendo wa 
serikali ni kuikosoa serikali inapo kwenda makosa na unaf iki ni pale unapoifumbia macho 
serikali yako kwa kutaka kuiridhisha katika nyenzo ambazo haziko sahihi.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika kujadili CIDP, makashablasha ya maswala au mipangilio ya miaka 
mitano kwa muda mfupi pasi na uandalizi ni  kucheza shere wananchi waliotuchagua ya kwamba 
tunajadili tunawapitishia pasi ya mmoja wetu kurudi mashinani kwa minajili ya kukaa na watu 
wake kupata muanga. Hakuna mtu mwenye shida na yaliyomo katika daftari hili au ka shablasha 
hili Mheshimiwa Spika, s hida yetu ama shida yangu mimi binafsi ni jinsi taratibu 
zinavyoendeshwa; zinaendeshwa pasi na mpangilio wa muda makhsusi.  Jana wananchi 
wameitwa  wafanye  validation au kuidhinisha kwa CIDP, leo ina wekwa Bungeni ijadiliwe na 
ilipaswa tuijadili , kwanza Mheshimiwa Spika aandikie barua Waziri mhusika na yale 
mapendekezo ambayo tumejadili leo wananchi wame  validate sisi huku tunachangia tupitishe.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika!  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Twataka Standing Order , hayo anayoyazungumza 
yameandikwa wapi Mheshimiwa Spika?  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mwam wiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa vipengele vya maswala haya vipo katika sheria 
ya pesa za umma PFM Act na kwa sababu ya maandalizi na muda wa maswala haya yalipoletwa 
si kuwa na mazingira na wala matarajio ya kwamba haya yatajiri ya kwamba nitabeb a na nukuu 
baada ya nukuu ya kila kinachostahiki lakini kiusahihi,  yaani kiusahihi CIDP;  zoezi la CIDP 
lilianza mwaka uliopita na ilitakikana uthibitisho  (Validation)  kufikia kipindi cha nyuma kabla 
ya leo. Leo tungekuwa  tunaangalia maswala ya Appropriation Bill labda na maswala mengine 
lakini haya yangepaswa yakamilike kwanza ndipo draft  itengenezewe. Lakini kwa sababu ya 
muda na uchache wa maandalizi ya kwamba leo kwa leo tunapewa kila kitu. Siko katika nafasi 
ya kusema nitanukuu kila kipengele kinachohusia na na zoezi hili Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes proceed Hon. Mwamwiri . 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nataka iingie katika 
kumbukumbu ya Jumba hili ya kwamba mimi Mheshimiwa M wakilishi wa Wodi ya Likoni  
ambaye  pia niki declare  interest  ama msimamo wangu ni kwamba na  chembe  chembe za 
uwanaharakati, sipo sambamba na zoezi hili linaloendelea sasa ingekuwa muafaka tungepata 
muda makhsus japo wa leo na kesho tuje tukijadili tukiwa tuko na  ufahamu sahihi na tumepata 
fursa ya kuuliza japo watu  wetu wawili au watatu kuhusiana na hili. Kwa hivyo mimi napinga!  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika point of information  ni kuwa Mheshimiwa 
anapotosha nyu mba hii. Mheshimiwa huyu huyu aliitizama hino stakabadhi wakaandika 
memorandum  sijui kama ni petition  yeye akiongoza hicho kikundi leo aje aseme kuwa sisi 
hatujaiangalia stakabadhi  hii. Hii ni  kupotosha Nyumba hii Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
(Applause)  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika nakataa kuchukua taarifa yake kwa 
sababu memorandum tulioleta ilikuwa inahusiana na draft estimates  ya bajeti na wala sio CIDP. 
 Kwa hivyo taarifa yake na ufahamu wake anaonipatia nakataa kuupokea.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Mwamwiri your time is up. Yes Hon. 
Ahmed Salama . 
 Hon. Ah med Salama:  Bwana Spika mimi napenda sana kuunga mkono na napenda 
kutoa pongezi kubwa kwa Kamati ya fedha kwa sababu walikuwa hawalali wa kesha  kwa 
kuandaa manen o haya. Leo yamekuwa mazuri. Nataka kusema kwamba Bwana Spika watu wa 
Mombasa watafurahia na jambo hili kwa sababu wanalisubiri. Halafu ukitaka kujua kwamba 
mambo ni mazuri sana ndani ya Bofu Ward tumekumbukwa na mambo mazuri ndani ya haya 
maneno. Kwa hivy o mimi nataka kusema kwamba wanyonge wa Mombasa watasikia raha na 
watakuwa na ufahamu mzuri kuhusu haya maneno. Tuacheni siasa za pang’ang’a, ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Ibrahim . 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Spe aker sir thank  you very much for the opportunity that you have 
given  me. Mr. Speaker sir being a M ember who  is representing my W ard in  Changamwe Sub 
County, Airport W ard firmly want to air my views on this program that we are having today and  
I want to st art by thanking the Chair of this particular Committee plus the Members who sat 
down and came up with this very beautiful document and plann ing that you’re seeing it today . 
Mr. Speaker sir the people of Mombasa are eagerly waiting for this particular proce ss so that it 
can go through  so that th e people can get... Mr. Speaker sir they can be taken care of. ..Mr. 
Speaker s ir they  can get what they need from us . Mr. Speaker Sir we are the Members of the 
County Assembly we have been given the power to go through this document ;  either pass them 
or not pass them and the Standing Order is very clear. Today we are here Mr. Speaker sir to pass 
to agree and pass this particular document.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The issue of ABCD is not here Mr. Speaker sir that should be taken b ack to our ECDE 
centres or Nursery.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 And I am saying this Mr. Sp eaker Sir with a lot of respect, b ecause this thing was table d 
very well in our internets , we hav e gone through personally as a M ember of Airport Ward ; I took 
my time, I went thro ugh the document , I read the document ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 And I fully agreed and I say thank you Mr. Chairman for coming u p with this particular 
document . Mr. Speaker sir let me tell you we are very ready , personally I am very ready for any 
opposition.  
 I am supporting this particular document 100  per cent  and we must pass it today and we 
must go ahead so that my people should get what they need at the W ard, thank you very much 
Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Aran Moses . 
 Hon. Moses Oindo : Mr. Speaker Sir, thank you  for at least seeing me and giving  me this 
chance to  air my contribution , it is quite  sad if we will use our sm art phone only on W hatsap p 
and facebook.  We should make use of our smart phones , the document that one of the Hon. 
Members ha s claimed that has not seen it, it was sent even on our wall; W hatsap p wall so I am 
requesting this House whoever wants to politicize this wait for us 2021 or 2022 we are not ready 
for this.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 We are here to discuss this so that the Mombasa residents can benefit , especially the 
youth s who I represent. So Mr. Speaker sir with all due respect let us not waste time, l et discuss 
this and move to the next agenda, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker with your permission 
I wish to reiterate and state as  follows; that the law on implementation of the County Integrated 
Plan is quite clear there is no v agueness that when you look  at Article 220 of the Constitution , 
the spirit of the constitution gi ves the National and the County g overnment s the power to 
implement integral plans.  
 Yes 220 of the C onstitution gives th e National and County g overnment power through 
their legislation to  implement integral plans which include long term and medium term plans and 
the County integrated development plan is part and parcel of the medium term. Mr. Speaker also 
when we refer to the County Government Act section 104 and section 108 it g ives the m andate 
to the County g overnment to come up with the County Integrated development plan in order to 
substantiate the appropriations that will be made in those five Ps and to distinguish the 
development, the expenditures of all the projects, programs and pla ns.  
 So it is a pilot plan, so this CIDP i s a pilot plan for the County vis a vis the Kenya vision 
2030 , we are in line with the vision . The Kenya V ision 2030 and the CIDP is part and  an integral 
part of the document t hat will make us achieve that g oal of a better life for every citizen in this 
Country.  
 Mr. Speaker having sa id that the process of CIDP from our previous speakers has been a 
bit of ... what do we call it? A mis information because as Mr. Speaker if you remember in my 
maiden speech I talked a bout public participa tion as the heart of devolution;  having respect of 
that we should also be aware of the modes and mechanisms of the public participation and I want 
to refer this Ho use to S ection 91 of the County Government Act which gives a medium and 
mechanisms of that public partici pation and one of them in that S ub Section (a) talks about 
information technology communication which is what we are talking about. We are talking about 
about website, we are talking about emails, we are talking about faceb ook account s to reach 
citizen s through information technology. So to update our CIDP in the website  is enshrined in 
the law, that is in S ection 91 of the County Government Act.  
 So in my view I think from an informed perspective this CIDP was well communica ted to 
the public; t here was reasonable public participation because the CIDP was posted. I think Mr. 
Speaker  the CIDP was posted around May; i t is not in April, i t is not late Apri l. It was posted in 
our website, w e were able to indulge with the citizen s and there was reasonable ... you see public 
participation has infinite variations Mr. Speaker ; if you go for public participations today not 
necessarily that everyone will appreciate that you hav e gone for public participation b ecause it is 
not everyone w ho will be willing to participate or to turn  up to the public participation. S o in my 
view there was reason able public participation, the C ommittee also went and re -evaluated and 
we went back for validation.  
 So this has been a process that has enshrined in  law and we have followed it to the letter 
and as I look at the CIDP it has all component s of what is enshrined in a valued CIDP. We have 
the general County firm information, w e have the strategic process. We have what do we call 
this...? We have the imple mentation frame work , we have the review of the section  where it 
reveals the previous CIDP vis a vis this CIDP . So I think it's hig h time and I heard some of the 
Members complaining that we haven't passed the CIDP yet and somebody has an audacity to 
stand h ere and say that they have no t had a chance to pass the CIDP.  I think it's 
unacceptable Mr. Speaker , this is a House of order we follow the law and the law has it 's time 
frames, the law does not work in a vacuum , it’s not vague, we have time frames and we have to 
beat these timeframes otherwise the PFM Act has repercussions.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ):Yes Hon Amriya your time is up, Yes Hon . 
Members as you can see in the O rder paper we have got very many businesses to transact and I 
have seen no M ember seeking for t he House to atleast adjust our A ssembly timings so I will call 
upon the mover to respond on this M otion for the House to proceed, yes Hon . Hatimy?  
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, nachu kua fursa hii mwanzo 
kuwashukuru Wanach ama kwa kuweza kuiunga mkono h ii stakabadhi kwani  stakabadhi  hii 
itamfaa kila mtu wala haitamdhuru mtu yoyote . Mheshimiwa Spika  hii stakabadhi M heshimiwa 
aliekuwa akiongea hapa kutoka Wodi ya Likoni  yeye mwenyewe aliichuku a akaiweka kwenye 
mtandao na watu wote wakaiona wacha kuingia kwenye tuvuti yetu;  nafikiri kama tulivyosema 
hatuna mda mambo mengi yangu ya  kuzungumza, naomba N yumba hii ipitishe hii stakabadhi 
kwani mwanzo nataka kuse ma hakuna sheria pahali popote imesema CIDP ipitishwe tarehe 
fulani . Kwa  hivyo sisi tumefu ata zile sheria zinavyotakikana Mheshimiwa Spika na leo tumefikia 
kilele naomba N yumba hii iunge mkono hii stakabadhi  ili tuweze kumaliza haya maneno . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Question put)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank yo u Hon . Members I have st ood to put a 
question on the M otion on Mombasa County Integrated Development Plan,  2018/2022.  
 
(Question put and agreed ) 
(Applause ) 
 
 Yes Clerk ? 
 
MOTIONS  
MOMBASA COUNTY ANNUAL  DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2018  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Thank you M r. Speake r, I beg to move the following M otion ; 
That this Hous e adopts the report on Mombasa County Annual D evelopment Plan 2018 and I 
seek leave to amend 2017 to read 2018, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Hatimy it is not a  report but it is Mombasa 
County Annual development Plan,  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I think Mr. Speaker I have mentioned Mombasa Annual 
development plan and not the report.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I just wanted you to come clear because you had 
said you were asking the House to adopt the report.  
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  The O rder paper Mr. Speaker , not the report.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you I n ow propose a question that the 
Motion on the Mombasa County Annual D evelopment Plan for the year 2018 be discussed in 
this House.  
  
(Question put and agreed)  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa  Spika naregea tena kusema shuk rani kwa 
kunipatia nafasi hii kuweza kuongea juu ya hii stakabadhi  kwani  stakabadhi  hii ni abstract  ya ile 
stakabadhi  ambayo tumetoka kufanya na hii ndio plan ya mwaka mmoja kwenye miaka mitano 
na nataka kusema kuwa tukiangalia kwenye hii stakabadhi  kwenye ukurasa wa kwanza ambao 
inazungumzia juu ya transport infrastructure and public wor ks kwa ufupi wa maneno W odi 30 
zote zitakuwa zimepata barabara Mheshimiwa Spika , hakuna Wodi  moja ambayo imemlalia 
mwenzake . Kwa hivyo nikisema kwenye ukurasa wa kwanza tunaanza Kisauni, Mja mbere, 
Magogoni, Barsheba Peponi , Mshomoroni barabara na Kishada, Maryland , Sunlight cabro -road 
Junda mission, N gomeni access road , Mtopanga wamepatiwa Chembani, Kiembeni Catholic 
church, Bamburi wamepatiwa Improvement  of Majaoni. Tukienda kwa Wodi ya Shanzu Utalii 
College schools Mheshimiwa c onstructions kuna vitu viwil i vitatu vime wekwa . Ukiingia 
Mwakirunge Improvement of access  roads  Mwak irunge, Kadzandani Mheshimiwa Wo di 30 zote 
zimetajwa kwenye hii stakabadhi  kuwa hakuna mmoja ali yepata zaidi ya mwenzio.  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ufupi wa maneno naomba Wanacham a wapitishe hii 
stakabadhi  kwani Wodi zote zitapatiwa  taa za barabarani  mpya na pia zile ambazo hazifanyi kazi 
zime wekewa pesa zitengezwe ili zifanye kazi . Hivyo basi  twasema Mheshimiwa Spika naomba 
Nyumba hii iweze kuunga mkono hii stakabadhi  ili tuweze k uendelea mbele . Ahsante sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. H atimy do you have a seconder of this?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshim iwa Spika kwa vile watu walivyo  na hamu na hii 
stakabadhi  hata nimesahau kuuliza mtu wa kuiunga mkono , nauliza Mheshi miwa Amur a iunge 
mkono . 
 Hon. Amur:  Hon. Speaker with all due respect I rise to second the Motion.  Thank you.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I now propose a questio n for the second time 
that the M otion on County Annual Developmen t Plan be debated in this House.  
 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Hon . Hatim y or the seconder or any other Member you can build on this M otion .Yes 
Hon. Amur . 
 Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker a blind man will always be blind, and a person with  
two eyes will always see this Annual Development P lan for the year 2018 , it is a black and white 
material even a blind person can see it . 30 W ards have been captured, no single M ember of this 
Assembly can say he is not touched by this document, the development s that have been clearly 
shown in this document portrays the willingness of Mombasa County to do what is sup posed to 
be done in this County.   We were elected and we gave out promises during our campaigns , it is 
high time Mr. Speaker to concentrate on issue s of development , and politics if the first eight  
months be kept aside, we will be judged by what we will deliver after 2022.  
 Some of us we may fight back to come here but Mr. Speaker we will be judged by the 
good deeds that we do and the bad deeds that we  do we will be judg ed, this document is very 
clear I want any M ember to rise and say he is not touched by this document because you are 
representatives of the people , what the people have been touched by the access roads and 
streetlights we are doing them what we are supposed to do , that is  represent them in this House 
and I want to believe the Mombasa County Ass embly website  is opened 24/7.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  It is accessible free of charge, I kindly request them to go to our website , go deep and if 
there are issues they ar e not satisfied they can ra ise it in written form. Our S tanding orders are 
very clear if a M ember or any person has a problem then it should not be verbal it should be in 
written form, I beg to rest thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon . Bwire . 
 Hon. Bwire: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I have just st ood on a point of order on Standing 
order 27(2) which simply talks about the timings o f the parliamentary proceedings;  we have 
heard you raising a concern over the timings and I find it i mportant to raise this issue that this 
business of today is of high magnitude and that we ought to have enough time to debate and pass 
it together as Assembly . I therefore ask through your C hair to allow adjustment of time so that 
we don't restrict ourselv es, we adjust time for us to debate, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ):  Hon. Raphael Bwire you are in order  and in the 
same time you  are out of order because in a M otion you are introducing another Motion because 
that's a M otion on its own.  
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon.  Speaker I was looking for the S tanding order even before we could 
start the business i have just con sulted the C lerk and that's why I f ind it to raise in between the 
Motion but am sorry, thank you.  
 The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes I will ask the responder becau se I can see 
there is no other M ember who is up, yes Hon . Ogutu.  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika ningependa kuunga hoja hii mkono kwa sababu 
mimi nikiangalia hii stakabadhi  naona nimepata rehabili tation of  Magongo Market at Kshs 53 
million , nimepata barabara tatu nimepata volleyball ground  Majengo pale kwangu na mambo 
mengi ambayo katika ile Bunge lilil opita sisi watu wa Changamwe hakuna kitu ambayo tuliona , 
kwa hivyo hiyo inanipatia nguvu ya kusim ama na kuiunga mkono , ahsante sana.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Tobia s Samba . 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity , atleast 
Members are aware of what I have been going through but I thought it wise since th is was not 
my first co ntribution towards this process  I had not to let the people who I represent down;  I had 
to come, actually Mr. Speaker ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Under  Standing order 41(2), I address that issue  of time that atleast M embers should be 
given amp le time or rather the business of the coming week by the Leader of M ajority , it's a 
genuine request Hon. Speaker and I would like to ask through your C hair that next time a tleast it 
should be catered for  Hon. Speaker . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. M ember it is supposed to be on Thursdays 
afternoon , so this  coming Thursday afternoon the Leader of Majority will abide with that 
Standing order, thank you so much.  
 Hon. Samba: Thank you so much as I rise to contri bute to the M otion . Hon. Speaker all 
the business of the day today i s a process ; some of us were just sworn in after 8th August and 
budget process making always begins around July and its always a process, some of us might 
feel like we were left out during the budget making pro cess and I think I was amongst those 
people who complained , who raised issues about the budget . I took my time I did a petition 
through memorandum, and out of the petition there were several changes that were made Hon. 
Speaker and I took  the memorandum to several offices because I felt that in as much as I am in 
the County A ssembly of Mombasa representin g Mombasa people but am in the County 
Assembly courtesy of Tudor people . So when I took initiative of going through every office Hon. 
Speaker the interest o f Tudor, even if it is not on the interest of Tudo r people is catered for in 
this.   
 Hon. Speaker when debating about the bus iness of today i would request M embers let us 
just be sober and because whatever thing we are doing it is going to take our County  for the next 
coming five years but when the hypes are so high we don't want to give soberness and 
opportunity we might end up not coming up with something tangibl e for the people who elected 
us. Hon. Speaker in that regard I would also refer to PFM Act 12 5 it's a process you go through 
and then PFM Act 128 also its a process, I don't see a reas on why we should not pass this 
Motion, i beg to support the Motion, thank you so much.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon . Leila . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kuweza kunipa nafasi hii kuweza 
kuchangia kwanza nampa kongole Mheshimiwa Hatimy ambae ni M wenyekiti wetu wa ODM 
kwa kutuletea hii bajeti ya CIDP kwa B unge...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Member the C hairman of Budget and 
Appropriation is the one who brought this document here and not the C hairman of ODM.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Nyache:  Sawa pole Mheshimiwa Spika . Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya F edha, 
nimekosea samahani, mi mi pia ningependa kuunga mkon o... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon .  Ogutu.  
 Hon.  Ogutu:  Hon. Speaker the Chair of Finance happens to be the C hair of ODM so i 
think there is no wrong that the M ember has done.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Ogutu there is no harm but as the Speaker I 
have communicated to Hon. Leila to rectify  her Statement so that the M embers don't r aise any 
queries or questions as to who actually brought those doc ument s. You understand that the 
Chairman of ODM is the Chair of F inance but other people don't understand s o it is in order that 
the Hon. M ember to go as the way I have ruled and she also acknowledged that she had gone 
astray so Hon . Leila you can proceed.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  Hon. (Ms.) Nyache: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwa kuweza 
kunielewesha kuhusiana na maswala ya Mwenyekiti  wa ODM na fedha, a hsante. M imi pia 
naunga mkono kikamilifu kabisa hii bajeti il iokuja na Mwenyekiti wetu Hatimy  kwa sababu kule 
mashinani sisi W aheshimiwa tun aangaliwa hivi mumefanya nini? W atu wan atusubiri mashinani 
kwa hivyo hii bajeti imegusa kila Wodi , kila Wo di imegusa na imegusa kila kinachofaa kwa 
mwanadamu ; kwa upande wa afya , upande wa elimu , upande wa shule vijana kina mama 
imegusa kila mtu .  
 Kwa hivyo mimi sioni haja ya kupinga hii ninge omba wenzangu wal ioona labda hii bajeti 
haifai ningewasisitiza waweze kuiunga mkono na kama ni maswala ya kupitia iko kwa tovuti  
tangu kitambo , mwezi uliopita na sisi tuli ipitia na tukaisoma tukaelewa vizuri hata kulikuwa na 
public participation  na watu wa kaunga mkono kila mtu akatoa hoja zake kik amilifu na mambo 
yakawa mazuri. K wa hivyo mimi ningeomba tu W aheshimiwa hata wale waliokaa chini 
hawa wezi kuinuka pia waunge mkono tu wa weza kuinua mkono juu basi waseme pia wako 
pamoja na sisi, a hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Abrari, and Members please stick to 
the Motion, we are in A nnual Development P lan for the year 2018, s o please let us be in the 
same M otion, we are not in the budg et estimates we are not in t he A ppropriation Bill yet, yes 
Hon. Abrari.  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kusema kwa kweli 
mambo mazuri hayataki haraka na hatuko hapa kuridhishana nafsi, sisi tumechaguliwa na 
wananchi kwenye Wodi  wametuamini na tulikula kiapo pale tukisema  hakika tutahudumikia 
mwananchi.  
 Ni kweli b ajeti tumeletewa hizi estimates  lakini ni kwa unyonge na masikitiko makubwa 
sana mimi nilileta memorandum yangu ambayo nina hakika M wenyekiti aliipitia.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Abrari stick to the  Annual Development 
Plan. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Naja hapo  hapo, kwa sababu mimi ni M wakilishi wa 
Kongowea l akini ya kushangaza katika hii Annual D evelop ment P lan ni kuwa Kongowea haswa 
kule kunapoishi watu wanyonge ambao mimi nawakilisha sijaona w amewakilishwa a ma sijaona 
chochote walichopata. M fano hapa kuna improvement of  Bandari road of which  ukiingalia haswa 
iko sehemu za utajiri ambao ni upande wa Nyali ambao Kongowea sisi tuna barabara za Kwa  
Karama , za Makutano, Afrikan B ar hizo zote ni mape ndekezo yangu ambayo nilipeleka  haswa 
kwake ambapo ni vizuri angekuwa ameangalia akayatia maanani...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon . Hatimy . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri amezungumzia akasema hapa watu 
hawak uja kushindana , nataka kum hakikishia kuwa kama anaona kule ile barabara ni ya matajiri 
na yeye anaona ile barabara anataka kuibadilisha iende kwengine hiyo  tutamwita tumpatie nafasi 
hiyo.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  Nampa h uu ujumbe kuwa twa weza kukaa tukakubaliana lakini Mheshimiwa Spika 
nilikuwa naomba kama M heshimiwa Bwire alisimama kutaka kumpa nafasi mda uongezwe 
naomba kupitia kiti chako tuwe wachac he wa maneno ili tuweze kuendelea mbele.  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Mheshimiwa Spika tumetangulia kusema mambo 
mazuri hayataki haraka tafadhali B wana Mwenyekiti niwie radhi haya ni mambo ambayo sisi 
twawakilisha jamii , sisi tulichaguliwa na wananchi kule haswa mashinani tuje tuwawakilishe 
hapa ila sisi hatukuchaguliwa tuje hapa kuridhisha wengine kwa sababu wengi walioko hapa 
wengine ni kama wameku ja kuridhisha wengine...  
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
 Unawasikia mwenyewe, wawasikia, wawasikia...  
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
 Wawasikia...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Order! Order!  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Heshima sijataja mtu yeyote wala jina tafad hali niacheni 
nitoe hoja yangu...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Order Members ! 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Mimi nawakilisha watu wa Kongowea, wewe 
unawakilisha watu wa kwako utaongea kwa niaba ya watu wa kwako. Nimechaguliwa na watu 
wa Kongowea ni na kila...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Point of Information . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Do you want to be informed?  
 Hon. Omondi:  Hon. Speaker, the Member is misleading this House . Mr. Speaker sir we 
have taken our time to be here today for a v ery important purpose and important call and if the 
Member of Kongowea can stand tall and tell us that we have...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Can you inform the House . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Mr. Speaker this is a point of i nformation...  
 
(Interruption)  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18  
 Hon. Omondi:  We have come here to satisfy a certain person somewhere Mr. Speaker 
Sir that is very wrong, let him withdraw that statement with immediate effect ... 
  
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Mr. Speaker there's no way that am  going to withdraw 
this statement, there's no way at all that am going to withdraw this statement. I am here to 
represent the people of Kongowea...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): There's a Point of Order. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker you see we all understand that this House is a 
House of laws and procedures and I think we are heading somewhere we will end up not 
agreeing or not knowing what we are doing today. K indly I need your attention Mr. Speaker, 
thank you. Kindly Mr. Speaker let 's have order, let's give each Member time and if you feel 
maybe what the Member is saying is not what you want to hear you can as well keep quiet and 
raise your concern but where we are heading I think we are not heading in the right  direction. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you for the information Hon. Abrari , a 
Member has raised and has requested you to withdraw your statement . This is a House of laws, 
before you proceed withdraw the st atement and proceed.  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naona sijakwaza 
mtu yeyote kila mtu...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Withdraw the statement as the Chair am askin g 
you to withdraw the statement.  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Okay due to your respect I withdraw the statement . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you, okay.  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Mheshimiwa Spika naregelelea tena, naregelelea tena...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Point of Information . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Two Members cannot be on the floor so Hon. 
Abrari can you sit . 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Is it Point of Order or Point of Information?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Point of Information .  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Okay, thank you.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumwambia mwenzangu kuwa 
mwanzo soma hiyo stakabadhi;  kwenye stakabadhi  ya kitengo cha afya  tulio nayo hapa twaona 
construction of Jomvu Model and Nyali Kongowea to create a 50 bed capacity for Level four 
hospital  akisema hakuna kitu atakuwa amekosea kwenye kitengo cha afya  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Mheshimiwa Spika tafadhali sana tusijaribu hasa kutoka 
nje ya mada . Mimi nawakilisha watu wa Kongowea na nina kila haki ya kutetea mwana 
Kongowea hapa siko hapa ku ridhisha mtu na siko hapa ku unga mkono  kama wengine 
wanavyoona wako hapa kum unga mkono  mtu fulani ili waonekane wao ni wazuri...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sipingi hii b ajeti isipokuwa nasema hasa tupewe muda kwa 
sababu mambo mazuri hayataki harak a, sote sisi hapa twawatakia watu wetu mambo mazuri na 
kwa hivyo ni vizuri itakuwa jambo jema zaidi kuwa kila aliyechaguliwa mashinani awe 
ataridhika na  stakabadhi  hii. Nawaomba W aheshimiwa wenzangu tuipitie hii stakabadhi  vizuri 
zaidi, tuje hapa kwa sabab u hii stakabadhi  nina hakika kama sote tutaridhika nayo basi mpaka 
mwananchi kule pia ataridhika lakini kama tukiangalia hapa mwanzo kuna mahali ambapo 
Mwenyekiti nataka kukutoa makosa.   Naona hapa kuna hii katika upande wa barabara katika 
Mkomani kwa saba bu Mkomani na Kongowea sisi ni ndugu hii ni Wodi iliozaliwa na 
Kongowea, Kongowea ndio iliozaa Mkomani na Ziwa La Ng'ombe tunaona katika ugawanyaji 
wa rasilimali naona Mkomani hapa  kuna Nyoka Road ambayo katika b ajeti ya mwaka jana  
nafikiri  Nyoka Road ilim alizwa haina dosari mimi natoka huko, mimi natoka Twiga Road na 
barabara ya Nyoka  ishajengwa lak ini na leo hii naiona tena kwa b ajeti... 
 
(Laughter and Applause)  
 
 Naiona hapa kwenye bajeti barabara ya Nyoka na mimi natoka hapo naitembea kila siku, 
iko cabro naomb a Waheshimiwa mkitoka hapa twendeni tukaitembee muione hii  barabara ya 
Nyoka leo iko hapa kwenye bajeti tena halafu mwasema tuipitishe jamanini tuketini vizuri 
tuangalie na bado tu kuna dosari nyingi hapa...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Abrari . 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ambaye hatoki Kongowea ama hatoki Mkomani aje 
niwapeleke kuna dosari nyingi sana hapa...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Abrari it is not construction of Nyoka 
Road but it is improvement of  Nyoka Road so...  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20 (Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ni barabara mpya ambayo imefunguliwa pengine  miezi 
mitatu , minne iliopita , ni barabara mpya , mimi ndio natoka hapo kwa hivyo mimi ndio najua 
ambaye hajui twende nimpeleke aone...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir with due respect I would like to inform the Hon. Member 
just on the floor that actually as we are discussing in this particular House we do not have the 
measurement and even we  do not have that capacity of saying this road is supposed to be put in 
this particular manner . Mr. Speaker Sir when they have talk about improvement of a road there 
are so many things which are still supposed to be done on that particular road but maybe t he 
Hon. Member saw the road and when he saw the road he thought that the road is already done, 
there might be some things like the drainages. Let me inform you, am informing you...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Ibrahim just let Hon. Abrari to proceed.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Yes what is it Hon. Hamida?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Hamida Noor:  I have something to add on what Hon. Abrari is saying , we 
come from the same place in Kongowea, the road that he is saying is complete it is already 
completed s o what we are asking we should go there and see the other roads that are not 
completed and I think that's where we can get the conclusion.  
 We support the budget, we are not refusing about the budget but we want you to come 
and see the roads that are not co mpleted over there and as my fellow Honorable  said that if those 
roads were completed and the other ones were not completed they can do the same for us we will 
appreciate. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Abrari she has taken a minute fr om your 
time so you have just one minute from your time  
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ahsante sana dadangu maana twatoka upande mmoja 
nashukuru sana kwa kuni unga mkono  na ni kweli kama mlivyosikia kutoka kwake hapa kuna 
barabara ambazo tayari zishatengenezwa na zimeregesh wa tena hapa kwenye bajeti hii hii na 
ilhali kule mitaani tuna barabara ambazo ni mbovu hakuna barabara itakuaje ukatengeneze ile 
barabara ambayo  ishatengenezwa na ilhali barabara mbovu ziko. Kwa hivyo kama kweli 
itatolewa na ipelekwe kwa barabara nyengin e... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumwambia ndugu yangu Abrari 
wajua shida  ni kuwa bado wasoma, ni kuwa ikiwa hii barabara iko  hii stakabadhi inaweza 
kufanyiwa marekebi sho wakati wowote . 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21  Sio kuwa eti mshapitisha hii stakabadhi  eti ndio imekwishwa , kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa 
Spika  naomba ruhusa ya hii Nyumba kupitisha hii Intergrated Plan  ama Development plan with 
amendment .  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ili tuweze kwenda kuangalia  na kama ni k upeana barabara nyengine ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Alafu  tutapeana barabara nyengine. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ahsante sana nadhani waliamsha waliolala na waliolala 
wakawa wameamka sasa kama ni sawa tutapitisha stakabadhi  hii na marekebi sho sawa nitakuwa 
nimekubaliana naye lakini kama tutaipitisha hivi nitakuwa ni wa kwanza kuipinga. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Milka?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand here to say that er eor is to human and 
we cannot have a perfect document and therefore if there's an er ror we cannot afford not to pass 
this Annual Development Plan (ADP) . 
 This is  because that will mean that we are denying the people of Mombasa the very 
essential services that have b een captured in this document and I can see that almost everyone 
has been captured . In fact am very happy being a professional teacher, am very happy  with what 
has been touched on e ducation and also for Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs where 
our women falls, our women are waiting for good roads to take them to wherever place where 
they are going to sell, our children are waiting for good roads so that they can go to school to and 
fro in a comfortable manner . 
 So I think it is fair that we pass thi s document with amendments as the Chairman has 
rightly proposed and as the Member of Kongowea has also agreed to the same statement that 
they could be a minor problem but we cannot afford not to pass it because then we are going to 
miss our people, our peo ple who are outside there who are going to miss our services are going 
to miss the services if we do not pass this document . And with that I just want to ask our 
colle agues that please let us pass this document with amendments and I think I trust our 
Chair man when he says that for example the Member of Kongowea come sit with us and we will 
look at the area of concern and then finally we shall alter as to the suitability of the people of 
Kongowea and other area . With that I ask the Members to support the doc ument and we move 
forward. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Ath man Shebe?  
 Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika licha ya maumbile yangu ya 
twiga, umechelewa sana kuniona lakini mwishowe umenipatia  fursa na mimi k uweza kuchangia 
mawili matatu ku toka hoja hii . Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante.   
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22  Kwanza nitangulie ningependa kuipatia uhai hoja hii ilio mbel e yetu ya Mwenyekiti wetu 
Moham ed Hatimy , nina sababu zangu za kimsingi. Kwa sababu nimechelewa kupatiwa n afasi 
ningeomba Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia nguvu zako kama Spika uweze kuwazuia sitaki point of 
information  kwa sababu naweza kuruhusu na kukataa . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nimekataa 
point of information  ili niweze kuchachawiza nili o yadhamiria , ahsante.  Naweza sema 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza wananchi walipatiwa nafasi yao...  
 
(Laughter and Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): What is it Hon. Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Point of Order . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): He is up on Point of Order , under which Point of 
Order? Hon. Thoya which Point of Order are you up on?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker you will have to help me take this opportunity but there's no 
chachawiza ... 
  
(Laughter)  
 
 And I know we have the right word.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Shebe proceed, use Parliamentary 
language. Thank you.  
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ni mistari imemuishia tutamuwia 
radhi. Mheshimiwa Spika kama kuna mtu ana jaribu kuongea Kiswahili Mufti basi ni mimi na 
kama hajui anaweza kuangalia ka tika Kamusi ina sema namna gani. Mheshimiwa Spika 
nachukua sababu zangu tano za kuweza kuieleza kwa kina kwa nini nimeipatia uhai hoja hii 
ilioletwa mbele. Leo katika Bunge la Pili tutakuwa hatutawafanyia haki wananchi wetu kwa 
kuwa kuna baadhi ya masuala y amezingatiwa katika Wodi zote 30 ; hapa nazungumzia kwa 
muktadha wa Jomvu Kuu ama eneo Bunge la Jomvu, miaka takriban kumi tumekuwa tukiachwa 
nyuma sana Mheshimiwa Spika katika mpango mzima wa maendeleo hususan katika Kaunti yetu 
ya Mombasa . Ndio sababu za kina nimeweza kuipatia hoja hii nguvu nikisema baadhi ya 
mapendekezo kwanza kadamnasi iliofanyika katika CIDP , kwanza malalamishi ya wananchi 
yalitoka yalipotoka Mheshimiwa Spika yakaletwa lakini baadhi hayakuweza kuzingatiwa .  
 Mimi kama Kiongozi wao nasima ma hapa Mheshimiwa Spika nasema nilileta 
memorandum  kwa wahusika na nashukuru mapendekezo waliweza kuyanakili katika bajeti na 
ndio maana leo niko hapa naiunga mkono.   Hii ni nafasi nzuri ya kut aka kuonyesha sisi sote ni 
wana damu Mheshimiwa Spika aliyekami lika ni Mungu pekee yake, kwa hivyo kosa la kwanza 
lisikufanye wewe ukakata tamaa katika mpango mzima huu wa bajeti. Mheshimiwa Spika 
nikiangalia Jomvu kuliachwa nyuma kimatibabu, Jomvu kuliachwa nyuma ki miundo msingi, 
Jomvu kumeachwa nyuma kiviwanda usiu lize barabara ilikuwa haziangaliki lakini leo nikitupa 
macho yangu katika bajeti hii naona nimefikiriwa katika huu muda wa hii bajeti , yote ni yale 
nilikuwa tumesahaulika katika miaka yote iliopita lakini nashukuru kwa viongozi shupavu 
wanaowakilisha Jomvu  katika Bunge hili la Kaunti katika Wodi tatu nashukuru kwa sababu 
tumetia nguvu zote katika hoja hii na bajeti hii imezingatiwa . 
 Kwa hivyo mimi nasema Mheshimiwa Spika mazuri kweli hayataki haraka na vile vile 
pia yataka mpangilio ikiwa leo tumepangilia bajeti hii na tumepatiwa muda na tukapatiwa 
upenyenyo wa kuweza kutia mabadiliko twataka nini zaidi ikiwa kila kitu kina mabadiliko 
inatuonyesha sisi ni wanadamu aliyekamilika ni nani , ni Mungu.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23  Hivyo basi ikiwa tumepatiwa nafasi ya  kufanya marekebisho  turuhusu bajeti ipite 
Mheshimiwa Spika tuan galie msasa utapigwa namna gani, tuangalie randa itapigwa wapi. K ila 
Mheshimiwa katika Wodi yake ahakikishe kuwa katika mpango mzima kwa sababu hakuna mtu 
Mheshimiwa Spika hataki kuingia katika kumbu kumbu kila mtu a nataka, kila mtu anataka 
kuhakikisha wananchi wake matakwa yao yamezi ngatiwa katika mpango mzima wa b ajeti kwa 
hivyo sioni sababu kuzidi kuchukua muda, sioni sababu tuzidi kukaushana mate , tuweze 
kupitisha hoja hii na kama kutakuwa na mabadiliko ruhsa inat oa nafasi ya kuwa sisi ni 
wanadamu aliyekamilika ni Mungu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Mwam wiri? 
 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika tukiangalia 
katika Kanuni ya Ser ikali ya Ugatuzi Ibara ya 102 inapeana lengo na shabaha ya kwa  nini 
kuliundwa serikali za Ugatuzi . Katika sehemu ndogo ya 2 inasema ihakikishe ya kwamba 
kutakuwa na usawa katika utendaji kazi na ugawaji wa rasilimali , kwa hivyo hii iko katika 
Kanuni na sio  kwamba ni msaada ni sehemu moja kupata hili, hili ni suala liko ki sheria kama 
makusudio ya serikali ya Ugatuzi kwamba kila sehemu lazima ifikiwe . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika tukija katika Ibara ya 115 inazungumzia masuala ya kuhusishwa kwa 
jamii, binafsi sina shid a kubwa na baadhi ya migao ilioko hapa lakini swali langu ni je haya 
yaliyoko hapa ya kwamba Wodi yangu kuwa itapata hiki na hiki ndio yalikuwa ni mapendekezo 
ya jamii ninayowakilisha ama ni Kamati na Waziri waliaf iki kuwa jambo hili linastahili? 
Mheshimiw a Spika ukiangalia gazeti ya leo la Nation ukurasa 21 kama sijakosea kuna baadhi ya 
mashirika yako mahakamani kwa sababu ya kwamba jamii haikuhusishwa kisawa sawa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika kama Bunge tusiwe na pupa ya kutazamana kana kwamba tuko kupingana 
mimi ni mwanachama wa serikali ya Kaunti yangu...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Kibwana . 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker am standing here on a Point of 
Information . I think Mr. Speaker my colle ague or my brother is misl eading  the House  because 
whatever has been contain ed in the CIDP every Ward or every Sub County was involved so 
whatever was captured in this CIDP are the views and proposal s of the people...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Kibwan a you are also misleading the 
House because we are in ADP. Hon. Mwamwiri proceed . 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Sorry, thank you Hon. Speaker for the correction . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Proceed Hon. Mwamwiri . 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika usi nge ingililia kati ilikuwa naanza 
kupunguza heshima yangu kwa Mheshimiwa wa Miritini lakini heshima yangu iko pale pale kwa 
ndugu yangu mkubwa. Mheshimiwa Spika kuna nukuu ya kupitisha kwa mabadiliko ama 
marekebisho lakini hapa tunazungumzia kuna ADP halaf u tena kuna bajeti ambayo makadirio ya 
bajeti yanatokana ama yako sambamba na ADP na tukija katika..  
. 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
24 (Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika rafiki yangu, ndugu yangu bado  
anapotosha Ny umba hii . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon.  Mwamwiri sit down . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  ...Anapotoshwa makadirio ya bajeti yanatokamana na Fiscal 
Strategy P aper Mheshimiwa Spika ambayo inakupatia ceiling  kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika 
tulikuwa na CIDP 2014  - 2018 ambayo ukiangalia kifungu 108 cha County Government Act 
kinasema stakabadhi  hii umri w ake ni miaka mitano . Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa iko 
ile stakabadhi  na ikafanyiwa public participation  kuitengeneza na wakati huo huo  
tumei tengeneza na pia ukienda kwenye PFM Act nafikiri 126 (3) iko wazi mipango ina kuwa 
table d tarehe moja mwezi wa Septemba  Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Hatimy.  Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimi wa Spika, Mheshimiwa Hatimy amekurupuka 
kabla ya kunipatia pale ambapo nilikuwa naja , pengine kwa ufahamu ataeleza zaidi Jumba hili ya 
kwamba haya marekebisho ambayo tunayakusudia kwamba tunaweza tukayafanya kwa sababu 
baadhi ya hizi sheria katika masuala ya pesa za umma Ibara ya 37 kama sijakosea inasema ya 
kwamba County Treasury ama Wizara ya Fedh a haitaruhusiwa kutumia nje ya b ajeti  kwa hiyo  
barabara ambayo Mheshimiwa anaizungumzia kwamba iko sasa hivi imegusiwa hapa je 
inarekebishika hapa ndio iende ku le ama itarekebishwa baada imepita wakati sheria imesema 
hatutaruhusi wa kutumia hata ndururu nje ya b ajeti iliopitishwa ? Hapo ndipo nilipokuwa 
napakusudia na wala si kuwa na ujamii kuhusiana na timeframe kwa sababu mengi 
hatutayapelekesha kisahihi.  
 Mhesh imiwa Spika bajeti ama naona jambo  moja hapa katika bajeti ya masuala ya 
uchukuzi ki mimi naona imepangilika kisahihi ya kwamba imezungumzia kitu fulani, mahali 
fulani na ndani ya muda fulani lakini baadhi ya vipengele vimezungumzia kitu pasi kuonyesha ni 
wapi na kwa muda gani na kima ambacho kiko pale.  Kwa hivyo tukienda mbele lazima wizara 
zetu zinazohusika ziwajibishwe na sisi kama Bunge lazima tuwajibishe kwamba wakituletea 
kiwe kinajulikana ni wapi ili kutuwezesha na sisi kufuatilia hiki kimetajwa hapa  ndivyo 
kilivyokusudiwa kufanywa kwa muda uliofanyika lakini tukiambiwa kuwa kutajengwa hospitali 
ya Kongowea , lini? Kongo wea hiyo ni Wodi kubwa ni nzima? N a iko na vijiji ndan i yake 
haijataja ni kijiji gani.  Kwa hivyo bado  kwa mwananchi bado hili ni tatiz o ambalo halijakuwa 
sahihi.   
 Mheshimiwa Spika kama Mwakilishi wa Likoni na mapendekezo tuliyoyaleta mengi 
yapo hatujayaona kwenye daftari hili japo mengine yapo tunashukuru, tunaafiki lakini 
kulikuwepo nayo kama Likoni Sub County kwa jumla ya sisi tuingiz iwe kwenye marekebisho 
masuala ya masoko, soko letu la Shika Adabu ili mama zetu na vijana waweze kupata ajira lakini 
sehemu zengine zimetajwa kwetu kumesah aulika, kukamilishiwa hospitali yetu ya uzalishaji ya 
Shika Adabu ili bibi zetu na mama zetu wawache  kutumia vidonge vya kupanga uzazi kwa 
sababu eneo za matibabu zipo kwa wingi lakini pia...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
25  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Mwamwiri your time is up.  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalim u): Yes Hon. Thoya and Hon. Thoya will be the 
last.  
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika mimi kitu ambacho ningependa kufurahika 
zaidi ni kuona kauli zote zinaungana kwamba hoja hii itapitishwa lakini marekebisho 
yatakuweko hiyo ni kongole sana, nasema h ivyo kwa sababu wengi nikiwem o mimi naunga 
mkono kwa sababu b ajeti hii inaweza kuwa haina pesa zote za  kutosheleza mahitaji ya w atu wa 
Mikindani lakini katika huo mwaka naona niko na karibu sehemu saba ambazo nimejivunia 
kwamba nimepata . Kwa hivyo ni lazim a niseme ahsante kwa sababu siwezi kutengewa kwamba 
kila kitu cha Mikindani kiweze kutengezwa kwa mwaka huo mmoja In Shaa Allah bajeti ijayo 
yale mengine ambayo hatukuweza kuyaangazia...  
(Interruption)  
             The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. T hoya we are in the ADP, Annual 
Development Plan .  
            Hon. Thoya:  Haya, nafikiri ni  Kizungu mimi nazungumza Kiswahili lakini nafikiri kuna 
kama ma  container nimeona hapa utanisaidia wewe mwenyewe maana yake umesema hapa 
tunasoma lakini nikisema hiv yo ni kwamba ni vizuri wakati tunaunga mkono ni kwa umoja wa 
wale wanaounga mkono, zile sauti mbili tatu ambazo kidogo zina utata, zina ulalamishi ziweze 
kuangaziwa kwa sababu tuwe katika hali ya sawa. Nimemuona Mheshimiwa Abrari na mwisho 
wa kuisha ikasem ekana kwamba ipo haja ya kwamba mapendekezo haya japo yatapita yapite na 
marekebisho. Kwa hivyo mimi nilikuwa nasimama niunge mkono hio kwa sababu ikiwa 
Mheshimiwa Mwam wiri amesema anasikia raha lakini kuna mahali ambapo si sawa akiona wale 
wahusika pengin e kutakuwa na ukarabati ili ahakikishe wale watu anaowakilisha watakuwa 
wawe sawa ili tuwe familia na Jumba moja maana yake naona sote tunasoma ukurasa mmoja 
japokuwa kuna dosari mbili tatu tuweze kuwapa nafasi hawa W aheshimiwa watoe yale 
mapendekezo ili s ote tuwe Jumba moja na Kaunti moja tukisema mbele, ni mbele pamoja. 
Ahsante sana.  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes, Chairman Finance Budget and  
Appropriation respond on your M otion . 
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika nachukua fursa hii 
kuwashukuru Members  kwa kuweza kujadili kwa umakinifu na kunga zia. Jambo ambalo nataka 
kusema Mheshimiwa Spika, je tumeangalia wananchi nje? Je, hawa wanaofanya hii kazi 
umewawekea nini? Waheshimiwa wamewekewa nini kwenye bajeti y etu ya Bunge la Kaunti ... 
(Interruption)  
 
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ):  Hon. Cha irman we are yet to reach that M otion 
just respond...  
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I am responding Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuwa hii pia na sisi 
kama Bunge la Kaunti  tuna haki kuwemo ndani. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika pia nataka 
kuambia Members  tumefanya bajeti ya kusema  kuwa Members  kwa pesa zao zile wanazopata 
laki moja tumekubaliana tumeshikana na Bo di... 
(Interruption)  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
26  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwa limu): Hon. Hatimy we are yet to reach that report, we 
have that report on our table so ... 
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Or you want me to do it in a ..., haya sawa .  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): We are in the  ADP, Annual Development Pl an 
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Haya sawa  Mheshimiwa Spika n imekubali kwa hivyo kwa 
kusema Members  ninawashukuru na nawaomba tafadhalini muipitishe ADP, Annual 
Development Plan na marekebisho maana yake sisi hatuna unafiki;  ni kusema kuwa ukisema 
jambo  ni lazima ulifanye lile jambo  kwa hivyo nataka kuhakikishia Members  kuwa tutapitisha na 
marekebisho na tutaaangalia zile shida ziko wapi ili tuweze kuzitatua...  
(Applause)  
            ...Tuzitatue shida zetu ili tuwe tuko pamoja tuendele mbele Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
(Question put)  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon . Members. I now st and to put a 
question that the M otion on the Mombasa County Annual Development Plan be ap proved in this 
Honourable Hou se. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
MOMBASA BUDGET ESTIMA TES FOR 2018/2019  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speak er I beg to move the 
following M otion ;  
That this House adopt the report on the Mombasa budget estimates for 2018/2019 .  
            I beg to move Mr. Speaker and request Hon. Mwidani to second.  
            Leader if Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): I stand to second . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you. I now propose a question that the 
motion on the Mombasa County budget estimates for FY 2018/2019  be debated in this House, 
will as many of the same opinion say ayeee....  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
           Yes M embers the Motion is on the floor, yes, Hon. Hatimy  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
27             Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish to give the Budget 
Estimates FY 2018/2019 of  total amount of  Kshs.13,591,771,891.00 ; development expenditure 
being Kshs .4,965,647,037.00 Hon.  Speaker while recurrent e xpenditure being Kshs. 
8,626,124,854.00 . Hon. Speaker I want to amend it is not Kshs.4M illion but Kshs.4,496,647,037 
of the recurrent e stimates . Kshs.3,281,135,163.00 has been set aside for operating expenses  
while Kshs.5,534,989,691.00 has been allocated for salaries and emolument. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker and I request the M ember s to pass this report.  
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani): Yes Hon. Kibwana .  
            Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker although you ambushed me I was just 
discussing with my colleague here. Hon. Speaker I think I will be on the right track if I stan d 
here to say that I support the se budget e stimates that have been tabled by our Chairman, Hon. 
Hatimy. Hon. Speaker there are a lot of things that have been captured in thi s budget which are 
very crucial to our people and this will improve service delivery to our people. Hon. Speaker I 
stand here as a Chair of the Health Commi ttee and I am glad to say that h ealth servic es within 
Mombasa County will be improved a lot.  
            Hon. Speaker currently we have 30 bed hospitals in almost every Sub -County, I start with 
Chaani which is also taking care of the larger Jomvu and Changamwe which means that there 
will be completi on and also equip that hospital and I am happy that the people will benefit from 
this facility. Hon. Speaker also I see that the services that the people of Lik oni are going to get 
from this b udget, they are a lot to be desired on this document ; the hospit als that have been built 
there this financial year the equipment also  will be catered for from this b udget. Hon. S peaker 
the other issue on this budget is that the Members will realize more development in every W ard 
than the previous year that other Wards did not benefit from this b udget. Hon. Speaker the other 
issue that will also benefit if I touch on my area is the land issue whereby my people also are 
squatter s and I have seen through this b udget that they will be catered for.  
            So Hon. Speaker since beca use of the time I will not be able now to capture everything in 
this document but I am happy that at least we will  put legacy not only for us as M embers but 
even the Governor who is also spearheading on th ese issues. So I am glad that we agree as 
Members I  think we are one team to see the people of  Mombasa County realize development 
and also improving of service delivery. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Mwaka Zahoro . 
            Hon. ( Mrs. )Mwaka Zahoro : Thank you  Mr. Speaker S ir. I rise here to support the 
Motion on the report of the Mombasa County Budget Fiscal Estimates FY 2018/2019.  Mr. 
Speaker I would also want to commend the Committee for doing a great job in creation of these 
documents, this will enable the County to move forward and I can see Kshs.4.9B illion  has been 
set aside for the purpose of developm ent. So I would also wish that M embers passed the 
document so as the implementation of the work can be done so that the people can realiz e fruits 
and the imp ortance of d evolution. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
           The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Junior Wambua . 
            Hon. Wambua : Ahsante Bwana Spika. Bwana Spika nasimama hapa kuunga mkono 
hoja ambayo tunaendelea kuijadili na nasema ya kwamba kazi ambayo Mwenyekiti ambayo 
amefanya ni kazi nzuri sana, mambo ambayo yamekuwa mengi ya malalamiko ni kuwa ile 
tuliyoletewa kule mtaani ilileta maneno mengi sana na sasa tumeona hapa imerekebishwa na 
mambo yanaendelea vizuri.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
28             Nimeangalia vile p esa Mwenyekiti amepa nga tunaona itaendeleza katika W odi zote na 
hapa tunaona tutapata maendeleo kwa watu wetu. Kile kinatufanya  sisi tuzungumze sana sisi 
wana siasa ni kutafuta jinsi tu naweza kupata maendeleo katika W odi zetu na hivyo ikiendelea 
namna hii M wenyekiti naona watu wetu watapata maendeleo katika muda huo wetu ambao 
tutawakilisha watu wetu. Kwa hayo machache naomba kuunga mkono hoja hii.  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes, the Leader of Majority is up . 
            Leader of Majorit y (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I arise here also to 
support the estimates of the budget, especially Mr. Speaker if you go to page 5, 217 – The 
County Assembly will get a facelift through repairs of the building . Most importantly, M embers 
of the s taff will also receive car and mortgage loans , this I think for my M embers this time we 
are going to be in a very good position...  
(Applause)  
            ...to add on it Mr. Speaker even we have set aside as you know we were payi ng 
Kshs.110,000 for the W ard offices but it has been risen to Kshs.140,000 now and I will also be 
very ha ppy to emphasize that even the Nominated M embers we have accepted according to the 
laws of the salary and r emuneration that they will get one driver and one  personnel to be paid. .. 
(Applause)  
            With this Assembly. And this is not because of we, it is according to law. So Mr. Speaker 
I am so happy to see th at all my M embers now they will be ok ay in a very good position. They 
will be no having any excuse of saying why they  have been coming late, maybe they will be 
having some cars to be brought here so that I do not want to see that things are not moving. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you. Yes, Hon. Kombe Nzai . 
            Hon. Nzai : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii na mimi kuweza kuongea 
mawili , matatu. Mwanzo nataka nitoe shukrani kwa W aheshimiwa wenzangu nyote kwa 
kusimama na m imi wakati wa msiba mkubwa nili o upata na vile vile napeana rambi rambi zangu 
kwa M heshimiwa mwenzangu ambaye amepoteza pia mpenzi wake.  
            Kabla kupoteza wakati nasimama pia mimi kupongeza hoja hii yote ambayo ilikuwa 
ikiendelea hapa hususan Ka dzandani ni Wodi ya squatter  na leo hapa naona nimepangiwa 
mambo mazuri ambayo ni ma suala nyeti ambayo yalikuwa yakiulizwa mara kwa mara. Nimeona 
mambo na bara bara, nimeona mambo na ardhi ambao hapa inaonekana baada ya miaka mitano 
hii Ka dzandani itakuwa ni W odi ambayo iko Nyali kikweli.  Moja tuu Mheshimiwa Spika 
amba yo nitayaangazia kup itia kwa  Mwenyekiti wetu wa Fedha mambo hayo yote ya pesa ni 
mazuri, yamepangika yanavyostahili lakini hivi vi  tender tender basi ukiturushia rushia pia 
utazidi kutupa  paja ambao hapo utakua umezidi kutuvalisha kilemba Mheshimiwa...  
(Interruption)  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ):  Hon. Member you are out of order. Yes Hon. 
Faith . 
            Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity 
though I have been standing , I do not know  if it is because I am too s hort, you have not given me 
chance since we started but now I appreciate.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
29             Mr. Speaker, I would like to  start first by saying we are here to represent our electorates 
and at the same time to help the g overnment of Mombasa. So it is good to say the things ho w 
they are, if it is good we applaud, if they are bad we try and see how we can make things to be 
seen nice. Mr. Speaker first of all I would like to appreciate my team which we were at Kitui 
County for benchmarking, it is through that benchmarking where we came with those proposal 
of one driver and one  personnel for nominated MCA s...  
(Applause)  
            Even though we have not been paid the per diem  for that trip. Mr. Speaker...  
(Interruption)  
 
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Faith y ou are also out of order, it is an 
administrative issue so do not raise it h ere because we cannot call the a ccounting officer to reply 
on your issue.  
            Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Thank you for guidance Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I would 
like also t o appreciate the development allocation which is Kshs.36.5 which is according to the 
Constitution. So I will urge all the departments and the allocation which are being allocated to be 
implemented because most of the things we see them in the papers but by  the end of the day 
those projects are not implemented. Mr. Speaker allow me to go back to the Annual 
Development Plan of which I saw many discrepancies on some of the projects...  
(Interruption)  
 
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Amur . 
            Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker point of clarification. We are talking about the budget 
estimates Mr. Speaker we cannot be taken back to ADP, Annual Development Plan at this 
moment. So I kindly request my colleague to concentrate on the budget estimat es. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
           The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Faith, what is it?  
           Hon. (Ms.) Faith Boniface : Thank you for that correction it is only that I wanted to 
contribute because I represent a W ard so I had to put my input on it. So I appreciate in 
everything but when we come to the County Assembly it will be also be good in near future to 
categorize this is going to where or where because it is just a lump sum. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
           The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwal imu): Hon. Amur . 
            Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker let me congratulate the team first ; the 
budget process Mr. Speaker it is not a one day issue. It is an issue that has to start from July until 
30th of June before it is presented to  the House. Mr. Speaker the team has done the most of the 
amendments and the public participation that were taken care of to come up with a transparent 
document like this , it was not easy Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker each and every item has been 
categorized wi th the percentage that has been allocated, that alone tells how transparent this 
budget is and we must be thankful to our people , those who participated in the public 
participation to th e Committee of Finance and the M embers. This is a well done job and we  must 
congratulate the Committee Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
           The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes, Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi . 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
30             Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Nataka kuchukua nafasi hii na 
mimi pia niweze kutoa maoni yangu; l angu ni  kuishukuru Kamati ya Fedha ikiongozwa na 
Mwenyekiti Bwana Hatimy, nataka kuwapongeza kwa kazi nzuri ambayo wameifanya ili 
kuitengeza bajeti hii ambayo nafikiri itasaidia watu wote wa Mombasa Kaunti. Pia nataka 
kuipongeza hii bajeti imegusia sehemu za  wenzetu ambao pia hawakuweza kubaguliwa kwa 
sababu ni viongozi ambao wameteuliwa, pia kuna pahala ambapo pametengewa kitu ambacho 
kitawasaida kuweza kupata  usafiri. Kwa hivyo nawashauri W abunge we nzangu tuweze 
kuipitisha hii bajeti kwa sababu t umefaidika sote na pia imegusa W odi zetu zote 30 kwamba 
kuna kitu kitafika kila pahali. Kwa hiyo nachukua nafasi hii  kuiunga mkono hii bajeti na 
kuishukuru ile t imu ambayo ilikaa kupoteza muda wao kuweza kuitengeneza hii draft  na kuwa 
kisawasawa. Kwa hio kwa hayo mac hache ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
           The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes, Hon. Shomari . 
            Hon. Ali Shomari : Assalam Alayku m. Kwanza ningependa kutoa shuk rani za dhati kwa 
Mwenyezi Mungu kuweza kutukutanisha sote hapa, pili natoa kongole  kwa kitengo cha Kamati 
ya Fedha kwa kuweza kugusa kila W odi katika Kaunti yetu ya Momb asa. Pili ningependa 
kuwaambia W ahesh imiwa wenzangu wote ikiwa kuna W odi yeyote ambayo pengine 
imesahaulika Mheshimiwa asiweze kupinga bali akae chini aweze kuandika mar ekebisho, 
Kamati iko itaweza kusawazisha. Ahsanteni sana na Mungu awabariki.  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members I had s aid earlier no one has moved a 
Motion to all ow the House to proceed after 6: 30 p.m. so because of time I will call th e mover of 
the Motion to respond unles s a M ember rises to bring that M otion.  
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri nitakuwa mchache wa maneno 
kwa sababu ya muda . Ni kusema kuwa ninawashukuru Members  kwa michango yao na kuweza 
kuunga mk ono haya makadirio ya bajeti na tuweze kuendelea mbele , na bado haijapita lakini 
bado naomba wazidi kuunga mkono na wakati huo huo naona kuwa kuna stakabadhi  nyengine 
ambayo ina umuhimu wa kupitishwa kwa hivyo nafikiri Mheshimiwa Spika nitakomea hapo ili 
tuweze kupata huu muda tuweze kuendelea na hii  stakabadhi  ya mwisho. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
(Question put)  
 
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you. Hon. Faith the Speaker is up on his 
feet so you are supposed to sit. Members I st and to  put a question that the M otion on the 
Mombasa County Budget Estimates for FY 2018/2019 be ap proved by this Honourable House.  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
            Hon. Members the House will adjourn for 20 minutes then we will come back to  proceed 
with the next business.  
 
TEMPORARY ADJOURNMENT  
 
(Serjeant -At-Arms lowered the Mace from the Table)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) exited the Chair)  
(The House adjourned  for 20 minutes)  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
31  
PLENARY RESUMED  
 
(Serjeant -At-Arms raised the Mace on the  Table)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Clerk?  
 
BILLS  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2018  
 
 Yes Chairman C ommittee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation?  
 
FIRST  READING  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker , pursuant to provisions of the S tanding 
order number 120 wi th your permission the Mombasa County Appropriation B ill no.6 be read 
the first time. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Thank y ou, Yes Clerk?  
 
(The Cle rk read the Mombasa County Appropriation Bill, 2018  for the first time)  
 
 Yes Chairman?  
 Hon. Mombasa Hatimy:  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker; T hat the Mombasa County 
Appropriation Bill, 2018 Bill no.6 be read a S econd time Mr. Speaker n ow. Thank y ou. 
 The Deputy Sp eaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
SECOND READING  
(The Clerk read the Mombasa County Appropriation Bill, 2018 for the Second time)  
 
 Yes Members the B ill has been read for a second time ; during this reading M ember s 
there are no amendments just principal ide as then if not we shall proceed to the next stage . Any 
Member with any ideas in this B ill before we proceed ?Yes Hon . Amur?  
 Hon. Amur:  Thank y ou Mr.Speaker ,  since everybody has the A ct it will be easier to edit 
if there is any issue because the votes have  been indicated and there is no reason to go vote by 
vote unless somebody has a particular issue then we will accept to hear it . If we go to the nitty 
gritty of each vot e  then we will go until upto 8: 00p.m so am requesting Mr. Speaker they just go 
through  it and if anybody has an issue then they can. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I think we have to move to the Whole House C omm ittee so 
that we can pass this Bill for Second and T hird reading . Thank you . 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members the H ouse now stands dissolved 
to the Committee of the Whole H ouse. 
 
 
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
32 HOUSE DISSOLVED TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
 
(Order of Committee read ) 
(Serjeant -At-Arms lowered the Mace)  
(The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Mwalimu) exited the Chair)  
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
 
(Chairperson (Hon. Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
 Chairperson:  Member s welcome to the Whole House C ommittee , you are allowed to do 
amendments and even speak more than once, the Cler k will read the clauses for us to proceed. 
Yes?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I take you  to S tanding order 126(2) that there are no 
amendments, we have not seen any and there is no amendment without the permission of the 
mover of the Bill. 
 Chairperson:  Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  The Mombasa County Appropriation B ill, 2018 schedule  Ksh.8,626,124,854 
supply,  donor funds Ksh 138,925,307,  Appropriation I n Aid Kshs 2,392,770,725.  Vote number 
R3011.  
 Chairperson:  Members I propose that vote R3011 Ksh s. 382, 877,200 be part of t his 
Bill? 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 I now put a question that vote R3011 Ksh s.382, 877,200  be part of this Bill.  
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote Number R3012 , the sum of Ksh.610, 986,278 Supply, Ksh s.203, 094,739 
Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson:  I propo se clause R3012 be part of the Bill.  
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 I now put a question that clause R3012 be part of the  Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk: Vote number R3013 , the sum of Ksh s.131, 749,530 as supply and Ksh s.43, 
749,169 as Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson: I propo se clause R3013 be part of the B ill. 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 I now put the question that clause R3013 be part of the Bill. 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
33  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote 301….3015 the sum o f Ksh…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Vote 3014 , the sum of Ksh s.1, 107,521,980 supply and Ksh s.314, 811,839  Appropriation 
In Aid.  
 Chairperson:  I propose that vote  R3014 be part of the B ill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 I now put a question that clause R3014 be part of the  Bill. 
  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R301 the sum of Ksh s.510, 208,594 as supply and Ksh s.169, 595,759 as 
Appropriation in Aid?  
 Chairperson:  Yes Hon . Amur?  
 Hon. Amur:  Hon. Speaker I move to amend R301 to be R3015 and the other one to be 
R3016.  
 Chairperson:  I now propose the question that R301 be amended to read clause R3015 . 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 I now put a question that clause R3015 be part of the Bill? 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Clerk:  Vote R301 Ksh s.578, 507,296 as supply  and Ksh s.152, 403, 572 as Appropriation 
in Aid.  
 Chairperson:  I now propose that vote R3016 be part of the B ill. 
  
(Question proposed ) 
 
 I now put a question that vote R3016 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R30 17 the sum of Ksh s. 2,683,387,579 as supply, Ksh s.85, 591,582 as 
donor funds, Ksh s.541, 302,771 as Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson:   I propose that clause R 3017 be part of the B ill.  
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
34 (Question proposed ) 
 
 I now put the question that clause R 3017 be par t of the B ill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R3018 the sum of Ksh s.137, 635,994 supply and Ksh s.45, 750,858 as 
Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson:   I propose that clause R3018 be part of the Bill. 
  
(Question proposed ) 
 
 Having n o amendments , I now put the question that clause R3018  be part of the B ill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R3019 the sum of Ksh.230, 297,579 as supply and Ksh.76, 552,009 as 
Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson:   I propose that claus e R3019 be part of the Bill. 
  
(Question proposed ) 
 
 Members I now put the question that Vote R3019 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk: Vote R3020 the sum of Ksh s.405, 456,909 as supply and Ksh s.134, 775,801 as 
Appropria tion in Aid.  
 Chairperson:   I now propose that vote R3020 be part of the Bill?  
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 Yes M embers, anyone with any issue?  
 I now put the question, there being no issue that vote R3020 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R3021 the sum of Ksh s.226, 404,844 as supply and Ksh s.75, 258,045 
Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson:   I now propose that clause R3021 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
35  Yes M embers I see that you are all in support . 
 I now put the question th at clause R3021 , be part of the Bill.  
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R3022 , the sum of Ksh s.463, 593,286 as supply and Ksh s.155, 762,633 as 
Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson:   I propose that clause R3022 be part  of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 I now put the question seeing that no M ember has a concern th at clause R3022 be part of 
the Bill.  
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R3023 , the sum of Ksh s.232, 703,389 as supply and Ksh s.46, 654,30 6 as 
Appropriation in Aid.  
 Chairperson:   I propose that clause R3023 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 Any M ember with any issue on that ? 
  
(Silence ) 
 
 Having no issue , I now put the question that clause R3023 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put  and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R3026 , the sum of Ksh s.919, 794,396 as supply and Ksh s.305, 744,024 as 
Appropriation in Aid.  
 
(Consultations ) 
 
 Chairperson:  I now put the question that vote R3026 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Vote R3011…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
36  Chairperson:  Development . 
 Clerk:  Development expenditure, Vote D3011 the sum of Ksh s.84, 424,673 as supply 
and Ksh.42, 463,682 as Appropriation in Aid.  
 Members I propose that Clause D3011 be part of th e Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 Chairperson : I now put the question th at clause D3011 be part of the B ill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk : Vote D3012 , Kshs.45, 773,748 as supply and Ksh s.23, 023,150 as Appropriation 
In Aid. 
 Chairperson:  Members I propose th at Clause D3012 be part of the B ill? 
 
(Questi on proposed)  
 
 Any M ember with any issue ? 
  
(Silence ) 
 
 I now put the question that clause D3012 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Chairperson:  Members as  I am seeing that there are no M embers with issues,  the C lerk 
to read all the votes in the development expenditu re then I will propose for the Members to 
agree , are we in agreement Hon. M embers ? 
 
(Hon. Member’s agreed ) 
 
 Yes Clerk proceed.  
 Clerk:  Vote D3013 , the sum of Ksh s.21, 637,280 as supply and Ksh s.10, 883,058 as 
Appropriation in Aid. Vote D3014 , the sum of Ksh s.302, 447,782 as supply and Ksh s.152, 
124,326 as Appropriation I n Aid. Vote D3015 , the sum of Ksh s.410, 372,081 as supply and 
Kshs.206, 407,783 as Appropriation  In A id. Vote D3016 , the sum of Ksh s.244, 499,756 as 
supply and Ksh s.121, 921,096 as Appropriation In A id. Vote D3017 , the sum of Ksh s.240, 
255,554 as supply and Ksh.0 as Appropriation in Aid. Vote D3018 , the sum Ksh s.767, 050,100 
as supply an d Ksh s.600, 000,000 a s donor f unds and Ksh s.41, 182,334 as Appropriation In A id.  
Vote the sum of D3019 Ksh s.1, 269,841,602 as supply and Ksh s.358, 478,579 as A ppropriation 
in Aid. Vote D3020 , the sum of Ksh s.95, 631,669 as supply and Ksh s.48, 100,545. Vot e 
D3021the sum of Ksh s.221, 201,888 as supply and Ksh s.111, 259,497 as Appropriation in Aid. 
Vote D3022 , the sum of Ksh s.837, 855,896 as supply and Ksh s.204, 817,899 as Appropriation in 
Aid.  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
37  Vote D3023 , the sum of Ksh s.266, 591,948 as supply and Ksh s.134, 089,660 as 
Appropriation in A id. Vote D3026 , the sum of Ksh s.158, 063,060 as supply and Ksh s.79, 
502,109 as Appropriation in A id. 
 Chairperson:  Members I propose that D3013, D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, 
D3019, D3020, D3021, D3022, D3023, D3026 be par t of the Bill? 
 
(Question proposed ) 
  
 Ok Members it’s on the floor, any M ember with any issue ? 
 
(Silence)  
 
 Okay . I now put a question that D3013, D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, D3019, 
D3020, D3021, D3022, D3023, D3026 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Clause 5 , the supply granted for the services of the year ending on the 30th of 
June, 2019 in respect to votes R3011,  R3012,  R3013,  R3014,  R3015,  R3016,  R3017,  R3018,  
R3019,  R3020,  R3021,  R3022,  R3023,  R3026 and D3011 , D3012,  D3013,  D3014,  D3015,  
D3016,  D3017,  D3018,  D3019,  D3020,  D3021,  D3022,  D3023,  D3026 in accordance with the 
Appropriation Act.  
 Chairperson:  I now propose that Clause 5 be part of this Bill. 
  
(Question proposed ) 
 
 Having no amendments, I now put th e question that clause 5 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Clause number two, the County Treasury may issue the sum of thirteen billion, 
Five Hundred and Ninety One Million,  Seven Hundred and Seventy One Thousand, Eigh t 
Hundred and Ninety One Kenya shi llings Only out of the County R evenue Fund and apply it 
towards the supply granted for the service of the year ending the 30th June, 2019.  
 Chairperson:  Hon. Members I propose that Clause two be part of the Bill. 
 
(Questio n proposed ) 
 
 Yes Members I see that you are all in support . 
 Chairperson : I now proceed to put  the question  that clause two be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
38  Clerk:  The sum granted by section 2 shall be appropriated for the several services and 
purposes specifi ed in the second column of the F irst Schedule, in the amounts specifi ed in the 
third column of that S chedule.  
 Chairperson:  Members I now propose th at Clause three be part of the Bill.  
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
 I now proce ed to put the question that clause three be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk : Clause number four, in addition to the sum granted by section 2, the sum 
specifi ed in the fourth column of the F irst and Second Schedules shall  be applied for the several 
services and purposes specified in the second column of those schedules, out of revenue dire cted 
to be applied outside the Consolidated Fund under A rticle 207 (1) of the Constitution.  
 Chairperson:  Members I propose a question t hat Clause 4 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 Having there being no issues, I now put the question that clause 4 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 Clerk:  Clause number one, this Act may be cited as the Mombasa Coun ty Appropriation 
Act, 2018,  issue of Ksh s.13,591,771,891 out of the County Revenue F und for the service of the 
year ending on the 30th June, 2019.  
 Chairperson:  Members I propose that Clause one be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 Yes H on. Members?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 I now proceed to put the question that clause one be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
(The Clerk read the Long Title of The Mombasa County Appropriation Bill, 2018)  
 
 Members I propose that the long title be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
39  
(Silence ) 
 
 Now that there is no issue to the long title of the B ill, I put the question that the long title 
be pa rt of the B ill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
 Yes Chairman, Budget and Appropriation.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hati my: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that the Committee do 
report to the H ouse in it 's consideration of the Bill and its approval thereof without amendments 
and seek leave to seat again. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Chairperson:  Members the C ommittee of the  Whole House stands disso lved and will 
turn back to the A ssembly.  
 
PLENARY RESUMED  
 
(Serjeant -At-Arms raised the Mace on the Table)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats? Yes C hairman respond to the 
House.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Thank y ou Mr. Speaker; the Count y Assembly does agree with 
the Committee . Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : So you mean there were no amendments.  
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy nod ded) 
 
 Yes C hairman Mohamed Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: That the A ppropriation Bill be now read a Third Time. Thank 
you. 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Clerk?  
 
THIRD READING  
(The Clerk read the Mombasa County Appropriation Bill, 2018 for the Third Time)  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Bill has  been read for the third time , I will allow the C hairman Finan ce, Budget and 
Appropriati on to say a word and any other M ember who would wish to say anything before we 
adjourn. Yes Chairman?  
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spik a nachukua fursa hii kupongeza 
Members  kwa kazi nzuri hii walioifanya na tumekubaliana tuta angalia yale matatizo pale yal ipo 
na ninataka haya maneno yaingie kwa Hansard  kuwa tumekubaliana kufanya marekebisho na 
marekebisho hayo kwa wale ambao wanaona kidogo  hawakuridhika waje waonane na Kamati 
alafu tuangalie tuta weza kusaidiana vipi kwani M heshimiwa Spika bajeti  hii ni yetu sote na ni ya 
wana nchi wa Mombasa  kwa hivyo tu nataka tufanye yale mazuri wananchi wapate kuridhika . 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
40  Jambo la pili Mheshimiwa S pika nachukua fursa hii tena  kusema kuwa nafikiri tumeweza 
kujitengenezea kwa sababu sisi si kama w ale W abunge waongeza mishahara tu lakini sisi 
hufuata sheria vile inavyotakikana , tumeweza kupata barua kutoka kwa Controller wa budget na 
nimeweza kukutana na Cont roller wa Budget mara  tatu kupeleka kilio kuwa haiwezekani kuwa 
kutakuwa na nyumba ambayo mtu ataingia kwa miaka m itano na isiweze kuongezwa kodi. Kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika tumeku baliana kuwa kodi iongezeke na W aheshimiwa wawe 
watafanya kazi bila ya pressure  yeyote na pia nataka kuchukua nafasi hii kupongeza B odi kwa 
kukubaliana na  Kamati ya fedha kuwa watu ambao watafanya kazi ; maana wale watu ni wen u 
nyinyi hakuna mtu ata weza kuwa ambia kitu lakini ni laz ima kuweko ka mkataba baina ya B odi 
na wafanyi kazi kwenye ofisi za W aheshimiwa ili na wao wajipatie haki yao ili na wao wakuwe 
watapata gratuity … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Kwa hivyo naomba Wanachama wa Bo di walioko hapa wapeleke salamu hizi ifanywe 
haraka vile inavyowezekana kuwa kuanzia  tarehe moja mwezi huu wa Julai , Bodi nd io itakayo 
walipa mishahara na W aheshimiwa wataziangalia ofisi zao na mishahara itakuja shilingi 50,000  
kwa wafanyi  kazi na  shilingi 90,000  kwa Waheshimiwa kuangalia zile ofisi.. . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Na jambo la pili pia nataka kusema kuwa si kus ema kuwa twafanya mambo bil a kuf uata 
sheria bali tumeweza kutuma K amati amb ayo iliweza kufanya benchmarking kwenye Kaunti 
fulani na sheria kama tunavyojua , sheria kama inatumika kaunti ya Kitui basi sheria ile itatumika 
kwa K aunti ya Mombasa . Kwa hivyo W aheshimiwa wateule tumeweza k usema p ia wapatiwe 
wasaidizi na dereva …. 
(Applause ) 
 
 Nashukuru wote kwa kukubali kupitisha na pia vitu vingine pia ambavyo viko kulingana 
na  sheria tumesema kuwa tumepitisha sheria yetu ya mambo ya mikopo  na mikopo  iko kila 
mahali sio kwa Bunge la Kaunti  pekee yake,  maofisi yote ya seri kali ina mikopo. K wa hivyo mtu 
yeyote al ieko hapa asichukulie hii ni ufisadi ama kitu chochote bali ni haki ya W aheshimiwa 
kupata mikopo . Mbali na W aheshimiwa pamoja na wafanyi kazi  pia wana haki kupata mikopo,  
kwa hivyo tu meweza k utenga millioni 200 kwa kuweza W aheshimiwa ku itisha hi i mikopo na 
Mungu akipe nda wakati wowote Controller  wa B ajeti wiki iliyopita nilikuwa Nairobi tunangojea 
barua moja tu mwaka mpya unaokuja tarehe moja Julai na kusema kuwa tumetambulika . 
 Kwa uc hache wa maneno au kwa mengi pia nataka kupitia kiti chako umwa mbie K arani 
wa Bunge haw a W aheshimiwa wamekaa hapa tangu asubuhi,  ni haki yao wapatiwe kama 
wamekosa chakula cha mchana  pia wapate.  Nafikir i kwa hayo machache nasema shuk rani sana 
na mimi kama mumenichagua kama M wenyekiti wa Fedha nataka kufanya kazi na kila mtu 
nataka usidizi wenu ; Waswahili wanasema mkono moja haupigi kofi tukikaa tuzungumze 
tuambiane ili sisi Kaunti yetu ipate kuendelea mbele.  Ahsanteni sana na M ungu awabariki.  
 The Deputy Sp eaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Raphael Bwire?  
 Hon. Bwire: Thank y ou Mr. Speaker, I think today we have done a very good job,  the 
trust and faith of our electorate lies within our hands and we must agree that indeed we had some 
disagreements but we disagre e to agree . I also commend the Committee on A ppropriation and 
Finance under the leadership of  Hon. Hatimy for the good job that they have done . 
June 26, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            46 
DISCLAIME R: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
41  We are after seeing Mombasa C ounty going miles  so we must put our ide as together Mr. 
Speaker so that o ur people  and we also serve the in terests of those who elected us. W ith those 
few remarks Mr. Speaker I would like to say thank you to the C ommittee  and to all H on. 
Members. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Having there no other business, yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Members the H ouse stands adjourned until tomorrow Wednesday the 27th June, 2018.  
 
The House r ose at 6: 15p.m.  