September 29 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           46 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday  29th September , 2020  
The House met at 2:30p.m. 
      [The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes, Clerk?  
MOTION  
CONTINUATION OF DEBATE ON THE STATE OF THE COUNTY ADDRESS TO THE COUNT Y ASSEMBLY  BY 
HIS EXCELLENCY  THE GOVERNOR , HON. HASSAN ALI JOHO   
 
  Hon. Members , the debate on the Motion by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani on the 
Governor’s address shall continue . Members who are yet to make their contribution may make 
their contributions. Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya?  
 
  Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. First of all, I want to  congratulate the Governo r 
for his speech made last week ; I think he touched on a lot of things especially C ovid-19, how his 
government is handling it and the measures they are taking with the recovery of the Mombasa 
economy. He also talked abou t the Blue Economy and County Vision . So I think there are a lot 
of points that he touched on which we now have a duty to go and explain to the re sidents of 
Mombasa because  unfortunately the residents were not here but us as elected Members we can 
also explain t o them.  Finally, or something h e said at the end of his speech ; that he was looking 
forward to have a retreat with the Assembly ; I think that retreat is long overdue. I congratulate 
that to him and I call upon the House leadership led by the Majority Lea der to push forward for 
that. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kizito Opeya . Yes Hon. Milka Moraa?  
 Hon. Ngare: Thank you Hon. Speaker for giving me this opportunity  to also join my 
colleagues in congratulating the Governor  for the wonderful presentation that he made through 
the speech  where overall he took us through the ac hievement s of Mombasa County,  being  the 
Governor plus his administration.  I will just mention like my colleagues have on the Health 
Department , which of course needless to mention that our County was actually put in the world 
map for putting mitigation s that dealt with the pandemic that struck the World.   

September 29 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           46 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  We were indeed the first County that came in very strongly  from the beginning to try and 
see a reduction in  the negative effect s of the pandemic which has been dealt with and  that we had 
a lot of measures  in place to cu rb the menace and indeed  that led to the platinum of the curve 
within our County and that was really wonderful and we do congratulate the Governor on the 
same.  As he mention ed on clause 32, our education  system  within Mombasa  has been assisted 
through the ‘Elimu Fund’  where by about 60,000  of students have been en abled to get school 
fees, bursaries for various institutions  including coming up with ‘Tukuze V ipawa’  program which 
has benefit ted about 2,400 young youth s and we k now that education is the core for 
development , that with a well -educated youth and also  generally population , then we will be 
able to spur the development within our County.  
 The Governor also talked about tourism  where by Mombasa being a tourist destination ..., 
that in many places there is a lot of rebranding  especially around the public beaches  and other 
areas  where  there is a lot of mitigation  going on and he is still doin g more  in order to make 
Mombasa a one stop area  where we can earn foreign exchange. One of the things that he  also 
mention ed about is water at access , on clause 43 ‘ water access and quality’ ; this has been a big 
problem within Mombasa County  but he has promise d that there are a lot of measures that he has 
put in place, including  a new management  so that we can have water shortage problems  sorted 
out. As an Hon. Member  we were to talk to the citizen s in observing the law  so that we do  not 
have people who are tampering with our main pipeline and doing illegal connections  which we 
must also educate the masses  so that they can take responsibility  so that the water problem 
improves and everybody gets to enjoy the water  which also is important for keeping our p eople 
healthy and also keeping away diseases . 
So overall the Governor speech was ti mely and it gave us a lot of hope  and we are hoping 
that going forward things are going to be improving and with that  I say let us work together as a 
team to ensure that our County  has success coming from all corners , thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. 
[The  Speaker (Hon. Khatri)  exited the Chair] 
[The Temporary Speaker ( Hon.  Raphael Bwire ) assumed the Chair] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Milka Moraa . Yes, Hon. Salim 
Maimuna?  
 
 Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Mwanzo nashukuru kwa 
kuwepo kwa Gavana , kwa kutuletea hotuba  amba yo imetufurahisha sana na sisi kama watumishi  
twaona ni k wamba ni kazi nyingi ambazo amezizungumza . Kuhusu mambo ya afya sisi wengine 
tunafurahi kwa sababu Kisauni  Sub-County  tuko na hiyo hospitali  ambayo iko Mtopanga ambayo 
ni Hospitali ya Level 4, kwa hivyo siku hizi tunakimbilia huko badala ya kukimbilia Makadara. 
Tukizungumzia kuhusu mambo na maji, kweli tulikuwa na shida ya maji sana na hakuna vile 
dunia inajengwa k wa wakati mmoja ama shida zinaweza kutatuka kwa wakati mmoja lakini 
naona hilo tatizo la maji limeanza kupungua kwa Sub -Kaunti nyingine ya Changamwe hiyo 
Jomvu kidogo wameweza  kupata hata sisi Kisauni kuna Wodi kidogo zimeingiliwa na wanaweza 
kupata maji vizuri. Kwa hivyo mimi naiunga mkono taarifa  ya Gavana . Na upande wa shule sisi 
kama watu wa Mombasa twashukuru kuna ECD ECs nyingi ambazo zimejengwa angalau  katika 
Sub-County  kuna ECD ECs mbili. ECD EC ambazo ni standard  na watoto wetu wanafurahi a 
kuenda kwa hizo sh ule na hata sasa hiv i tunaomba kwamba hii shida ya Corona  iishe ili watoto 
waweze kurudi shule kwa sababu wamekaa sana majumbani.  
September 29 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           46 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  Na upande wa elimu tunashukuru amejitahidi sana kwa  sababu kuna watoto ambao 
walikuwa wakipata basari na wengine walikuwa hawapa ti lakini wameangalia wale ambao ni 
watoto wa wajane na watoto  ambao hali zao za majumbani si nzuri na wameweza kupata  
matokeo  mazuri wakiwa wako shule . Kwa hivyo wao wanapatiwa kipao mbele  kama watoto 
wengine  hivyo basi  tunashukuru hali ya shule  pia zimeimarishwa  na watoto wanapata basari . 
Kwa hivyo tunamshukuru Gavana na sisi tuko hapa ili  kuhakikisha ya kwamba tumeshirikiana 
na ofisi zake za  Executive  na hawa Mawaziri na Chief Officer  yale mengine ambayo 
hayajatendeka yaweze kutendeka. Kwa  hivyo tunaiunga mkono.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Salim Maimuna. Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Okay thank you Mr. Speaker. My attention was drawn t o section 20  of the  
speech which clearly is talks  about economic recovery. Mr. Speaker currently as we are spe aking 
any norm al human being will talk about post Covid economic recovery ; His Excellency the 
Governor has outlined clear ways and mechanism s in which his government is going to ensure 
that there is speedy recovery to the economy. Mr . Speaker my plea is with the department 
concerned that these should be done with  rocket speed to ensure that we realize steady economic 
growth.   
 Two Mr. Speaker,  section 25 which is very important he talks about public service 
transformation agend a; currently if you look at the wage bill vis a vie the productivity of the 
employees it does not tally  so if we can have that transformation I think there will be increase in 
revenue collection and there will be a very big growth in the County.  
 Mr. Speaker the Governor also talked about his development agenda which my Ward is 
not an exception ; in my Ward we have through the development a state of  the art ECD EC at 
Gome Primary, we  also have  the renovation of Ma gongo Clinic and a ren ovation of a social hall 
in my Ward and some roads . Mr. Speaker , so moving forward i  think we should join hands to 
ensure that we make Mombasa great again. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Benard Ogu tu. Yes Hon. 
Osongo?  
 Hon. Osongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity granted . I stand here to 
support the speech of the Governor that he presented here last week. I congratu late the Governo r 
on his speech ; as we look at the education sector we get th at the Governor is so much concerned 
about the pupils, he has introduced the milk program which has help ed the young stars or young 
kids to go to schools and they get more education.  He has also built a lot of ECD ECs and our 
small kids to get the opportunity to go  and join the ECD ECs and they get well because there are 
so many teachers that have been employed in those ECD ECs sectors so that our children get 
more education and I think it has improve d Mombasa so much and we get so many people come 
to Mombasa to benchmark , to check how they are supplying the milk in the ECD EC schools and 
what has made them to achieve that . Without the wisdom of the Governor it could have not been 
there, so I stand to support the Motion. Thank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Ho n. Osongo. Yes Hon. Leila?  
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spi ka na mimi pia kuweza kuniona 
nime simama ni kama nafanya zoezi nashukuru umeniona. Mimi pia ningeweza kuunga mkono 
ripoti hii iliokuja hapa Bungeni ya Gavana na pia naunga mkono hotuba ya Gavana.  
September 29 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           46 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Mimi kama mama nimefurahi sana Gavana kugusia kina Mama na vijana  na wenzetu 
wale wanaoishi na  ulemavu pia amewagusia kwa sababu Mhesh imiwa Spika kama unavyojua hii 
Corona  ilikuja ikaleta mtafaruku sana kuhusiana na uchumi wetu ama biashara . Kwa hivyo 
amesema ata inua kina mama kibiashara na vijana hata na wenzetu ambao wanaishi na ulemavu.  
Pia Mhes himiwa Spika nataka niseme pongezi sana Gavana jana kulikuwa na mkutano hapa nje 
na alikuwa na mashirika tofauti ; wale Haki Africa na U NDP wakaweza kutoa  ripoti ya Gavana 
kuhusiana na virusi vya Corona yaani C ovid-19 kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna kiongozi 
yeyote Kenya nzima alitoa ripoti yake kama vile Gavana kuiweka wazi. Kwa hivyo Gavana wetu 
anaonekana ni mkweli na anafanya kazi yake kisawa sawa, ameweza kutoa ripoti yake na 
ikaonekana iko sawa sawa kulingana na hii Covid-19, ametumia pesa za Covid-19 kih aki na 
kisawa sawa , kwa hivyo hana kashfa yeyote na si wenyewe tumejionea.   
 Kupitia masuala ya elimu pia amegusia na amegusia kuwa watoto ataendelezea 
kuwapatia maziwa watoto wa shule na pia ECD ECs zetu zinaendelea kuisha zengine kama mimi 
natoka Wodi ya Kipevu  kuna ECD EC nzuri sana imejengwa na serikali ya Kaunti . Kwa h ivyo 
pia tunaitarajia pia hivi karibuni itafunguliwa.   
 Kupitia masuala ya misin gi ya maji taka  pia kama unavyojua Mheshimiwa Spika udhaifu 
wa misingi hii  ni donda sugu sana katika Kaunti yetu  ya Mombasa lakini m radi umeshaanza pale 
Kipe vu masw ala ya  njia za maji taka  yanaende lea na kazi inaendelea na hivi karibuni mambo 
yatakuwa mazuri. Namshukuru sana Gavana kwa hotuba yake nzuri. Ahsanteni.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :  Thank you Hon. Leila Nyache. Yes Hon. 
Rosemary Mukavi?  
 Hon. Mukav i: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this chance to contribute to the 
Governors’  speech . Listening to my colleagues I do not want to repeat myself because most of 
the important things have been said . Mr. Speaker I support the speech which was delivered by 
the Governor  of Mombasa Ali Hassan Joho ; this speech has catered  for all sectors as every 
department is represented  in this speech . Mr. Speaker , I therefore do not want to repeat what has 
been said by my colleagues but support  it fully and support all what is hi ghlighted in the 
Governors’ speech.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Rosemary Mukavi . Yes Hon. 
Nzai. 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance  to air my views on the 
Governor’s speech . Mr. Speaker Sir having taken a quick glance on the speech I have noted a 
few paragraphs  on the importance of the speech ; paragraph 36 talks about being self-reliant  on 
agriculture, 56 talks about tourism which wil l lead to job creation to our youth s through the 
opening  of Mama  Ngina grounds and the P irates, paragraph  57 to create a platform for youth s 
which talks about the jobs . When you go to paragraph  67 we talk about the business community , 
the intera ction and good will for the County to invite the stakeholders to discuss about the 
economy of this County is a lso so important as anything, all these bring about a socio economi c 
transformation to this County . My humble request Mr. Speaker S ir is that all the above shall 
require our sober  minds in coming up with good  laws so that we can mak e this County better in  
future.  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I support.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Nzai . Yes Hon.  Mwalimu.  
September 29 , 2020                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           46 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Offic ial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika  kunipatia nafasi hii ili na mimi 
niweze kuchangia kuhusu hotuba iliotolewa na Gavana wetu mpendwa wa Mombasa . 
Mhes himiwa Spika  hotuba  ya Gavana ili gusia mengi sana kuhusu ajira kwa vijana , kuhusu 
mambo y a michezo na mengineo kadhalika . Langu mimi nataka kumsh ukuru sana mambo 
ameyagusia Gavana ni mambo ambayo  mashinani  hayakuwep o na sa a hii ukiangalia Mombasa  
ilivyokuwa kabla ya ugatuzi na ukiangalia wakati huu wa ugatuzi Mombasa  imebadilika sana 
hususan kule kwangu Shika  Adabu , ninayo ya kusema na yanaonekana waziwazi kwamba 
Mheshimiwa Gavana anafanya kazi inayoonekana.  Leo hii Shika  Adabu ina  sura mpya yote 
yasingekuwa yamepatik ana ni kwa sababu ya juhudi za Mheshimiwa Gavana wetu wa Mombasa ; 
leo hii kule Shika  Adabu kulikuwa na soko imekaa kama miaka 15 bila kushu ghulikiwa lakini 
kwa juhudi za Mheshimiwa Gavana soko ile iliweza kufunguliwa na sasa hivi  ukifika Shika  
Adabu waona sura ambayo haikuwepo wakati huo . Pia upande wa ECDE Cs; ECDE C ambayo 
iko pale Shika  Adabu na zingine zilizojengwa se hemu zote za Mombasa lakini uki angalia hata 
huwezi kuita kwamba ni ECDE C kwa saba bu imejengwa kwa kifahari sana. Kwa hilo nampa 
kongole Mheshimi wa Gavana na kwa hayo machache Mheshimiwa Spika nasema a hsante sana 
wameweza na ninaiiunga mkono hotuba ya Gavana w etu, ahsan te sana.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you Mwalimu Hamadi . Yes Hon. 
Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I want  to take this  opportunity to applaud the 
Governors Speech ; I think from morn ing to now it has been applause , applause, applaus e! And I 
want to join the band wagon to say  it was a very good speech especially whereby he is now 
starting the initiative to bring on board economical friends to discuss  issues relating to the 
economy . Again out of the highlights he is trying to come up with an age nda to see how workers 
of this County are going to be accountable vis a vie  the salaries that they have been getting  and 
the service delivery is  expected to be on the best if at all this is to be realized . In this regard , I 
support the Motion that has been put forward by the  Leader of  Majority ; we are looking forward  
and especially for the people of Mikindani we appla ud that something has been done but we are 
still yearning for more. T hank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you Hon. Renson T hoya.  Hon. Members 
thank you for your contri butions towards the Governor’s address to the County Assembly. Yes, 
Clerk? And therefore Hon. Members the debate will continue as from tomorrow. Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members , there having being no other business the House stands adjourn ed until 
Wednesday of September 30th at 10 :00a.m. 
The House at 2 :58p.m. 
 