April 25, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              46 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 25th April , 201 7 
The House  met at 2:33p. m. 
(Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Murfad Amur ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): Members be s eated .  Clerk ? 
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani . 
(Leader of Majority (H on. Mwidani) moved the M otion ) 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I take this opportunity 
to table this M otion, a Procedural M otion  on adjournment of the County Assembly.  
Pursuant to the provisions of Standing O rder number 28 and 49 (b), this House 
adjourns and will resume its normal sittings on Tuesday 2nd May, 2017. Mr. Speaker Sir, the 
reason of seeking adjournment is due to unanticipated circumstances. T he Orange 
Democratic M ovement  (ODM)  which is the sole party in the Assembly  postpone d the 
schedule of party primaries on Tuesday 11th of April 2017 to Wednesday 19th April, 2017 
then rescheduled to Saturday 22nd April , 2017  due to logistic al issues.  
Mr. Speaker Sir , nominations took place on 22nd as slated. However , the exercise was 
not concluded in some wards and hence it was directed that the exercise will be conducted on 
Wednesday 26th April 2017. I therefore pray that this House be adjourned and resume at a 
time when nomination co nclude s, that is , next Tuesday 2nd of May 2017.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir  and I would like my fellow colle ague Hon. Kibwana to 
second the Motion.  
Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): Yes Hon . Kibwana . 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon . Speaker , I do second . Thank you.  
(Question proposed)  
Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): I now propose a question that those who are in 
support for the adjournment say yes.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Members may i now propose to the House that has been tabled by Hon.  Hamisi Musa 
Mwidani for the adjournment until 2nd of May 2017. For those of many who...  
(Temporary S peaker (Hon. Amur) consulted with Table Clerk and point ed at  Hon. Mwidani ). 
Mr. Hamisi Musa Please?   
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like also to 
take this opportunity because of the s aid exercise , which is still happending on the ground , I 
would like on your opinion that we adjourn the Assembly so that Members  can go just down 
to the ground  to make their exerc ise on the part where the Wards have been remain ing for the 
nomination. So Mr. Speaker I would like to move that you put a question , so that you have 
already put the the question but I would like to put in order to the House that instead of taki ng 
long time , you give them a chance  so that they can go back to the ground. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
(Temporary Speaker( Hon. Amur consulted with the Table Clerk on procedural issues)  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): Yes Hon . Zainab . 
(Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab  Ali gestured  to indicate she had nothing to sh are) 
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): Yes Hon . Opeya?  
 Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I also second  the Motion by the Leader of 
Majority ; as we all know the nomination will  take place  tomorrow  and it will be unti l late at 
the night, until 2:00 am so it will be difficult or t hem on Thursday to come for the session in 
April 25, 2017                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              46 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from t he Hansard Editor  
Page 2 the afternoon , so let us postpone it to Tuesday to give them time and space to prepare for the 
party primaries which will be  from  tommorrow. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): Yes Hon. Kibwana . 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker . I just support this Motion reason  
being that  the ODM is a sole party that ha s the majority in the Assembly.  Hon. Speaker these 
are fellow Members  who have been here for the five years and if you agree with me we can 
adjourn the House so that the Members w ho are also fighting for their house will have ample 
time to do their campaign in their ground , ours is just to wish them good luck so that we will 
be with them after the nomination. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 Temporary  Spea ker (Hon. Amur ): Thank you Hon. Kibwana I can see the House is 
quiet, I can now put a question that, Hon. Mwidani would you like to respon d to the Motion 
which Members contributed . 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Hon. Speaker I want to congratulate all the 
Members who supported the Motion , actually I also urge  that the remaining Members  to 
support the Motion so that they can succeed in their nominations , and  by next week on 2nd 
May, 2017 they will be here . I would like to say that we adjourn the Assembly next week  
since  this is our last session and I would be very happy to see that all Members have come 
back in this House , so I still put  up the pray ers so that we can get all the Members who are 
here. So thank you Mr. Speaker for givin g me this time. Thank you Sir.  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Amur ): Thank you Hon. Mwidani may I now put a 
question  that the proposal by Hon. Mwidani that this House be adjourned until 2nd May, 2017 .  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 This House stands until Tuesday 2nd May, 2017 at exactly 2:30 pm. 
The House rose at  2:43p m. 