May 2 , 2017                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              47 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 2nd May, 201 7 
The House  met at 2:18p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ): Members  may you sit down .  Clerk ? 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur.  
 Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speake r. I stand to put  a Notice of Motion on blockage 
of road drainage s due to rains within the County.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I be g to give Notice of Motion.  
 That aware that,  it is the mandate of the County government to ensure proper drainage 
systems on the roads under the Fourth Schedule part two sub sec tion (5 a) of the Constitution 
of Kenya 2010.  
 Further aware that, poor drainage systems and lack of proper garbage collection on 
roads within the County causes clogging and blockage of the system.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, Concerned that ongoing rains are causing f loods leadi ng to 
oversaturated soils swell ing causing structural foundation damage,  sever e distress and 
damage of pavement, and sickness as a reult of breeding mosquitoes among other effects.  
 I therefore urge the Assembly to resolve that; the department of roads  and 
infrastructure to ensure that the drainage are unclogged ; the department of Environment to 
ensure that they sweep the roads and collect the gabage to avoid clogging of the drainage.   
I beg to move this motion...   
(Hon. Amur moved the No tice of Motion)  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ): Hon.  this i s a Notice of Motion . Yes 
Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Thank you Members , there being no other business  this House is adjourned till 
tomorrow morning at 9 :00a.m. 
The House rose at 2 :23p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 