June 27 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 27th June, 2018  
The House met at 2:38p .m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats. Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ESTABLISHMENT OF  MEDICAL SCHEME FOR THE ELDERLY IN THE COUNTY OF MOMBASA  
(Resumption of  interrupted business ) 
 
 Hon. Members this is resumption of previous b usiness that ha d already been debated ; 
unless there  is a Member who did  not debate on th at same day that was debated if not I'll call 
the Mover of this Motion to respond so Members if an yone who did not debate on that day 
we have the records then I will call the Mover of this Motion to respond. Yes Hon. Nyiro  
from Bamburi Ward ? 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Once again thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this time to respond . 
Hon. Speaker  I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation  to all Members who really 
debated  in support of th is Motion and because this thing touches on every one and everybody  
in the W ard, really our elderly Members I beg to support or rather to thank  you Members for 
putting your inpu t in th is Motion so that our elderly Members can get assistance whenever 
they fall sick . This is  because as we speak am very sure they are so many lying in bed s in the 
Coast G eneral Hospitals and most of these  elderly people have already accumulated some  
amount s of money in terms of bills .  
 So it will be good for us or rather for the County to start working on this thing so that  
our elderly people can start enjoying the services of what this County will offer to them and 
so that they can  also feel that they are part of this County , that the g overnment of the day is 
aware that  they are there and its aware that they are facing some challenges in terms of 
medi cal or rather medica tion.  
 Therefore I thank you again Hon. Speaker and the Hon. Members who contributed 
effecti vely so that this thing is established and our elderly Members get the assistance that is 
required. I thank you.  

June 27 , 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Members I stand to put a question . What am 
saying thanks to Hon. Member Hon. Nyiro and the House at large fo r bringing this Motion 
and you deliberated on it very well so I hereby put the question that the Motion on 
Establishment of  Medical Scheme for the Elderly in the County of Mombasa be approved in 
this Hon orable  House . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members  there  having no other business the House stands  adjourned until 
tomorrow the 28th June, 2018 at 2 :30p.m. 
 
The Hous e rose at 2 :45p.m. 