September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday , 30th September , 2020.  
The House met at 2:42p. m  
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in t he Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may be s eated. Yes, 
Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRADE , TOURISM AND 
INVESTMENTS HON . KIZITO OPEYA ON RELOCATION OF HAWKER S IN THE CENTRAL BUS INESS 
DISTRICT (CBD)  
- 
 Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya? Statement on relocation of Hawkers i n CBD.  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. T his statement was requested by the 
Member for Makadara Hon. Murfad Amur, about the relocation of Hawkers in CBD and it was 
directed to the Department of Trade. I followed up with the County Executive of Trade Hon. 
Fauz and he t old me that the Governor had formed a task force which was being headed by 
Deputy Governor Dr. Kingi and he was the one who was in charge of the said issue . So I 
manage d to have an audience with the Deputy Governor and he explain ed that it was true that 
they are in charge of the task force and in charge of the relocation,  that they have looked at  the 
various routes in town, on how they can resettle, but they have re quested for more time  so that he 
can give me a comprehensive time  so that I can bring to the House on  where they are going to 
appoint them to streets and the hours they are going to be allowed to  do their business. So we ask 
for more time Mr. Speaker , thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Kizito , before you 
request for  more time, t he Hon. Member 's concern s... for the benefit of Hansard, please he  is not 
Hon. Member from Makadara, we do  not have a Ward named Makadara . Yes  Hon. Amur 
Murfad?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Spea ker I have no objection to wha t 
the Hon. Member has just said because I know h awkers are so many , i need to be guided with 
proper laws and determination of where they will be doing it . 

September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  I just want to emphasize that  it should be speeded  because some of the hawkers are 
widows who are looking after  orphans and whatever and soon the schools will be reopening Mr. 
Speaker  and they will be needing money to pay for school fees , uniform and other things . So I 
would like to ask my colleague  to expedite  this issue, at least  we should know the timeframe for 
that exercise to take place but I have no objection . Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Thank you Hon . Murfad Amur.  Hon. 
Opeya when are you going to expedite on this S tatement.  
 
 Hon. Opeya : Mr. Speaker S ir I will follow up with the Deputy Governor and by next 
week Wednesday I will get a comprehensive answer. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . So next week  Wednesday 
afternoon.  Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON HEALTH  HON. KIBWANA SWALEH ON 
INSTALLATION OF MOBI LE CONTAINER MOBILE CLINICS IN MAGOGONI WARD  
 
 Yes, Hon Kibwana Swal eh B aya on installation of container  mobile  clinic in Magogoni 
Ward. 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Baya: Thank you  Mr. Speaker . The issue of relocation of the container ; 
Mr. Speaker before that we had anticipated that we are going to get this container which we are 
planning to give to almost six W ards but as time goes by we only got two containers. T hese two 
container s were alloc ated to Likoni and Mwakirunge,  and during the exercise the M ember who 
raised this issue had no t secure d a place to put this container so I advise  him to loo k for a space 
so that in case we got another container we can put it there . Hon. Speaker  so I think I can 
confirm to this Honourable  House that we only got two c ontainers which we gave to two W ards 
and we expect if we get any because this area has got no facility I think he deserves to get one at 
Magogoni . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you.  Yes Clerk . 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON WATER , SANITATION AND NATUR AL 
RESOURCES HON . HAMIDA NOOR ON ACUTE WATER SHORTAGE  IN MWAGOSI AREA  
 
 Yes, Chairperson Committee o n Water, Sanitation and  Natural Resources , Hon. Hamida . 
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. W e have  not got any response from the Department 
of W ater but we are still waiting for the response from them ; anyhow we have given them a 
reminder so we are waiting for the response that  is where the situation we are  in. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So how lon g will we wait for the 
response?  
 
 Hon. Noor:  For a week.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay. Yes, C lerk?  
September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON EDUCATION , INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY AND MV 2035  HON. IBRAHIM OMONDI ON  CONSTRUCTION OF EARLY CHILDHOOD 
DEVELOPMENT (ECDE ) CENTRE IN MAGOGONI W ARD 
 
 Yes, Chairperson Committee o n Education, Information Technology and MV 2035. Yes 
Hon Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omon di: Yes thank you Mr. Speaker.  This issue w as raised by Hon. Shomari  
MCA Ma gogoni  and Mr. Speaker  I did meet the CEC for the department concerned for the issue 
of ECD E in M agogoni and he did tell me that the issue concerning land these are very sensitive 
issues . That they are issues of waiting  and therefore they cannot make a rushed decision  and 
they told me that they need time because they are now working on research that is to ascertain  
the authenticity of the said document s of the land.  Mr. Speaker , once they are through then 
they will be able to communicate fully to this House the direction they are going to take and 
therefore I do request that I be given one  more week so that I can be able to bring a 
comprehensive response on this.  Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, C lerk? 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . SHEILA MUMBA ON POOR STATE OF BOM U CATHOLIC ROAD , MWIDANI BOKOLE 
NURSERY ROAD NEAR BROOK  FIELD AND BOKOL E CDF DISPENSARY ROA DS 
 
 Yes, Chairperson Committee o n Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works or the Vice 
Chair or any M ember from the Transport Committee?  Yes Hon . Kibwana.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Baya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Since the  Chair is absent and the Vice, 
Iam a M ember of the Committee Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker just give us two weeks’ time  so 
that as a Committee  we can get a concrete answer to th is statement.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker, ok ay am satisfied with what the Member has said but only 
my prayer s are let this be  fast tracked because surely the situation is very pathetic . Mr. Speaker I 
confirmed this ... even our Deputy G overnor when he  was doing the normal rounds trying  to 
oversee the  development of the C ounty he got a lot of problems with the same roa d. Therefore I 
just pray that this matter will be solved. T hank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swale h: Thank you Hon. Speaker . I got mo re information on the issue 
from the Clerk that he has just informed me that we were supposed to have a meeting with the 
Minister  today but we have postponed up to tomorrow . So I think I just request my colleague to 
be a bit patient may be by tomorrow we c an get a very compreh ensive statement on this issue. 
Thank  you. 
 
September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : So now that you are meeting  the 
Executiv e Member  tomorrow and you had earlier asked for two weeks  when are you going to 
respo nd back to this Hono urable House?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swale h: Hon. Speaker I think I was just giving an additional information 
on the issue but i stand with the two weeks’ time because immediately we get the report from the 
Executive Member we have to discuss as a C ommittee before w e present it to this Hon ourable  
House.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Thank you . What is it Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi : [Inaudible ] 
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Yes, Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY  MEMBER  OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOA RD (CASB ) HON. 
MURFAD AMUR ON REMITTANCE OF GRATUI TY FOR MEMBERS OF TH E COUNTY ASSEMBLY  AND 
CONTRACT STAFF  
 
 Yes Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. O n behalf of the Board to respond to 
the statement which w as brought in by Hon. Shebe Ath mani . Mr. Speaker, we did  write to the  
Department of Human Resource to  tabulate all the money which has not been remitted and we 
have done s o, we have also submitted the letter i ncluding the tabulation to the Execut ive Member 
so that he can respond to it clearly  and squarely .  
 Again Mr. Speaker i want to inform the House we have also invited as a Board and let the 
Member appear before the Board next week so that she can give us specific date on  how she is 
going to remit the money . Mr. Speaker so we have invited the Executive Member next week as a 
Board so that we get a comprehensive report once we meet  her. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Yes, what is it Hon. Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athmani  Shebe: Thank you Hon. Chair, indeed they say patience is virtue and I 
must bear with my fellow Hon. Member . I think we are going to wait for that conclusi on and I 
hope  it is going to be a very detailed report and we are looking forward if he has already  done the 
work of even to an extent  of summoning the Department in charge . Hon. Speaker, I think the 
Chair is up to the task so am looking forward together with the Hon. Members for this detailed 
report so am going to wait  Insha Allah. Thank you . 
 
[The Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) l eft the Chair ] 
[The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes, what is it Hon. Kibwana?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swale h: Hon. Speaker, I think  when it comes to  the issue of services at 
the same time  the issue touching on the welfare of the Assembly I think  we need to exhaust . 
September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  I am not the one who brought this statement Hon. Speaker but I think  as Members these  
are very important issue s to us , the Board Member  has given his Statement on this issue although 
I thought that such a w eighty matter he should have given us a letter to confirm that the letter 
was written by the Executive Member because this is not only  a money issue touching  on the 
welfare of the Members only but even the staff in general.  
Hon. Speaker I  want to add an issue which we have already talked to the Board Member , 
we have workers at Ward level who do not know where the ir money is being remitted; their 
money for gratuity because they do  not have even pay slips . Hon. Speaker, the issue of Nat ional 
Health Insurance Fund (NHIF) and there a re a lot of issue s that our offices, our team s at the 
Ward level are really getting  it rough .  
Mr. Speaker , so I thought it is very important just to put my comment on this issue , I 
think the Statement should carry more ; should be having a lo t of issues including our staff , if 
somebody is at the office he or she does not even get her pay slip  showing that he is deducted , 
even anything to s how that he is a worker at the Ward level it is very s erious . So I ask my 
colleague , a senior that I think next time let him come with evidence when it comes  to issue of 
welfare of our staff and also the Hon. Members. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes, thank you Hon. Kibwana . I think the 
Board Member you have t aken the concerns raised by the h onourable Member  and you kindly 
consider those prayers , so next time when you report. Yes?  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  [Inaudible ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Me mbers , before we go to the next 
busines s kindly there  is a very serious business a head of us and the massive walk out of Hon. 
Members is scaring me ! It is something that touch es on  your welfare so just persevere  with the 
time and let us deal  with it once and for all , so I urge you not to walk out of this plenar y. Let us 
just handle the next business together. .. 
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Yes for the  interest  of records Hon.  Murfad , maybe you  give the specific date when you 
will be reporting back, when do you intend to report back?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . The first letter was dispatched and as 
per the tabulation and again as  Board Members we sat and thought it was fair to call her on board 
so that she can give us exactly remittances . So hopefully Mr. Speaker Sir if we meet with the 
Executive Member , Finance I will be able to give you the exact day because if I say so 
Wednesday and if we are meeting her the same Tuesday or Wednesday so two weeks will be 
more convenient . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So you will report back Wednesday , a week 
after ne xt week ? 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes, Clerk?  
  
MOTION  
RESUMPTION OF BUSINE SS  
ADOPTION OF GOVERNO R'S ADDRESS  
 
 Hon. Members in our  morning session we h ad some miscommunications ; we had a 
Motion and we never put a question on it due to some miscommunications and now allow me to 
put a question on the Motion we had today in the morning over the Governors’ County Address.  
Members , I know put a question tha t this House adopts the Motion moved by Hon. Hamisi 
Mwidani on the County Address made by His Excellency the Governor Ali Hassan Joho?  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT O N THE ADMINISTRATIVE  PROCEDURES FOR THE D ECLARATION OF INCOME , 
ASSETS AND LIABILITI ES OF STATE OFFICERS  WITHIN  THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I stand on behalf of Hon. Hamisi Mu sa 
Mwidani who is the Vice Chair , Committee on Powers and Privileges.  Mr. Speaker Sir , I want to 
move a Motion Adoption of Report on the Administrative Procedures for the Declaration of 
Income, Assets and Liabilities of State Officers within the County Assem bly of Mombasa.  Mr. 
Speaker Sir ; 
 
THAT this House adopts the Report by the Committee on Powers and Privileges on the 
Administrative Procedures for the Declaration of Income, Assets and Liabilities of State 
Officers within the County Assembly of Mombasa, as l aid on the Table on Tuesday, 29th 
September , 2020.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker. I request Hon. Hamida to second.   
  
 Hon. Noor:  I stand to second.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  Hon. Members allow me to now propose a 
question that the Report o n the administration procedures for the declaration of income, assets 
and liabilities of State Officers within the County of Mombasa  be debated in the same terms as 
moved ? 
[Question proposed  and agreed  to] 
 
Yes Hon. Murfad?  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker once again, declaration is 
one of the mandatory in regards to Chapter 6 and EACC . 
September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 Mr. Speaker, before  even we were sworn in as Members of the County Assembly we did 
declare and the terms expire every two years ; it is now due t o each and every Member to decl are 
so that to be in line with Schedule Four of the Constitution of Kenya. The declaration of wealth 
is very important to my colleagues and any other staff because if somebody has not declared Mr. 
Speaker, and then  once the conc erned o rganizat ion finds you have not declared  you will be 
quest ionable and it will even cost  you to be taken to court. So it is a very important all my 
colleagues to declare th eir assets and liabilities , even the loans that you have declare them so that  
the purpose of notification so that tomorrow you will not be held responsible for not declaring 
your assets and liabilities . It is a very important declaration and I beg my colleagues to be very 
patient when you are declar ing your assets a nd liabilities , thank  you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Murfad Amur. Hon. Members 
the floor is now open for debate. Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
Mheshim iwa Amur a meeleza vizuri na hii ni procedure  ambayo i naendelea iko na kama 
tunavyoju a Chapter  6  ya Katiba  iko wazi  na mambo ya ethics  yako wazi. Kwa hivyo hii ni 
kufuata tu vile inavyotakikana kwa sababu declaration  nafikiri sote tunafanya  declaration  na 
tunaifanya declaration  na kila siku kama tunavyojua sheria zinaenda kubadilika. Kwa hivyo hii 
sasa imemfunga Bunge  kuwa ajenti  wa shirika la  Anti-Corruption  kuwa yeye ndio atakae angalia 
na hii itakuwa chini ya Kamati ya  Power s and Privileges . Kwa hi vyo Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
jambo hili ni kuhakikisha tumelifanya tuonekane integrity  yetu haik o kwa wale wanaofuatwa na 
shirika la Anti-corruption  kuwa tutaonekana ni watu wasafi na kila mtu ana declare  vile 
inavyotakikana. Kwa ha yo macha che Mheshimiwa Spika na unga mkono hii sheria na tufanyeni 
haraka ili isije ikasimamisha kazi.  
 
         The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy. Yes Hon. 
Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Oyugi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker first I want to thank the Chairman, the 
Committee on Powers and Privileges , Hon. Hatimy who has assured that this Constitutional 
mandate has been adhered to. Mr. Speaker I want to say that I know when it comes to people 
maybe declaring their wealth or even their liabilities it is a bit tricky  as most people try to take it 
as a private matter but with this we must do it as per the law. First of all we know about the b ody 
called Ethics and Anti -Corrup tion; this is a very dangerous b ody and when you find that they are 
following you on o ther issues as a Member of this House or any other house outside there you 
cannot be at peace leave alone with your work  even with your family  and therefore w ith me I 
think it is important for Members to be able to adopt this particular report, it is a Constitution 
mandate. Mr. Speaker also to add on that I have read this report , the Clerk is supposed to take 
action against the public officer who has not complied with this and now we are brothers and 
sisters and when it comes to whereby now the Clerk is call ing up as an officer to summon part of 
the County to me or  the County Assembly  it is not fair  at all so it is good that we just follow the 
law so that things can work well.  Finally,  our integrity Mr. Speaker will also not be questionable 
when do comply with this particular very important co nstitutional mandate. Thank you.  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): What is it Hon. Athman?  
September 30 , 2020                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          48 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshim iwa Spika nataka 
kumtaarifu tu Mheshimiwa a liyetoka kuongea  Jumba hili ya kwamba aliposema ya kwamba sio 
muafaka ama sio vyema ya kwamba Katibu wa Bunge hili atakua ndama ili kukuchukulia sheria . 
Lakini katika ripo ti akisoma kifungu cha tatu sehemu ndogo ya pili inazungum zia mamlaka hayo 
ya kwamba Katibu  ana mamlaka ya kuchukua uamuzi peke yake pasipokuwa tashwishi lak ini 
yuko chini ya usimamizi wa Kamati na maamuzi ba do Kamati itampa m husika nafasi ya 
kujieleza kabla ya hatua nyengine kuchukulika. Kwa sababu nimetambua huenda kibina adamu 
mtu akawa na sitofahamu kibinafsi yeye na Katibu  na kuchukua jukumu lake labda kutaka 
kumdhuru kwa makusudi . Kwa hivyo m amlaka hayo pasi kwa idhini ya Kamati kwa hivyo asiwe 
na hofu na Waheshimiwa wasiwe na hofu hakuna Mungu Katibu  anayo ya  peke  yake bal i 
jukumu lote linabakia katika Kamati ya Jumba hili Kamati ya Powers and Privileges. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you . Yes Hon. Kombe Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker to have als o given me a chance to air my views. I 
have just had a quick glance of the document and actually the clauses, amendments and 
conclusion and recommendations  are very clear to an extent they can never cause a doubt.  
Mr. Speaker I stand to support the doc umen t because it is very clear. Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you I think Members are okay with the 
document , it seems to be no much debat e on it. I will now invite the Motion mover to reply.  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speake r. I want to thank the Hon. Membe rs for 
having confidence with the Committee because the Committee Members are  also Member s of 
this House and we took care of each and every item . When we look ed at the concl usion and 
recommendations we mad e sure that some clauses are changed to fi t the system of the people of 
this County Assembly. So Mr. Speaker each and every detail that was captured  it was captured 
with this in mind that we should not fear for tomorrow . Mr. Speaker we are in declaration but I 
want to assure Members that there is no harm in declaring your wealth and asset/liabilities , it is 
one way of being transparen t in your life . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire ): Hon. Members , having exhausted with the 
debate allow me now to put a question. I now put a question that the report on administrative 
procedur es for declaration of income and liabilities of State officer s within the County Assembly 
of Mombasa be adopted in the same term s as been debated . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 There having no other business the House stands adjour ned until Tuesday next week at 
10:00a.m. 
 
The House r ose at  3:20p.m. 