April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 7th April, 2016  
The House met at 2: 43p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  You may have your seats Hon. Members . 
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo.  
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo : I just got  some information,  the statement was given out by Hon.  
Paul Onje but unfortunately we did not receive that communication so please give us time to 
work on it.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay . 
STATEMENT  
       The mover of the statement I think is me but I will bring this statement next week.  
(Laughter)  
       Yes Hon. Nyamvula . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula :  Thank you  Mr. Speaker; I  have two  statements which  I want  to 
ask if I can be given the opportunity to prese nt them.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  We have a lot of business  to transact  today;  if 
it’s not a long statement then you can proceed.  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Thank  you Mr. Speaker , it's not a log stateme nt. Mr. Speaker on 
Thursday  30th of July 2015, Order  paper 96  of the afternoon sitting  I brought  a Motion , a 
statement  regarding the status  of the 30  per cent procurement  rule for  women , Persons Living 
with Disabilities ( PWDs) and youth s. In that  statement  I had requested that I be give n the status 
of the 30  per cent as regards to  procurem ent in our County . Mr. Speaker I did get a n answer  
which was not very satisfying,  I did receive a n answer  after some time back , after pushing  and 
trying  so ma ny times.   
       Mr. S peaker I have again  as a representative a nd the Chairperson of the Committee  on 
Gender , Sports a nd Youths had some not really  complaints  from women  both disabled , abled   
and youth s have come to me a nd said mama  Hon.  Serah  the chairperson we  still  are not being 
honored, the  30 per cent is not being honored . So my statement  today Mr. Speaker is kindly  can 
we revisit  this issue of 30  per cent  procurement , on issue of 30  per cent  procurement  on youths, 
gender  and sports a nd CDWs to see if really our County  Assembly and the County  as a whole is 
honoring that rule . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Thank  you. Hon.  Saad Faraj . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank  you Mr. Speaker. I think  this is a very crucial item that has been brought  
by Hon.  Serah Nyamvula  and we have been  conducting  several meetings with the national  
government  and our brother  here the Chief W hip has been in  charge of this process throughout  
and I want  to ascertain this H ouse that I have  been  one of the Members  attending  these meeting s 
but my assumption is that this process is becoming  like they are actually not rea lly ready i n terms 
of implementing  these processes . It is becoming  a public relations  session ; we attend  and go and 
nothing  happens  Mr. Speaker . I think  this is very crucial for the betterment  of our yout hs and 
improvement  of our people living  with disabilities and to also be able to deal with the issue of 
affirmative action .  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2        I therefore , Mr. S peaker ca ll upon this H ouse to take this issue very seriously a nd we  can as 
well request for a report from the Chief W hip who has been on top of things since this initiative 
was brought up. Thank you  so much.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank  you Hon.  Saad  I understand  this issue  was 
before this Hon.  House but agai n I ha ve to let the Chief W hip Hon.  Omar  Meti to inform us on 
the issues of  procurement  rule for youth,  women  and people living  with disabilit ies. So Members  
are not satisfied with what is happening  currently , so we need  statistics w e need  to be told when  
the County  government will hono r the 30  per cent  procurement  plan to the said people.  So Hon . 
Meti  I think  I will give Hon . Meti  one week to come back  to this H ouse with a n answer  to how 
far we have reached to that plan, it is one way of implementing  that pla n. 
       Hon.  Ahmed  Ebrahim  Omar : Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  I think  one week will be enough  
because we as a County  and I as its representative have actively been advocating  for  this issue of 
30 per cent procurement rule and I re member we have gone  to the various su b counties  
advocating for this issue a nd sensitizing  the youth s on the same ,  but I think  it would be good  if 
we get a report from the procurement  department  so that we can get to know  how ma ny youth s, 
women  and people  living  with disabilit y have come to the County  to seek for  the 30  per cent  
procurement  tender s and how many  of them have been  able to access the tenders . So I want  to 
call a meeting  of the Committee  of gender  and sports a nd with the D irector of procurement . 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Saad we  are not going  to debate  this. It  is a 
statement  and we are going  to send Hon . Meti  to come back  with a comprehensive  answer in  one 
week, please . 
       Hon.  Ahmed E brahim Omar : I will call a meeting  with the Committee  of Youth a nd 
Sports together with the Director of Procurement  of the Assembly  and the executive so that they 
can give us a report and  present to this Hon.  House.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  So next week o n Thursday is ok ay? 
       Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar : Yes Hon.  Speaker . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay. Yes Hon.  Saad .   
       Hon.  Faraj : Mr. Speaker I was o n a point  of information . The report that we need to  have is 
how t he youth s, women  and people living  with disability have  accessed not only our 
programmes here but my suggestion is that  we need  to look into other parastatals that are  under  
the national  government  because this is the problem with access to government proc urement for 
the youth a nd the others for the gender.  Mr. Speaker I  think it is important that that element of 
cutting across all government  institutions  is very important . Thank  you. 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay, then I think  we have to give another  
ruling because  Hon.  Serah Nyamvula  you are heading that docket so  it is your Committee  which 
should have done  such a thing  as to go outside Mombasa  County , but I think  it is your 
responsibility  Hon.  Serah Nyamvula within  Mombasa, w ithin the Mombasa  County  Assembly 
Hon.  Meti ca n be held accountable  but outside the Committee  is supposed to do that. Thank  you. 
Yes Hon.  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker that is why I actually quoted even  the date when  that 
statement  came to this House, a nd if my colleagues  can go back , I will give them a copy , I will 
give them a directive they will see what am actually referring  to, am very aware  of the matter 
and am praying on our own procurement  processes within the A ssembly.  
       Deputy Speak er (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay but outside the County  it is the duty of 
your Committee .  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 BILLS  
AMENDMENTS OF MOMBASA COUNTY BILLS  
       I think Hon.  Members  when  we go to the Committee  stage we should take all the B ills 
together, so order No.9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 are all amendments to  these Bills a nd they all need  to 
go to the Committee  of the Whole House.  I think we should take all of them at the same time so 
that we ca n finish with them once a nd for all once we go to the Committee  stage we do all the 
Bills together  a nd the n we report on  the Bills.  
       Members , this House is dissolved to Committee  stage.   
COMMITTEE  OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
(Sergeant At Arms lowered The Mace ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mswabah Rashid ) exited the Chair)  
ORDER OF THE COMMITTEE IS READ  
 (Deputy S peaker ( Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
 
Clerk:  NOTICE TO AMEND THE MOMBASA COUNTY  CHILD CARE BILL 2015  
NOTICE is hereby given that the Chairperson of the Committee  on Early Childhood Education 
and Vocational Training, Hon. Stephen Wangudi intends to mo ve the following amendments to 
the Mombasa County  Child Care Bill, 2015 with the Governor’s recommendation as follows –– 
1. THAT  the year of the Bill be changed  from  2015  to 2016  hence  the title of the Bill be 
amended  to read ‘Mombasa  County  Child  Care  Act, 2016. 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
2. THAT  the words , ‘to facilitate  the decentralization  of related  state organs’  in the long 
title be deleted.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Interruption)  
       Chairperson:  Hon. Wangudi . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  I’m suggesting th at the Clerk reads three Clause s at a time . 
       Chairperson:  That is the proposal by Hon. Wangudi Members , I have to put a question to 
this proposal  for the House to  agree then we go on. Yes Hon. Hon. Saad . 
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker if we agree wit h one and disagree with two what is going to be the 
position . 
       Chairperson : Before I put a question you can write your disagreement . Let’s  read three 
amendments then put to question because we hav e a lot of amendments, so as the C lerk reads 
and you d on’t agree with the amendments you can stand and raise it.  
       Hon.  Faraj:  Mr. Speaker this House is guided  by rules and regulations and a s far as am 
concerned the  procedure is that we go by each Clause . 
(Question proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I have to  ask other Members  if they agree  for reading three amendments at a 
time. 
(Question put and agree d to) 
(Members  request ed for a division)  
       Okay those who agree to raise their hands . 
       I can see it has tied.  
INTERPRETATION  
3. THAT  the following  words  in the Interpretation  Clause  be defined  as follows:  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4        “Abuse” means any form of verbal, psychological, physical, sexual, e Motion al abuse, 
cruelty, torture, inhuman treatment or neglect directed towards a child;  
 
       "Child care facility" means any  facility that provides all forms of residence, pre -primary 
education, health, welfare, maintenance protection and recreation for children;  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       I propose  that amendments  3 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  3 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  3 agreed  to) 
4. THAT  the words , ‘appointed  by the Executive  Committee  Member’  under  Clause  6(1)(c)  
be deleted.   
THAT  a new Clause  6(2) be inserted  to read as follows;  ‘The Mem bers referred  to in 
section  6(1) (b)(c)  and (d) shall  be appointed  by the Governor  in consultation  with the 
Executive  Committee  Member.’  
THAT  Clause  6 thereafter  be renumbered  chronologically.  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  4 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  4 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  4 agreed  to) 
5. THAT  the following  words  be inserted  as a new Clause  7(h) ‘Provide  for training  and 
capacity  building  of child  care facility  operators  and assessors’  and thereafter  the Clause  
be renumbered  accordingly  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  5 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  5 be part of the Bill.  
(Amend ments  5 agreed  to) 
6. THAT  the head  note in Clause  8 be deleted  and replaced  with the following  words  
‘Board  arrangements  and agreements’  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propo se that amendments  6 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that Clause  6 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  6 agreed  to) 
7. THAT  the words ‘or entity’  be inserted  immediately  after the word  ‘person’  in Clause  9. 
(Questio n of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  7 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that Clause  7 be part of the Bill.  
(Clause  7 agreed  to) 
8. THAT  the words  ‘or imprisonment  to a term not exceeding  two years,  or to both’  be 
inserted  at the very end of Clause  9(3) so that the offence  reads  as follows;  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 ‘A person  who operates  a child  care facility  which  is not registered  under  this Act 
commits  an offence  and is liable  on conviction,  to a fine not exceeding  five hundred  
thousand  Shilling  or imprisonment  to a term not exceeding  two years,  or to both.’  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  8 be part of the Bill. I now put a question  that 
Clause  8 be part of the Bill.  
(Interruption)  
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Auma : Mr. Speaker  I have  an amendment .  
       Chairperson:  Amendments  have  to be written  and forwarded  to the chair  before  the session,  
Hon Serah . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula:  Mine  is not amendments  but I wish  my concern s to be recorded  in 
this session  because  the person  who takes  care of the child  facility  has no intention  most  of the 
time to protect  the child  for me and I do realize  there  are people  who do not have  good  will when  
they set up child  protection  services , I do register  my concerns  on that. When they go to set up 
they do it in good  faith but the other  concern  is that the registration  might  take long and it might  
not be the case for the person  who has set up the child  facility.  My concern  is the punishment  the 
person  who is protecting  the child.  
(Question  proposed)  
              Chairperson:  Thank  you, Members  I now put to question  that Clause  8 be part of the 
Bill.  
(Clause  8 as amended  agreed  to) 
9. THAT  Clause  10(6)  (b) be deleted  and the following  words  be inserted  therefor e; 
‘Any  applicant  not satisfied  with the decision  of the Committee  may seek legal  redress  in 
a court  of law.’  
(Question  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  9 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed ) 
       I now put a question  that Clause  9 be part of the Bill.  
(Clause  9 as amended  agreed  to) 
       Hon.  Ibrahim  Kondo:  Mr. Speaker  I have  a communication,  at around  4:00p.m  we will be 
accompanying  the Governor  to Changamwe  so i request  we do three  Clauses at a time. 
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Wangudi . 
       Hon.  Wangudi:  I also agree . 
       Chairperson:  Hon Mary . 
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Chairman  I wonder  why they are reporting  what  we put to question  
earlier . 
       Chairperson:  Hon.  Kondo . 
       Hon.  Ibrahim  Kondo:  When  there  is a need  of urgency  which  has risen  from  the office  of 
the Governor  we don’t  need  to oppose  and in front  of this House  I want  to communicate  to you 
that even  at around  4:00p.m we were  supposed  to go and bury the late Moth er of Hon.  Omar  
Mwinyi  so let’s take consideration  of that. 
       Chairperson:  Hon. Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Chairman  I support  what  Hon.  Kondo  said, so let’s read Clause s 
and put to question.  
(Question  proposed)  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6        Chairperson:  Okay  Member s it has been  proposed  that we go many  Clause s at a time but if 
someone  wants  to change  the rules  I will put the question , it’s for you to decide,  so those  who 
agree  that four amendments  be read at a time. 
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
10. THAT  the words  ‘two years’  under  Clause  13(2)  be deleted  and the words  ‘one year’  be 
inserted  therefore .  
11. THAT  the word  ‘instruct’  under  Clause  20(1)  be deleted  and the word  ‘co-opt’ be 
inserted  therefore . 
12. THAT  Clause  21 on regulations  be deleted.  This in turn will affect  the numbering  hence  
the Bill be re-numbered  accordingly.  
13. THAT  the words  ‘six months’  under  Clause  28 on offences  be deleted  and replaced  with 
the words  ‘one year.’  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
        I propose  that amendments  10, 11, 12, 13 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  10,11,12,13  be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 agreed  to) 
14. THAT  a new Clause  be inserted  immediately  after offences  to read as follows;  
       ‘Regulations  
       The County  Executive Committee  Member may make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act or the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 respecting any matter that is necessary or convenient to 
be prescribed under this Act or for the carrying out or giving effect  to this Act.’  
15. THAT  another  new Clause  be inserted  immediately  after the new section  above  to read 
as follows;  
       ‘Transition ’ 
       Any child  care facility  permit  or license  issued  at the commencement  of this Act, shall  be 
operational  for the remainin g duration  of the permit  or license  and thereafter  any subsequent  
application  shall  be in accordance  with the provisions  of this Act.’  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  14, 15 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  14, 15 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  14 and 15 agreed  to) 
       I think we are done with that one now let’s go to order number  10. 
NOTICE OF AMENDMENTS TO MOMBASA COUNTY  OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BILL, 
2015  
       NOTICE is hereby given that the Chairperson of the Committee  on Energy, Trade, Industry 
and Cooperative Development Hon. Ibrahim Kondo intends to move the following amendments 
to the Mombasa County  Outdoor Advertising Bill, 2015  with the Governor’s recommendations 
as follows –– 
1. THAT  the year ‘2015’  be deleted  and the year ‘2016’  be inserted  therefore  hence  the title 
of the Bill be amended  to read ‘The  Mombasa  County  Outdoor  Advertising  Act, 2016’ . 
2. THAT  the following  words  ‘and shall  come  into effect  upon  being  published  in the 
Gazette’  be inserted  in Clause  1 immediately  after ‘2016’  so as to read as follows;    
‘Short  title and Commencement  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 This Act may be cited  as the Mombasa  County  Outdoor  Advertising  Act, 2016  and shall  
come  into effect  upon being  published  in the Gazette .’ 
3. THAT  the following  words  be inserted  or be defined  in Clause  2 (Interpretation ) as 
follows:  
       “Advertising  device”  includes  any board,  framework  screen,  signboard,  flag, banner  
or lamp,  neon  signs,  pamphlets,  leaflets, flyers,  bulletins,  digital  displays,  murals,  
vehicles  or any other   fixture  or device  used or constructed  for the purpose  of 
advertisements;  
       “County  Executive  Committee  Member”  means  the County  executive  Committee  
member  responsible  for matters  relating  to advertising;  
       “Department”  means  the Department,  of the County  responsible  for matters  relating  
to advertising ;  
       “Outdoor  advertising”  means  any advertising  done  outdoors  that publicizes  a 
business  product  or service;  
       “Owne r” means  the person  in control  of a building,  premises  or site or with legal  and 
equitable  right  to an advertising  device;    
“Protected  area”  means  an area declared  to be a protected  area under  Clause  9 of this Act 
and any applicable  law and no outdoor  advertising  shall  be permitted  in such area.  
4. THAT  Clause  3 be amended  as follows;   
 Clause  3(c) be deleted.  
 The following  new objects  of the Act be inserted  thereafter;  
d)  To allow  the promotion  of information,  industry  and trade  through  outdoor  advertising;  and  
 to regulate and manage outdoor advertising . 
(Question of amendments proposed)  
        Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  1, 2, 3, 4 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  1, 2, 3, 4 agreed  to) 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Clause  2 which  reads  upon  being published  to read as upon  been  
assented  and published . 
       Chairperson:  So it was left out? 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Yes. 
       Chairperson:   Okay I now put a question  that amendments  1,2,3,4  be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  1, 2, 3, agreed  to) 
5. THAT  Clause  5 be amended  to read as follows;  
       ‘This A ct shall apply within the geographical boundaries of Mombasa County . 
6. THAT  the words  ‘responsible  for matters  relating  to Water,  Environment  and Natural  
Resources  (in this Act referred  to as the Department)’  in Clause  5 be deleted.  
7. THAT  the word  ‘Department’  in Clause  7 be deleted  and the words  ‘County  Executive  
Member’  be inserted  therefor e.  
8. THAT  Clause  7(f) be amended  to read as follows;    
(f) In consultation  with the County  Executive  Comm ittee, declare  any area to be a 
protected  area as provided  for under  this Act;’  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  5, 6, 7 8 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
              I now put a question  that amendments  5,6,7,8  part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  5, 6, 7, and 8 agreed  to) 
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 9. THAT  a new Clause  7(g) and (h) be inserted  to read as follows;   
(g) Enter into agreements,  public  private  partnerships  for the purposes  of advertising;  
(h) Perform  any other  function as may be required  for the effective  implementation  of 
this Act. 
10. THAT  Clause  8 be deleted  in totality.  
11. THAT  Clause  9(1) be amended  to read as follows:   
‘The County  Executive  Committee  Member  may,  in consultation  with the County  
Executive  Commi ttee, declare  or undeclare  an area to be protected  for purposes  of this 
Act and subject  to any other  laws on protected  areas.’  
12. THAT  Clause  11(1)  be amended  to read:   
‘Every  permit  issued  under  this Act shall  be for a period  of one calendar  year unless  
cancelled  prior  to such expiration.’  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  9, 10, 11, 12 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  9, 10, 11, 12 be part of the Bill  
(Amendments  10, 11 and 12 agreed  to) 
13. THAT  Clause  12(1)  be deleted  and the following  words  be inserted  therefor e;  
‘The  advertisements  specified  in sub Clause  (2) are exempted  from  payment  of fees 
chargeable  under  this Act.’  
14. THAT  the size of the advertisement  under  Clause  12(1)(b)  be amended  to read 0.3m2 
instead  of 0.3m  and the brackets  in this sub Clause  be deleted.  
15. THAT  Clause  12(1)  (d) be amended  to read:   
‘A non-illuminated  advertisement,  or notice  relating  to a place  of worship,  public  
schools,  public  hospitals  and police  stations.’  
16. THAT  Clause  14(a)  be rephrased  to read;  
‘Any advertising  device,  other  than an exempted  sign,  which  is not permitted  by this Act, 
or any other  written  law;’  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chair person:  I propose  that amendments  13, 14, 15,16 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
I now put a question  that amendments  13, 14, 15, 16 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  13, 14, 15 and 16 agreed  to) 
17. THAT  Clause  14 (f) be re-drafted  to read; 
‘Any advertising  device  that prevent  access  or exit from  a building;’  
18. THAT  Clause  14(h)  and (i) be deleted.  
19. THAT  Clause  14(j)  be amended  to read;   
‘Any poster  otherwise  than on a hoarding,  legally  erected,  for the purpose  of 
accommodating  such poster;’  
             20. THAT  Clause  13(n)  and (p) be deleted;  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  17, 18, 19, 20 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  17, 18, 19, 20 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  17, 18, 19 and 20 agreed  to) 
21. THAT  Clause  16(1)(c)  be amended  and rephrased  to read;  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 ‘Obtains any document with an intent to have a licence or permit issued or renewed by forgery or 
fraud;’  
22. THAT  Clause  16(2)  be deleted.   
23. THAT  Clause  18 on regulations  be deleted  and a new 18 be inserted  therefore  to 
read;  
‘The  County  Executive  Committee  Member  may make  regulations  not inconsistent  with 
this Act respecting  any matter  that is necessary  or convenient  to be prescribed  under  this 
Act or for the carrying  out or giving  effect  to this Act.’  
24. THAT  a new Clause  be inserted  immediately  after Clause  18 to read as follows;  
Transition  
‘Any  outdoor  advertising  permit  or license  issued  at the commencement  of this Act, shall  
be operational  for the remaining  duration  of the permit  or license  and thereafter  any 
subsequent  application  shall  be in accordance  with the provisions  of this Act.’  
25. THAT  the entire  Bill be renumbered  chronologically  due to the amendments  
incorporated.  
(Question  of amendments  proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  21, 22, 23, 24, 25 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  21, 22, 23, 24, 25 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendment s 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 agreed  to) 
NOTICE  TO AMEND  MOMBASA  COUNTY  CONSOLIDATED  REVOLVING  FUND  BILL,  
2016  
       NOTICE is hereby given that the Chairperson of the Committee  on Finance, Hon. Mohamed 
Hatimy intends to move the following amendments to the Mom basa County  Consolidated 
Revolving Fund Bill, 2016 with the Governor’s recommendation as follows;  
1. THAT  the word  “trade”  and year “2015”  be deleted  from  the title and the word  
“Consolidated”  and year “2016”   be inserted  to read as follows;  
“The Mombasa County  Consolidated Revolving Fund Bill, 2016”  
Clause  2 
2. THAT  the following  words  be inserted  and defined  as follows  under  Clause  2; 
“County  Secretary” means the County  secretary of Mombasa;  
“Fund” to include both revolving fund and grant;  
Clause  3 
3. THA T Clause  3 be deleted  and rephrased  to read as follows;  
(a) “Expand  access  to finance  in the promotion  of youth  and women  enterprises  to 
spur wealth  creation;  
(b) Generate  gainful  self employment;  
(c)  Establish  the mechanisms  for community  driven  development  
             (d) Establish  Mombasa  County  Consolidated Revolving Fund;  
             (e) Finance  technology transfer for efficiency, sustainability of projects or promote use  
of technology;  
             (f) Promote education, business management literacy for c apacity building of the 
enterprises” . 
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  1, 2, 3 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10        I now put a question  that amendments  1, 2, 3 be part of the Bill.  
(Amen dments  1, 2, and 3 agreed  to) 
PART II: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND AND THE BOARD  
Clause  4 
4. THAT  Clause  4 be deleted  and rephrased  to read as follows;   
4 “(1)   There  is established  a Fund  to be known  as the Consolidated  Revolving  Fund  
which  shall  be administe red by the board.  
(2)    At the County  level,  there  shall  be a Fund  Management  Office,  under  the office  of 
the Governor  headed  by the Fund  Manager  who will also be Secretary  to the Board.”  
5. THAT  the words  “County  Executive  Committee  Member”  under  Clause  6(2)(b) be 
deleted  and the words  “County  Executive  Committee ” be inserted  therefore  to read as 
follows;  
“(b) Three  Members  appointed  by the County  Executive  Committee  in consultation  
with the Governor  from  any of the following  categories”  
6. THAT  the word  “bache lors”  under  Clause  7(2) be deleted  and the word  “post -graduate”  
be inserted  to read as follows;  
“The chairperson shall posses a minimum qualification of a post graduate  degree from a 
recognized university with at least five years working experience in the relevant field.”  
7. THAT  the words  “posses  at least post-secondary  education”  be inserted  under  Clause  
7(3) to read as follows;  
“The Members  appointed under section 6(2)  (b)(ii),  (iii), (iv) and (v) shall posses at least 
post-secondary  education with at least  five years experience in the field of competence on which 
basis they are appointed.”  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  4, 5. 6, 7 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  4, 5, 6, 7 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  4, 5, 6 and 7 agreed  to) 
8. THAT the words  “but shall be eligible for re -appointment for one further term of three 
years”  under Clause  8 be deleted and the words , “without possibility of re -appointm ent 
thereafter” be inserted thereof to read as follows;  
“A M ember of the board appointed under section 6(2)  (a) and (b) shall hold office for a term 
of three years without possibility of re-appointment thereafter.”  
Clause  10 
9. THAT  Clause  10 be deleted  and rephrased  to read as follows;  
10. (1) The functions of the Board shall be — 
(a) To develop policies, procedures and manuals to operationalise the Fund guided by the 
CIDP and County  vision;  
(b) To oversee equitable, timely and efficient processing of loan an d disbursement;  
(c) To ensure compilation of proper data, records, returns and reports;  
(d) To receive and discuss annual reports and returns;  
 (e) Perform  such other duties as may be deemed necessary from time to time for the proper 
management of the Fund . 
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 Clause  11 
 
10. THAT  Clause  11 be deleted and rephrased to read as follows;  
         11. (1) “There shall be a Fund Manager under the office of the Governor which shall be 
administered by the Board.  
      (2) The Fund Manager shall be the Secretary to the  board.”  
Clause  12 
      11. THAT  Clause  12 be deleted and rephrased to read as follows;  
      12. “The Fund Manager shall;  
(a) Develop  and review criteria and guidelines for applicants;  
(b) Receive , evaluate and approve applications for loans;  
(c) Impleme nt communication and decisions of the board;  
(d) Recommend  to appointed disbursing agents to release the fund;  
(e) Monitor  and evaluate activities under the fund;  
(f) Manage and ove rsee the implementation of the F und.”  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  8, 9, 10, 11, be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       Chairperson:  I now put a question  that amendments  8, 9, 10, 11 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  8, 9, 10 and 11 agreed  to) 
       Hon. Moh amed Hatimy:  I propose we read six Clause s. 
(Question proposed)  
      Chairperson:  I now put a question  on that. 
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
Clause  13 
      12. THAT Clause  13 be deleted.  
Clause  15 
      13. THAT  Clause  15 be rephrased to read as follows;  
      15. “ The borrowing limits of the loans shall be set as determined by the Board from time 
to time.”  
Clause  16 
14. THAT  Clause  16 be deleted.  
Clause  17 
15. THAT Clause  17 be rephrased to read as follows;  
      17(1)”Any loan shall attract an interest rate that will be determined by the Board upon 
consultation with the Governor and the Executive Committee  from time to time.  
    (2)The County  Secretary shall disseminate the rate to the public.”  
Clause  18 
      16. THAT  Clause  18 be deleted.  
    17. THAT a new Clause  be inserted after Clause  20 to read as follows;  
      “The accounts of the Fund shall be audited as per the law governing public finance 
management.”  
Clause  22 
    18. THAT  Clause  22 be deleted.  
Clause  23 
    19. THAT  Clause  23 be deleted . 
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 (Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 part of the Bill  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  12, 13, 14, 15, 16,17,18,19  be part of the Bill.  
(Amendm ents 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 agreed  to) 
       Hon. Faraj: Mr. Speaker I have a proposal we move from six to ten Clause s. 
(Laughter ) 
(Question proposed)  
(Question put and  agreed to)  
Clerk:  NOTICE FOR AMENDMENT OF MOMBASA COUNTY  PORT HEALTH 
BILL, 2014  
       NOTICE is hereby given that the Chairperson of the Committee  on Health, Hon. Kibwana 
Swaleh Baya intends to move the following amendments to the Mombasa County  Port Health 
Bill, 2014 with the Governor’s recommendation as follows –– 
1. THAT  the year of the Bill be changed  from  2014  to 2016  hence  the title of the Bill be 
amended  to read ‘Mombasa  County  Port Health  Act, 2016 . 
2. THAT  the long title be amended  by deleted  the words  ‘port  health  officer’  and 
inserting  the words  ‘port  health  services’  therefo re so that it reads  as follows;   
‘AN ACT  of the County  Assembly  of Mombasa  to provide  for the powers  and functions  
of port health  services  and connected  purposes.’  
3. THAT  the commencement  be redrafted  to read as follow;  
‘This  Act shall  come  into operation  upon  publication  in the Gazette .’ 
4. THAT  the interpretation  Clause  should  include  definition  of the following  terms  as 
follows;   
       “Coasting trade”  means trade carried on by water between neighboring  ports within the 
Country, as distinguished from f oreign trade or trade involving long voyages . 
       "Customs Officer"  means an officer of revenue and customs appointed by the Kenya 
Revenue Authority;  
       “Port”  includes harbors and airports;  
       “pratique”  means license or permission to use a po rt, given to a vessel after quarantine or 
on showing a clean act of health;  
       “Vessel” includes aircraft and sea  crafts;  
5. THAT  objects  of the Bill under  Clause  4 be as follows;   
a) Establish,  manage,  regulate  and control  port health  services ; 
b) Provide  for inspection  of vessels  to ensure  public  health  standards  are met; 
c) Control  infectious  diseases  on board  incoming  vessels  by undertaking  health  checks  to 
vessels;  
d) Provide  for investigation  of reported  sickness  and deaths  on vessels . 
6. THAT  Clause  5 be in continuous  prose  and to read as follows;  
 
       ‘The provisions of this Act as regards vessels shall apply to vessels anchoring or arriving in 
any port within Mombasa, provided that the Executive Member may, subject to such conditions 
or limitations as ma y be prescribed by him, exempt from any such provisions any warship of 
Kenya or of any foreign country, or any vessel engaged solely in the coasting trade.’  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  1, 2, 3,4,5,6  be part of the Bill.  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13 (Question  put and agreed  to) 
I now put a question  that amendments  1, 2,3,4,5,  6 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 agreed  to) 
PART II – ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF PORT HEALTH  
7. THAT  all reference  to officers  and or implementers  of the legislation  be amended  by 
capitalizing  the first letter,  for example  ‘port  health  officer’  be amended  to read, ‘Port  
Health  Officer.’  
8. THAT  the word  “danger”  under  Clause  6(1) be deleted  and the word  ‘emergency’  be 
inserted  therefore . 
9. THAT  the head  note,  ‘Powers  of the Port Health  Officer’  under  Clause  8 be amended  
to read ‘Powers  and functions  of the Port Health  Officer’ ; 
THAT  a new sub Clause  3 be inserted  therein  to read as follows;  
3) The Port Health Officer shall perform the fol lowing function;  
a) Ensure  that vessels  carrying  into the port meet  port health  standards ; 
b) Develop,  communicate  and disseminate  the port health  standards ; 
c) Implement  and enforce  the standards  of health,  infectious  disease  control  
mechanisms/interventions,  through issuance  of permits,  notices,  quarantine,  grants ; 
d) Provide  treatment  and management  of standards  through  vaccinations,  decontamination,  
application  of disease  control  mechanism  and other  preventive  and take all precautionary  
measures ; 
e) Co ordinate  with other departments,  agencies,  government  and private  entities  in 
providing  port health  services ; 
f) Issue,  approve  and revoke  licenses,  permits,  clearance  certificates  and inspection  reports  
g) Order  quarantine  and issue  pratique ; 
h) Collect  charges  for all port health services ; 
i) Maintain  reports  and records  of all vessels  carrying  into the port; 
j) Perform  any other  function  relating  to the implementation  of this Act or any other  
applicable  law. 
10. THAT  the offence  and penalty  under  Clause  8(2) be redrafted  to read as follo ws; 
‘Any  person  who refuses  to allow  any such officer  to board  any vessel  or to make  any 
inspection  or medical  examination  as aforesaid,  or otherwise  obstructs  or hinders  any 
such officer  in the execution  of his duty,  or who fails or refuses  to give any information  
which  he may lawfully  be required  to give,  or who gives  false  or misleading  information  
to any such officer  knowing  it to be false  or misleading,  shall  be guilty  of an offence  and 
liable  to a fine not exceeding  five hundred  thousand  shillings  or imprisonment  to a term 
not exceeding  one year,  or to both.’  
11. THAT  Clause  9 be redrafted  to read as follows;  
       ‘Upon the occurrence on any vessel of any case of death from any notifiable infectious 
disease, or of such other disease as the Executive Memb er may prescribe, or of any sickness or 
mortality among rodents or other animals on any vessel or within the harbor  area suspected to be 
due to any formidable epidemic disease, the Port Health Officer shall forthwith inform the 
medical officer of health of  the area in or adjoining which the port is situated of;  
a) The occurrence  of death  from  any notifiable  disease;  
b) Any sickness  or mortality  among  rodents  or other  animals  on any vessel  or within  the 
harbor  
c) The measures  taken  or intended  to be taken  in connecti on therewith.’  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 12. THAT  the offence  and penalty  under  Clause  12(2)  be amended  to read;  
       ‘Any master of a vessel failing to comply with sub  section (1) and enters any port in 
Mombasa shall, unless he satisfies the court that he was unaware of the measures  required to be 
taken by him and that he took all reasonable means to ascertain whether it was his duty to take 
any such measures, be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding Five Hundred 
thousand shillings or imprisonment to a term not exce eding two years, or to both.’  
THAT  other  penalties  in the Bill be amended  to be as follows;  
a) Failure  and or willful  obstruction  of execution  of the law be amended  to read;  
‘Any person who refuses or fails to comply with, or willfully obstructs the executi on of, 
any requirement lawfully made under this section shall be guilty of an offence and liable 
to a fine not exceeding three hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding two years or to both.’  
b) Clause  19(2)  be amended  to read as follows;  
‘Any  person  who contravenes  or fails to comply  with an order  made  under  sub 
section  (1) shall  be guilty  of an offence  and liable  to a fine not exceeding  Fifty  
thousand  shillings  or to imprisonment  for a period  not exceeding  three  months  or to 
both. 
13. THAT  the words  ‘or cremated’  be inserted  immediately  after the word  ‘buried’  so that 
Clause  17 reads  as follows;  
‘Where  there  is any dead  body  on board  any vessel  at any port in Mombasa,  it shall  be 
the duty of the master  of such vessel  to cause  such body to be properly  buried  or 
cremated.’  
14. THAT  Clause  21 and 22 be deleted  in totality  and the following  Clause s be inserted  
therefore ; 
‘21.Regulations  
       The County  Executive Committee  Member may make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act or the Cons titution of Kenya, 2010 respecting any matter that is necessary or convenient to 
be prescribed under this Act or for the carrying out or giving effect to this Act.  
22. General penalty  
       Any person contravening any provision of this Act, for which no o ther punishment is given 
is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand shillings or imprisonment 
for a term not exceeding two years or to both.’  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 agreed  to) 
 
NOTICE OF AMENDMENTS TO MOMBASA COUNTY  CORPORATIONS BILL, 2015  
       NOTICE is hereby given that the Chairperson of the Committee  on Energy, Trade and 
Industry, Hon. Ibrahim Kondo intends to move the following amendments to the Mombasa 
County  Corporations Bill, 2015 with the Governor’s recomm endation as follows;  
1. THAT  the year “2015”  be deleted  from  the title and the year “2016 ” be inserted  to 
read as follows;  
“The Mombasa County  Corporations Bill, 2016”  
2. THAT  the long title be deleted  and rephrased  to read as follows;  
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 “AN  ACT  of the Count y Assembly  of Mombasa  to make  provision  for the establishment  
of County  Corporations  and Entities,  their control  and regulation  and for connected  
purposes.”  
3. THAT  the short  title and commencement  be rephrased  to read as follows;  
           “This Act may be cited as the Mombasa County  Corporations and Entities Act, 2016 and 
shall come into operation upon publication in the gazette.”  
4. THAT  the following  word  be inserted  and defined  as follows  under  Clause  2; 
“Public  Officer”  means  any officer,  employee  or member,  including  an unpaid,  part-time 
or temporary  officer,  employee  or member  of the County  Government  of Mombasa;  
5. THAT  the word  “County ” under  Clause  6 (1) (c) be deleted  and the word  “chief”  be 
inserted  to read as follows;  
      “The Chief Officer of the parent Department ”; 
6. THAT  the words  “County ” and “County  Treasury”  under  Clause  6 (1) (d)  be deleted  
and the words  “Chief”  and Finance  Department  be inserted  respectively  to read as 
follows;  
“The  Chief  Officer  to Finance  Department ”; 
7. THAT  a new sub-Clause  2 in Clause  6 be introduced  to read as follows;  
“A person  shall  be qualified  for appointment  as a Chief  Executive  Officer  or board  
member  if that person –– 
a. Holds  a degree  from  a university  recognized  in Kenya;  
b. Meets  the requirements  of Chapter  6 of the Constitution;  
c. Has knowledge  and experience  for not less than five years  in the relevant  field;”  
8. THAT  a new sub-Clause  3 be introduced  to read as follows;  
“Sub  section  (2) above  shall  not apply  to the chairperson”  
9. THAT  the words  “County ” and “Treasury  department ” under  Clause  27 (1) (b) be 
deleted  and the words  “Chief”  and Finance  Department  be inserted  respectively  to read as 
follows;  
“The  Chief  Officer to the Finance  Department” ; 
10. THAT  Clause  27 (1) (c) be deleted  and rephrased  as follows ; 
“The Chief Executive Officer;  
11. THAT  Clause  27(1)  (e) be deleted  and rephrased  as follows;  
        ‘County  Attorney”  
(Question of amendments proposed)  
       Chairperson:  I propose  that amendments  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 be part of the Bill.  
(Question  put and agreed  to) 
       I now put a question  that amendments  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 be part of the Bill.  
(Amendments  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 agreed  to) 
       Members  I think  we have  finished  with the Committee  of the Whole House, now it is 
reporting  time.  Thank  you. 
(The Mace  is raised)  
(The House  resumed  business ) 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mswabah Rashid ) in the C hair)  
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Thank  you Members  for the completion  of the 
Committee  of the Whole House.  So it’s time for the movers  of these  amendments  to report  what  
transpired  In the House.  Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker  (Inaudible ). 
April 7, 2016                                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      48 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electr onic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16        Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Hon.  Hatimy  you are supposed  to report  what  
transpired  in the House;  it must be reported  to this Hon.  House  so that the House can proceed  to 
the next stage.  Yes Hon.  Wangudi  I can see you want  to share  something . 
       Hon.  Wangudi : Thank  you Mr. Speaker  sir I would  like to report  to this House that the 
amendment  on the Bill of Mombasa  Child care 2015  was discussed  and passed  in the Whole  
House Committee  without  further  amendments , so I beg this House through  the chair  to take 
these  amendments  to the next stage.  Thank  you, Mr. Speaker . 
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker,  I take this opportunity  to table  to this 
House the amendment s of the Bill of Mombasa  County  Consolidated  Revolving  Fund Bill, 2015  
for appro val. 
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Thank  you, if there  is no other  chair,  the deputy  
chairs,  yes Hon.  Meti . 
       Hon.  Ahmed  Ebrahim  Omar : Thank  you Mr. Speaker ; as a Member  of the Committee  on 
Water Environment  and Natural  resources  I think I can table the report  that the amendment  of the 
Mombasa  County  Outdoor  Advertisement  Bill which  was discussed  on the Committee  of the 
Whole House and the amendments  that were  made  I wish  it to be moved  to the next level . 
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Msw abah  Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker  I am a member  of Trade  and Energy  and 
I take this opportunity  to table for approval   the amendment s of the Mombasa  County  
corporation  Bill 2015  to proceed.  Thank  you, Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Caroline  Auma . 
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Auma : Mr. Speaker  I would  like to table  the amendments  for the County  Port 
Health  Bill. 
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) :  Thank  you.  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Members  this House stands  adjourned  until next week  Tuesday  at 2:00p.m. 
The House  rose at 4:17p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 