February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 14th February, 2019  
The House met at 2:40p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Clerk can you check if 
we have quorum ?  
 
(Lack of quorum)  
 
 So can you ask Serj eant-At-Arms to ring the bell for five  minutes . 
 
(Quorum bell rung)  
(Background consultation)  
 
(A few Hon. Members entered the Chambers)  
 
 Yes Clerk, do we have the quorum now?  
 
(Quorum )  
 
 Yes Hon. Kit ula. 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa  Spika  nasimama  kulingana  na Katiba  yetu 
ya Bunge katika  kipengele cha 41 kwa  ruhusa  yako  uweze  kuniruhusu  niweze  kutoa  kauli  yangu  
siku ya leo. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Kitula you may continue.  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Mr. Speaker I seek to know from the Chai rperson, 
Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public works on;  
 

February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 1. Number of technicians employed in street lighting.  
2. How the tasks are divided among them.  
3. The company supplying str eetlight equipments in Mombasa Country and the mode of 
supply.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kitula. Yes Hon. Fadhili ? 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Excuse me Mr. Speaker I have another statement;  
I seek to know from the…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Kitula let me direct first that statement to the 
Chairperson of Transport then you may give the other statement. Yes Hon. Fadhili, the Deputy 
Chairperson Committee of Transport.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Spea ker  I am a 
Member of the Transport Committee but I was up , I just wanted to get your directive because I 
saw the Chairman of Health entering this Honourable House without bowing so I do not 
understand why the Hon . Member is dishonoring this House.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh is it true what the 
Honourable M ember is saying?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I think at my age all 
along I have been  a very respective person and at no time I can disrespect the Chair. So I think 
my colleague from Port Reitz maybe he was unable to see whether I have bowed or not but I 
have really bowed down as required in the rules of this Assembly. Thank y ou Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh did you say that at your age you 
are old enough you forgot how to bow I did not understand.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Mr. Speaker I think the language that you are using may 
interpret diffe rently but Hon. Speaker I said that I think at my age I have to respect…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  So did you bow down when you entered in?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : I did maybe my colleague did not see Hon. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Kh atri): Ok. Yes Hon. Thoya . 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Hon. Thoya : Mr. Speaker I think it is just because age is a number and that mean s when 
the age is very high the young generation are allowed to bow or not to bow it is about the reality. 
I would suggest  with powers vested in you  the M ember to be thrown out and bow so that we can 
see him , a lot of us did not see him doing it please throw him out. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Thoya I think we have Serj eant-At-Arms 
here so he should tell us , did the Hon ourable M ember follow the rules of the House by entering 
the House or he just enter ed? Clerk just confirm with Serjeant -At-Arms.  
 
(The Table Clerk consulted with the Serjeant -At-Arms)  
(The Table Clerk confirmed that Hon. Kibwana Swaleh did not bow)  
 
(Applau se) 
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana can you please do the needful.  
 
(Hon. Kibwana Swaleh bowed down before the House)  
 
 Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ok Hon . Members back to the Business I think the Chairman for Transport is not around 
and I can see the Deputy Hon. Mwaka.  Hon. Mwaka I think you have heard what Hon. Kitula 
has asked and you will be given the copy, do you think you have the answer to answer him now 
or you need some time  to answer him?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka  Bakari : Ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa S pika nakushukuru  sana kunipa  fursa  
hii na pia nashukuru  Mwenyezi  Mungu  kutuwezesha  kurudi  tena muhula  huu wa pili. Kwa 
kusema  kweli  hio ripoti  unayoizungumza  Mheshimiwa  Kitula  ni ripoti  ambayo  ni muhula  
uliopita  na sasa hivi tuna wiki moja  ambayo  kwamba  tutaweza kukupa hii  ripoti  nams ubiri  
Mwenyekiti  wangu  yuko  nje ya nchi lakini  akirudi wiki ijayo  tutaweza  kukujibu.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwaka if I may correct you on that when 
your Chair is not around you are the Chair…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 So you are the boss of that C ommittee right now you do not need for your Chair to come 
back. So please tell this House if yo u can bring the report back in one  week?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka  Bakari : I want this House to give me one  week.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : One week?  
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Hon. Mwaka  Bakari : Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So thank you Hon. Mwaka please give us the report by next 
week. Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Hon. Kitula . 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I seek to know from the 
Chairp erson Committee on Water Sanitation and Natural Resources when the Frère town 
Kisimani pipeline will start? Thank Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry can you come again Hon. Kitula?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): I seek to know from the Chairp erson on Water, 
Sanitation and Natural Resources when the Frere town Kisimani pipeline will start? Thank you 
Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kitula . Hon. Members the Chairperson for 
Water a nd Sanitation I think is not around but we  have a Member or the Vice C hair who is Hon. 
Mwalimu. Yes Hon. Mwalimu ? 
 
 Hon.  Mwalimu Mgwisho : Just give me one week I will answer that question.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ara n? 
 
 Hon. Aran: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker pursuant to Standing Order 41 sub  
section 2(c).  I seek  to get clarification from the C hairperson on Committee on Trade, Tourism 
and Investment in regards to the Mama Ngina drive facelift  project th ese are:-  
 
1. Whether the County residents have been accorded equal opportunity on the available 
employment especially the casual workers.  
 
2. Mr. Speaker whether the County government has any plan for the y outh and women who 
used to earn their l iving at Mama N gina drive before the facelift . 
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Than k you Hon . Aran, I think the Chairman for Tr ade is 
there,  Hon. Opeya can you please tell us if you have the answer for that question?  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  No but I will forw ard it to the Chief Officer and by next week Thursday 
you will get the reply.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry ?  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  By next week Thursday you will get the reply from the Chief Officer.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you need one week?  
 
 Hon.  Opeya:  One week only.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Opeya so by next week Thursday please 
give us the report. Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro : Thank you Mr. Speaker and I also  welcome back all M embers to this year s’ 
session. I would also like t o request the Chair on water as he will be replying concerning Hon . 
Kitula’s request, I also want  him to reply on my project. There is a project there at Vikwatani 
Kashani pipeline; I also want to know how far it has reached o r whether it has started or no t. So 
we want to know whether it has started and if it has started the level of completion and if it has 
not started why it has not started.  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Nyiro. Hon. Mwalimu the V ice Chair of 
that Commi ttee?  I think you have heard the Hon.  Member what he has ask. Do you have the 
answer for that?  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho : Thank you Mr. Speaker, at the moment I do  not have the 
answer but I need; may be in one week s’ time. I will give the answer. Thank you . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Ho n. Member so by next week please make sure 
you b ring the answer. Yes Hon. Shebe?   
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you Chair of course through  your indulgence I will also 
kindly request for a stat ement and I know the Chair  of Education is fully aware of this. It has 
been two years now down the line and there is an ECD in my area and up to now it has not yet 
been opened. The pupils or other the children are s till finding very difficult Honourable  Chair to 
continue with their  learning and there is space there. So I would like to have a request, thank 
you. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Shebe can you please explain to this House when you 
tell us there is an ECDE and it is not opened what does that mean? Explain to this House ; that 
there is an ECD which has been built in, and there is no furniture inside or…  
 
(Interruption ) 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Hon. Athman Shebe:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Or what is the problem?  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Actually Chair the infrastructure is complete there is e verything 
but up to now or  up to date it has not been opened and the last time we check ed with the Chair of 
Education he is fully aware of that and he promised that the ECD will be going to be opened 
soon. So up to now the kids are still learning outside a nd there is a space there so it is paramount 
there if this will be going to be opened soon or when b ecause I do  not know what is happening 
up to now.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Ibrahim Omondi can you please tell this 
House if you have the answer for that or … 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Okay thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. I would like to respond to the 
Honorable question or request tha t we shall be ready with answer,  let him give us one week we 
shall be…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But it ha s been two years the Honourable  Member is saying 
that. 
 
 Hon. Omo ndi: Okay Mr. Speaker S ir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Is it the first time you are hearing about this issue or you 
have heard about it before?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  It has never been brought to t his House Mr. Speaker Sir , that I can 
confirm.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It is not about  that, it has been bro ught to this House you are 
the C hairperson of Committee of Education that issue , is it the first time you have heard about?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  It is the first time Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You have never heard about it before?  
 
 Hon. Omondi : Exactly first time.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay then we are giving you one week and please make 
sure, you tell us what the problem is . 
 
 Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim Omondi, yes Hon. Thoya Renson?  
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker I  want to seek to know from the C ommittee of 
Education in relation to the bursary ; what is goi ng on because we knew we were called for a 
meeting that bursary  as the MCA s we are going to be involved; we were involved. We went 
round to tell the common Mwananchi  to bring the relevant papers and after that another team 
apart from the MCA we send,  I am told even the organization were brought on board and now 
the forms are bac k there the MCA is not involved. W e want to seek this information what is 
going on in the department of education in relation to bursary. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Than k you Hon. Renson. Y es Hon. Ibrahim Omondi? Can 
you please explain  to this House about that issue, b ecause I am sure it is not the first time you 
have heard about that issue Hon. Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon. Omo ndi: Sorry for that hiccup Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes is it the first time you have heard about the issue of 
bursary?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Not the first time Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Several times I confirm that.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Please so tell this House what is the problem. What is the 
main problem with that issue?  
 
 Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir I want to be very much candid on this and very open on 
the iss ue of the bursary. Mr. Speaker S ir the Hon. Member is right by saying that we hav e had a 
lot of issues on this b ursary. Mr. Speaker Sir as the C ommitte e of the E ducation I being the 
Chairman we have done our part and I can confirm that we even have the documen ts showing 
that we have walked…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Member can you just tell us what is the problem? And 
how are you going to solve the proble m. Stop taking us round please?  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes just tell us in short what  the problem is and how are yo u 
solving that problem in your C ommittee? Not unless you do  not know what you are doing.  
 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 (Applause ) 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir on the issue of bursary we had a meeting 
today with my C ommittee to del iberate on th e issues that the M ember is raising now and we 
have agreed that we are going to have anot her meeting on Monday with the M embers so that we 
should deeply deliberate on the matter and then we shall come back again.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . 
  
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Do you know now it has been almost two years since the 
residents of Mombasa County have never received the bursary?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Is it true or no t true?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  It is true Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Was that money budgeted last year?  
 
 Hon. Omondi : It was.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Have you confirmed? Was that money utilized or was not 
utilized and where did tha t money  go? You know Honorable M embers you should kno w what 
you are doing with your C ommittee. Those are the things we need to know in this H ouse. If that 
money was utilized or what happen ed with that mone y of bursary, if  the resident s of Mombasa 
got money or the y did  not get that money.  Otherwise just stop taking us round here and there; 
you had a meeting, we just want to know the facts and you sho uld get those answers from the 
Education department. You know  and as a C ommittee I think you have all the powers to w rite 
those letters and get that information.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker S ir it is true what you have said I do agree with that and I 
remember in the last session a statement was brought in this House on the same and I did 
respond. We did respond on the sam e in the sam e House but the issue that the M ember has is just 
an issue that is talking about the programs that were there and also those are the programs 
because there was a n agreement between us and the Department of E ducation on how that 
bursary will be disbursed , specifically  the one dealing with form Mr. Speaker S ir. That one is 
complaining about it, I have said that there  are some things which have gone wrong and tha t is 
why I have requested this H ouse again to give us time, to give us one week Mr. Spe aker Sir so 
that we shall come here with a very c omprehensive report on the same . Mr. Speaker  please!  
 
(Interruption)  
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Elimu ni vizuri 
aseme k wamba mambo yamemzidi na kinachoendelea kule hata yeye mwenyewe 
anachanganyikiwa kwa sababu hawezi enda kuambiwa kwamba we are giving you a f avour, ni 
vizuri zile shida anazopitia na ile Kamati husika na pale imefika sasa hili si  jambo la Kamati ya 
Elimu. Naomba S pika uchukue ...wachukue hiyo kama tutakuwa na full House Kamukunji  
tuweze kujua kinachoendelea kwa sababu in fact nataka aelewe kuwa silalamiki  najaribu 
kuzungumza ukweli wa mambo mashinani  asiniambie nina lalamika , hapa hiyo shida hata yeye 
yuko na yo ana  watoto ambao hata sasa wanahangaika. Hivyo basi  tunataka hili jambo kama 
Ibrahim Bomoa Omondi umetatizika njoo urudi kweli useme jamaa najaribu kusukuma lakini 
nina changamoto. Huwezi enda pale kama M wenyekiti ukaambiwa tunakufanyia favour na hii 
pesa tunapitisha hapa kuwapelekea wao , kama ni hivyo hatutapitisha pesa ya elimu  hapa. Kwa 
sababu tuambieni zile pesa tunapitisha hapa Bungeni  mnazitumia namna gani kama ham patii 
hawa watoto . ahsante . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Baya Swa leh. 
  
 Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker I stan d here to say that I am also a 
Member of that C ommittee. I want to defend my Chair not because of being the Chair but t he 
steps that we have taken as M embers . Currently the forms are being issued at  the Sub C ounty 
level Hon. Speaker and we started with those with marks for those who are form ones who got 
300 marks and above and the allocation was Kshs 50 M illion that was allocated the previous 
financial year which was not enough to c ater for the coll ege plus U niversity plus the secondary 
level .   
 Mr. Speaker that was the project started with only a student with 300 marks only, s o the 
next stage will be the mega bursary form for all categories ; that is U niversities , colleges and 
again secondary level for form one s, form two, three and form four s. So Mr. S peaker the money 
we think through the consultation with the department we found that the money we allocated was 
almost Kshs 150 million and we come to this financial year up to now the department has 
receive d only Kshs 50 million. So Kshs 50 million is not enough for the County that is why we 
have gone to that portion of it , but ne vertheless Hon. Speaker as a Member I think we need also 
as M embers we have agreed to recall back also that B ill that we pas sed here in the previous 
Assembly.  
 Hon. Speaker that Bill made us as M embers of this Assembly not having any hand in the 
bursary issue , that is why there is a lot of confusio n as my colleague has said the M embers were 
given mandate to go to the ground an d collect data then after some two weeks or three weeks the 
Ward A dministrators were then on the ground looking for the same data . So we found that there 
is a lot of suspicio ns and Hon. Speaker I thin k these  are seriou s matters and I urge my fellow 
Members  plus the C hairman I think we should take this seriously otherwise as I agree with my 
colleague s that in future if things are not going to on our way we should not add more to this 
department. Thank you .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana .. Ye s Hon . Fadhili Makarani the 
Deputy Speaker?  
 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity to at least give my input on the issue of bursaries. Mr. Speaker I am very much 
surprised by the Hon. Member who has just stepped down ; frankly speaking the Committee has 
let us down.. . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Mr. Speaker we have been pa ssing budget in this Honorable H ouse; two years down the 
line our kids have not received even a single cent for bursaries and to make the matter  worse we 
as Hon . Members  and we went down  to the ground to collect data , to collect forms from the 
standard eight  students after that the issue was a lso duplicated and done by the Ward 
Administrators. Mr. Speaker we were silent we are even much surprised no w that we were 
expecting the department to give  out cheques, t here in forms of which it is as if the department is 
still buying time. What we want to see at hand Mr.  Speaker we want to see cheques; w hen we 
see cheques that is when we are going to know that  our kids are being given money or bursary 
and in the forms there is supposed to look for C hiefs, they  are supposed to look for Ward 
Administrators.  
 Mr. Speaker our people are wondering and they come to our offices; t hey brought all the 
details to our of fices and now they are supposed to look for C hiefs and now they  are supposed to 
look for Ward A dministrators to sign for them those forms. Through your Chair Mr. Speaker it is 
a matter that  needs urgency and we need the C ommittee to work on this issue on a  serious 
matter. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athuman Shebe : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker let me begin by saying it is 
very unfortunate that this thing is happening. We have been take in round , in circles year out 
year in . It is unfortunate  that the Committee or other the Chairman of the Education Hon. 
Speaker  has been over whelmed by his responsibility that is what I can I say.  
 The last time I check ed Hon. Speaker it was on December and I had  a privilege to host a 
very important guest in my area and that was His Excellency the Governor , even my neighbour 
can b ear me witness what the Governor said last year was very frankly and clear let no student 
who has excel led in his exams miss school and that was a very clear statement from the 
Governor’s mouth and up to now you can imagine the dynamics in Jomvu Ku u and other areas 
are different;  250 marks for a student coming from Jomvu Kuu that is a pass mark. Why this 
selective discrimination Hon. Speak er?  
 So it has been a burden for us Hon. Memb ers in the grass root up to now, we  have been 
degraded like data collectors. The so called data collectors Hon. Speaker we just go there we 
have been given forms we take them  and it is unfortunate;  when is this  thing going to end really 
to me it  is a chal lenge I am giving to Hon. M embers we have a full mandate of the Constitution 
of the republic to do a n aggressive oversight about these  things or else this issue will judge us 
very harshly Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe . Yes Hon Mohamed Moham ed? 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : (Technical hitch) .  
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Hon. Mohamed please we can not hear you! Just use 
the microphone.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I think this problem Mr . Speaker will finish when the 
Committee starts to submit their reports to  Liaison Committee because C ommittee s should   
submit report s to the Liaison Committee . So I think if we can through the C hair I request if you 
can direct the Chair of t he Liaison C ommittee to handle this matter and report to this House as 
soon as possible. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed Mohamed . Yes Hon. Renson? Is 
there anything else you want to add?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Yes I think I am the pers on that I have brought this forward ; for what we 
want to suggest this matter is very urgent and I know the Chairman of this Committee will be 
telling us one week or two weeks ; because of it s urgency there is need that either  through a 
supreme or powerful C ommittee of this House that the concern ed party is summoned at the 
Committee room for a special Kamukunji  because w e need to make it to an end.  
 These  administrators must come to an end hawa ni watu wameandikwa na sisi 
tumechaguliwa na mimi sitaki kubadil ishwa kuwa mtu wa kuchukua makaratasi nikiletea watu . 
This is a document of Mombasa County why do you take it back to the C hief? Somebody should 
explain, mimi niko pale kama MCA na mimi ndio nimechukua hizo karatasi halafu unasema 
karatasi ipelekwe kwa Chifu, ya Mbunge  itaenda kwa ya K aunti inaenda kwa Chifu  kufanya kitu 
gani? Some body should explain I know the C hairman is that (??) to explain this, the relevant  
people must come tuweze kusaidia huyu M wenyekiti wetu . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Ho n. Renson.  Hon. Ibrah im Omo ndi I think you 
have heard what the Hon . Members are complaining about and the matter is very serious and you 
know now we are almost two months and students have already started , the form one s. So if you 
are not going to push it and do  not know when we are going to get th ese bursaries so please just 
tell this House what are you going to do with this issue.  
    
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, first of all I w ant to appreciate what all the 
Members and the contribution they  have given and I will confirm it  is very true M embers were 
very much frustrated and that is true concerning this issue of bursary . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Use the mic rophone  Honourable.  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you . I was just confirming it  is true the  way M embers are putting 
it; this issue has really eaten up the Members because it i s an issue wh ich has been there long 
time and it has never been resolved.  I think this is the time now we need to call a spade a spade 
and a spoon a spoon . The time has come Mr. Speaker S ir as the Chairman of Education I would 
like to say this one we are going to summon the C EC, we are going to summon all the people in 
the department , all of them and if they are not going to come to that meeting I think I will resign 
from this  position .  
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  Mr. Speaker S ir if they are not going to come it  is going to be very tough indeed;  it will 
be either me or them Mr. Speaker S ir that is one because it  is an issue we have talked about 
several times and it seems ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. M ember, you know if you are going to do your 
work and if you are going to write the letters  and present the letter to the M ember then there is no 
need for you to resign. The M embers are just asking you to do your work so you just w rite a very 
good letter to the concerned department tell them this is what they need to  know and if you are 
saying if you want to summon them write for them a letter  and if the Honorable M embers come 
to ask you show them the letter so I do  not see why you have to resign  and if they do  not come 
that is not going to be your problem because if you have done your part there is no need for you  
to resign . So the most important thing is to do your part ; up to now there is nothing you have 
shown us that you  have su mmoned anyone . The  issue is you just have to do your part and you do  
not do it verbally you just write a written document whereby you know ..., you have those powers 
so make use of your powers.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker S ir I only used this word resign to  emphasize or to stress that 
it is a very serious matter I do  not mean the real resigning …  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 I was emphasizing tha t it has to happen Mr. Speaker S ir, I was just emphasiz ing so going 
back to the point ok ay... 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri)  left th e Chair ) 
( The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) in the C hair) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes continue ?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker ; going to the point I wanted to enlighten some of 
the issues concerning the process that is ongoing , one of my M ember s has already elaborated a 
lot about the process of the bursary taking place . Now, one Mr. Speaker S ir there is a problem 
with the forms that are being used I want to explain this without fear so the forms that are being 
used are black and white a nd those forms can be manipulated . They are exposed to manip ulation 
so first of all there are  problems with the forms that are being is sued on the ground Mr. Speaker 
Sir that is number one, number two the process is not being followed , the entire proc ess w as 
supposed to take place at the W ard level  but it is taking place at the Sub -County level that is 
another thing that we have noted .  
 Mr. Speaker S ir number three I would like also to enlighten the M embers that ther e was a 
place that was written C hief, I think it has been repeatedly questioned . There was a place on 
those form s which was written the Chief A dministrator ; we are not to talk about the C hief on the 
administrati on of the national government, we are talking about the Chief Administrator who is 
the Ward A dministrator is th e one supposed to sign not the C hief on the ground .   
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  I would like to correct that for M embers Mr. Speaker ; finally I am sayin g this that today 
we had a C ommittee , with my C ommittee and we solved that that this time round it  is goi ng to be 
very tough we are going to call the whole H ouse we are going to have a Kam ukunji  with the 
whole H ouse to discuss this matter on moving forward and  the resolution that the whole H ouse 
will give us . 
   
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : There is a Member who is up what is your 
concern . 
  
 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: A point of information Hon. Speaker ,  I think the Chairman 
is misleading the House there is nothing like Chief  Administrator in the past. S econdly I think 
he is biting more that he can chew H on. Speaker my sprinkle of wisdom sa ys that I think you 
should also consider in joining this issue with the Liaison Committee it will be of much help to 
him so that  we can be able to bite the so called shark together because it seems it 's tooth is either 
toothless or th ere are full of gaps Honorable C hair, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Athuman, Hon. Ibrahim and 
Education Committee , as you have said you are going to have to ca ll a meeting you will join the 
Liaison C ommittee i n your meetings then you  will give a report in a week’s time because it  is an 
urgent matter of which the public is waiting for the bursary . Yes Hon. Feddis what is it?  
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, ni likuwa nataka kujua kutoka kwa 
Mwenyekiti wa Afya kwamba kuna hospitali Mwakirunge Marimani  na hio hospitali imechukua 
mda mrefu sana haijafunguliwa . Je kuna mikakati gani kwa ile hospitali kwa upande wa 
kufunguliwa na ni lini ningetaka kujua kutoka kw a Mwenyekiti ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
  
 The Depu ty Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes any Member from Health Committee?  Hon. 
Abrari you wanted to speak on behalf o r you have a statement? So the C ommittee will be 
requested to respond on your statement next week Thursday the chairman and the committee will 
be no tified yes Hon. Junior.  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Bwana Spika pi a mimi ningetaka kuongezea kwa M wenyekiti wa Afya  
kuna hospitali iko kwangu ambayo ime kamilika na mpaka kufikia sasa haijafunguliwa , ningetaka 
kujua pamoja na hio Mheshimiwa Feddis ni lini na ni hatua ga ni inachukuliwa ndio kuhakikisha 
zimefunguliwa kwa sababu tangu imalizike mpaka sasa inamaliza mwaka mwingine itakuwa ni 
hali ambayo  haisadii wananchi wetu wa Chaani  na vile vile Mwakirunge . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : So let  us be precise you r hospital is in which 
Ward?  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Of Chaani W ard.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  It is note d it will be enjoined with the S tatement 
from Hon. Feddis of Mwakirunge . Yes Hon. Abrari.  
 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  Hon. Abrari Omar:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika langu ningependa kutaka kujua 
kutoka Mwenyekiti wa M azingira kuna shida ya takataka K ongowea ambapo kuna mlima wa 
takataka ambao ulikuwa waendelea na inasemekana kuwa hilo jaa litafungwa kwa hivyo 
ningetaka kujua mlima ule utamalizwa li ni ama wana mikakati gani ku maliza mlima u le wa 
takataka nje na ndani ya K ongowea sokoni . Pia vile vile ambao tumekaa vikao kadha na idara ya 
wahusika tukiwa mas hinani na wakasema kuwa jaa la K ongowea litafungwa karibuni na mpaka 
sasa jaa limechukua siku tisa kusafishwa lakini mpaka sasa hawajafika hata nusu ya hilo jaa . 
 Kwa hivyo ningependa kuomba M wenyekiti m husika aangalie swala hili na alitilie 
mkazo swala hili ni njia gani ambao watafanya ile jaa litoke na kama kutakuwa na mpangilio 
watueleze ni mipangilio  gani kama ni  ya kila w iki watakuwa wanachukua kwa kila wiki ama ni 
baada ya kila siku mbili mpaka lile jaa lile liishe . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athman Shebe.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Naam ahsante sana Mwenye kiti nimes ikia sana Mh eshimiwa 
mwenza na nashukuru katika maongezi yake ametambua kuwa kuna juhudi zinafanywa 
Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti kwa sababu kama kuna changamoto kubwa la taka ni Kongowea  na 
kwa uchache na uduchu wa rasilmali tulioko  nayo katika wizara ya mazingira kazi tunaifanya 
tunashauriana tu na W aziri kuwa kuna mikakati kabambe ya kuweza kuleta magari mengine . 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nitajulia ningependa tu aweze kunipatia takriban wiki moja niweze 
kujua utaratibu huo wapi na kama pia kutakuwa na mbinu mbadala ya kuweza k ukodi magari 
tuhakikishe  kuwa Kongowea  tumeitia katika hali yake ya unabifu . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti pia 
bila shaka na sizungumzi kwa mtazamo wa Kongowea  nazungumzia kwa mtazamo wa Kaunti 
nzima ya Mombasa , ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : The S tatement is noted and it is clear and in a 
weeks’ time we are waiting for your response Hon. Ibrahim use your mic rophone . 
 
 Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker S ir, I can remember very well i n the last session there was a 
Statement that was given in this House, was read in this House towards the Chairman of Labour 
and I remember it was an issue which was very much touching, and this was about the 
employment or the opportunities that were going or the employment that were going on  within 
the County an d the Chairman of Labour confirmed or promised that he  is going to give a very 
comprehensive report on this matter . Mr. Speaker S ir up today we have not received any report 
and as am speaking there is a lot of, I cannot  confirm but there is a lot of rumo ur that people are 
being employed in different department s so I would like the Chairman of labour to sh ed light to 
that, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes the Hon. Member has requested the 
Chairman of Labour to respond to this.  
 
 Hon. Thoya : Ahsante Bwana Mwenyekiti nafikiri ni  sukuma ni kusukume hakuna kitu 
mahususi sana, nafikiri ni vile nimekuwa ngangari  na hi lo jambo la basari  lakini nataka 
kumwambia kwamba kama kuna lolote alilete na nitalifanyia kazi kwa sababu taarifa zote 
ambazo zime kuja hapa…  
 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 (Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : It is an issue that has been there ever since.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Nataka kujibu, taarifa  hiyo iliulizwa na MCA wa Tudor na majibu yalikuja, 
swali lengine lililokuja hapa iliku wa ni kuhusu…  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes there is an Hon. Member there.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri hatuwezi kukaa hapa 
tukazungumza vitu vya last session, ni makosa kwa hivyo kama kuna swala lolote anataka 
kuleta, alilete kwa njia nyingine, la kini ni makosa kuzungumza vitu ambavyo vishapitwa na 
wakati Mheshimiwa Spika, ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : So even the bursary issue that was in the last 
session is not supposed to be discussed?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Bursary Mheshimiwa Sp ika imeanza sasa  imeletwa upya 
lakini vitu viliv yopita vya session iliyopita hatuwezi ten a kuvuzungumza.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay well noted so will…  
 
 Hon. Juma Thoya:  Nafikiri Mheshimiwa m kongwe Nyumba hii anajaribu kuwapa ile 
njia muele keo na ningemuomba Mheshimiwa Ibrahim kama ana tetesi kwamba kuna department 
yeyote ambayo inaandika watu alete h iyo statement  kikamilifu tutaifanyia kazi, mambo ya 
kusema kwamba ile iliyokuja hapa ilipelekwa kwa ad hoe committee, pengine aulize hiyo ad ho e 
committee imefikia wapi. Nimesema Bwana Mwenyekiti ambaye uko hapo hii ni vuta ni kuvute 
lakini Mheshimiwa Bomoa alikuwa hana ujumbe kwa Nyumba hii, lakini kana anayo tuko tayari 
na Kamati  yangu kuwapa majibu, ningeomba atulie apumzike mziki wa b asari  umekuwa…  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Thoya. Hon. Athman 
Shebe, you have given your statement if am not wrong.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Is right here Mr. Speaker but there is also another statemen t which 
require …urgent matter H on. Sp eaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay proceed.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you, I would like… I was requesting for a statement 
through the Labour committee, there are two different companies in my area and according to 
our laws here state that 70  percent of the jobs opportunity are being allocated or rather reserved 
for the local and this company has 95 percent all foreigners, so I would like the Chairman of the 
Committee…  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Name the company.  
 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  Hon. Athman  Shebe:  Denki and there is another one called Manoki enterprises in my 
area Hon. Speaker so I require the Committee to take charge of that matter so that we can see 
how  are we going to solve that issue.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay the Commit tee will handle the matter a nd 
bring a response to this Hon ourable  House . Yes Clerk.  
 
MOTION  
OPERATIO NALIZATION OF PERFOR MANCE CONTRACTING IN  THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : MCA Kipevu Ward, Hon. Faith Mwende.  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir for gi ving me this chance to move my 
Motion about operatio nalization of performance contracting in the County government.  Mr. 
Speaker S ir, I beg to give the following M otion;  
 
WHEREAS  the C ounty Government Act (2012) enshrines performance contracting in the 
County Government in Kenya in Section 47;  
 
WHEREAS  the Co unty government of Mombasa is therefore obligated to operationalize 
performance contracting as provided for in the law;  
 
WHEREAS it has been observed that the performance of the departments and staff is not 
subjected thoroughly to performance contracting st andard;  
 
WHEREAS  it is a matter of great concern that the failure to enforce the provisions on 
performance contracting is a serious and fragrant violation of the law and may in 
consequence thereof lead to losses in terms of a man hours and development due t o non - 
performance and under  - performance;  
 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED  by the County Assembly of Mombasa that all 
departments of the Chief Officers to sign performance contracts on behalf thereof.  
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED  that all departments and staff in the County government of 
Mombasa be subjected to performance contracts and annual staff appraisal.  
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED  that reports on performance contracts and annual 
performance appraisal be submitted by all departments to the County Assembly for 
consideration.  
 
I urge Mr. Mo hamed Hatimy to second my M otion.  
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy seconded)  
 
February 14 , 2019                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now propo se that the motion on 
operationali zation  of performance contracting in County Government be debated in this House. 
Yes Hon. Thoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya: Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, it is a very good debate but I do  not think we 
have a sufficient  number  of Hon. Members to debate this ; you can count, may be you can plan 
may be we debate it next week.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalim u): So you are moving a Motion on adjournment or 
you are saying that there is no quorum...  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Yes Hon. Thoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya: Thank you Hon. Speaker, we are still lea rning. I want to seek an 
adjournment th rough Standing order number 28 because we ha ve very few Hon. Members to 
debate the said Motion , thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy seconded)  
 
 I now pr opose a question that the Motion on adjournment by Hon. Thoya be passed in 
this Hon. House ? 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 I now stand to put a question that the Motion for adjournment by Hon. Thoy a be passed 
in this Honourable  House?  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members the House stand adjourn ed until next week Tuesday a t 2:30p .m. 
 
The House rose at 3:45p.m.  