February 1 5, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 15th February , 2018  
The House met at 2 :49p.m. 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 
 The Speaker : We may be seated Hon.  Members . Next order.  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Hon.  Kombe Nzai .  
STATUS OF BURSARIES WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 
 Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I would like to bring a statement on the status 
of bursaries within the County. I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee on 
Education, Information Technology and MV 2035 on when the County Government will start 
the disbursement of bursaries, considering that it has already been a month since the students 
returned to their respec tive educational institutions. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker : Thank you Hon.  Nzai . Hon.  Members  I direct that the Chairperson 
Committee on Education Information Technology and MV 2035 bring response to the 
statement in the next sitting hour , that is on Thursday next week  at the same time as p ursuant 
to Standing order 41(1) . 
(Applause)  
 ...Next order.  
 The Speaker : Yes, Hon.  Moses Ara n. 
PROGRESS OF THE CLEA NING EXERCISE WITHIN THE COUNTY  WHICH HAS BEEN CONDU CTED BY 
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 Hon.  Aran: Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee on 
Energy, Environment and Solid Waste, on the progress of the cleaning exercise within the 
County, which has been conducted by the County Government.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker : Hon. Members  again I dire ct that the Chairperson,  Committee on 
Environment , Waste Management and Energy bring the response to the statement on the next 
sitting hour , that is Thursday next week at the same time. Next order ? 
Yes, Hon.  Mwaka Bakari . 
 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT POLICY ON SPONSORSHIP OF WARD TOURNAMENTS AND WHAT 
MEASURES  AVAILABLE ON  THE SAME  
 
Hon.  (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I seek to know from the 
Chairperson, Committee on Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs on if the County 
Government has any policy i n regard to the sponsorship of Ward tournaments and if no t, 
what measures they would take regarding the same.  
February 1 5, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 The Speaker : Thank you. Hon.  Members  I direct that the Chairperson Committee on 
Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs bring the response to the statement on the next 
sitting hour , that is Thursday next week at the same time. Yes Clerk? Yes Hon.  Fatma Kushe . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi pia ilikuwa nina 
ombi ... 
  
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : Can you state under what Standing order you are standing please . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika kama ninavyojua leo ni siku ya 
Statements  kwa hivyo naona niko sawa . Mheshimiwa Spika...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : Which Standing order is that?  
Hon. (Ms.)  Fatma Swaleh : Standin g order 41 Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : Sorry, can you read for me Standing order 41, what is Standing order 
41 saying?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma  Swaleh : Naomba Mheshimiwa Hatimy aweze kunisomea 
anisaidie Mheshimiwa Spika. 41 During the statemen t a Member  of the County Assembly.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : Excuse me can you state the Standing order Hon.  Member , state which 
Standing order are you reading?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh :  Standing order number 41 .  
The Speaker : Yes.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Standing order number 41 (c), a Member  may request of 
a statement from.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : Standing order 41 , 2(c). 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma  Swaleh : Yes, a Member  may request for a Statement from the 
Committee Chairperson relating to matter s under mandate of the Committee and the Speaker 
may either appoint a day  for th e Statement or direct that the Statement be issued on the same 
day.     
The Speaker : Thank you, so Hon.  Member  you may give your Statement next 
Thursday. Thank you.  
 
(Applause and Laughter)  
 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika nakuomba kwa  heshima na taadhima 
kwa sababu A lhamisi  ijayo sitakuweko  niko nina  miadi  na daktari kwa hivyo ni donda 
ambalo linaniuma . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nakuomba unione e huruma uniangalie kwa 
jicho la imani niweze ku izungumza . 
The Speaker : Thank you , yes Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu . 
February 1 5, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Point of order Hon.  Speaker . The 
Hon.  Member  is going against your directive , you have already directed that the Statement to 
be issued next Thursday same time and by you g iving her a chance to continue it will be 
going against your direction , thank you.  
The Speaker : Thank you. Hon.  Fatma I think you said next Thursday you will not  be 
here and I have not seen any letter in m y office stating that you will not be here next 
Thursday so my direction is that you will give your statement if you are not there next 
Thursda y first I have to see that letter and then you may issue the statement the other coming 
Thursday . Yes Hon.  Fatma Kushe?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Standing order number 40  Mr. Speaker . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : Sorry . 
Hon.  (Ms.)  Fatma  Swaleh : Under S tanding order number 40 . 
The Speaker : Hon.  Fatma I think we are done with that. Yes Hon.  Shebe Athman . 
 
RETRENCH MENT  OF MORE THAN 300  WORKERS WITHOUT PAY  IN JOMVU KUU WARD 
FOR JOINING  UNION . 
 
Hon.  Shebe Salim : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I rise under Standing order number 
41, 2( c). Mr. Speaker S ir, I kindly ask your indu lgence  on a matter which is of great  concern 
to my electorate in  Jomvu kuu Ward .  Mr. Speaker Sir two companies in my Ward have 
suddenly  retrenched more than 300 workers without pay an d others have found themselves in 
the wrong foot  from the employers by joining the so called union which I think the 
Constitution is very clear that every worker has a right to join any union in this country . So 
Mr. Speaker  I kindly ask the Chairman of Labou r to give a tho rough statement concerning the 
issue . Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
The Speaker : Yes, Hon.  Shebe was it a statement or what?  You know  read Standing 
order 41 ...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Shebe Salim : Yes Mr. Speaker . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : But you didn't tell us if you wanted to give a statement or?  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon.  Shebe  Salim : Yes, I was inquiring Mr. Speaker for...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker : Because you just continued reading you were not asking me for  the 
permission.  
Hon.  Shebe  Salim : I have done that Mr. Speaker S ir. 
The Speaker : How?  
February 1 5, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Hon.  Shebe  Salim : Mr. Speaker I ask your indulgence on a  matter , I have already 
stated that.  
The Speaker : Okay, but I have not given you the permission t o continue giving the 
statement . 
Hon.  Shebe  Salim : Okay thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker : I think this House  you must ask for permission first and when 
permission is granted then that is when you can continue, you just do not  stand and proceed.  
Hon.  Shebe  Salim : Thank you Mr. S peaker, I ask your permission .  
The Speaker : Okay . 
Hon.  Shebe  Salim : Point of order Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker : Okay, so I think you can give that statement next week Thursday  the 
same time . 
Hon.  Shebe  Salim : Okay thank you . 
The Speaker : Thank you, Yes Hon.  Thoya . 
Hon.  Thoya: Ahsante Bwana Spika, nafikiri mimi nina ombi ambalo najaribu kulitoa  
kwa sababu hii kitu m nasema Standing order  wengi wetu tunazidi kuisoma na kuna yale 
mambo ambayo ni ya dharura kwamba haikuingia kama statement  lakini pia inakosa 
uvumilivu wa takriban wiki nzima inakuwa ni dharura . Ningeomba wakati mwengine 
muweze kutuel ewa kwamba sisi bado tunasoma, kwa sababu kile ambacho Mheshimiwa  
Fatma angekuwa nacho s uala zima ni kuwa je linaweza kuvumiliwa kwa takriban siku saba 
kufikia wiki ijayo...  
(Applause ) 
 
...ila kwamba hakupeleka kule na wengine hata hatujui hizi statement  zaingia vipi 
ama ni nini lisitumiwe kama kigezo cha kwamba yey e anawachwa nje. Ningependa kwamba 
tuweze kuhurumiwa  wakati tunazidi kufanya hayo marekebisho tusome tuwe wanafunzi 
wazuri lakini anaweza kuwa ana jambo ambalo ni la dharura ambao kuvumilia takriban wiki 
moja itakuwa ni ngumu kwa N yumba hii kuirekebisha na il hali tulikuwa tuna weza 
kurekebisha ndani ya sik u moja . Huyu Mheshimiwa S hebe pia analo lakini kwa sababu 
halikuingia hapa kwa sababu zengine zinakuwa tunawa dismiss on technical ground s kwa 
sababu hatuna uzoefu na hiki kitabu  cha kanuni tunawekwa kando tu . Kwa hivyo Bwana 
Spika ningependa kwamba muweze kuelewa kwamba sisi pia tunazidi kusoma na isije 
tukawekwa kando hivi  hivi technically  naomba muweze kuiangalia hiyo japo kuwa tayari 
umeis ukuma sote hatuko ngazi moja ; kuna wengine ambao wanajua kupeleka Miswada 
wengine lazima tua nze kutafuta tafuta , wengine saa hizi  wamekuja ndio wanaona kumbe kila 
mmoja anastahili kuongea kuhusu statement , kwa hivyo tusimcheke sana Mheshimiwa 
Fatuma lile aliloko nalo wiki ijayo  tukakosa kurekebisha.  Ahsante.  
The Speaker : Ahsante  sana Hon.  Thoya lakini nataka kurekebisha  kwa hapo ; 
Mheshimiwa  Fatma alikuwa hapa katika B unge la kwanza na anajua sheria vizuri sana , 
kusema kuhusu Mheshimiwa Shebe naweza kubaliana na wewe lakini ukin iambia kuhusu 
Mheshimiwa Fatma alikuwa hapa katika B unge lil ilopita na anajua kanuni na sheria vile 
zafaa kuf uatwa. Kwa hivyo ni sawasawa afu ate sheria inavyotakikana na tukiso ma Standing 
order  leo tuko kwa B unge zaidi ya miezi sita ndio kila siku tunasisitiza tusomeni hizi 
Standing order , tukisoma ndio tutakuwa na ufahamu na pia kazi yetu itakuwa rahisi hapa 
ndani ya B unge . Ahsanteni, Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon.  Members  the Assembly sta nds adjourned until Tuesday 20th February , 2018 at 
2:30p.m. 
The House r ose at  3:07p.m. 