February 9, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 9th February, 2022  
The House met at 2:45p.m.  
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Honourable Members , you may be  seated. Yes Clerk , 
next Order  please.  Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON , COMMITTEE ON TRANSPO RT, 
INFRA STRUCTURE AND PUBLIC  WORKS HON OURABLE PRISCHILLAH MUMBA ON  STREET LIGHTS 
IN KIPEVU WARD  
 
Yes Chair , Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works pl ease respond 
to the statement.  
 
  [Silence ] 
 
Vice Chair?  
(Silence)  
 
Any other Memb er from that Committee? Yes Hon ourable  Ibrahim , are you a 
Member of Committee on Transport?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Please respond to that statement.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker as you can see actually we do not have the Chairla dy or 
the Chairman in the House  but being a Member of the said Committee I would like to request  
humbly  that we be given one week so  that we bring the response back . Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon ourable  Faith?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Mr. Speaker , I brought this statement on 27th of October last year and  
I am surprised up to now no response  from the Department  concerned .  

February 9, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 So I do not know what the problem with the Department is  because they are some 
people employed th ere and they are earning salary ; if just a small thing like a statement they 
cannot respond, even if they do not have material, just to tell the Com mittee they do not have 
material  even they cannot  say anything. Mr. Speaker , this is the ignorance of high standard  
from that department and I canno t say it  is lack of money that  is why they are not repairing 
the street lights, because just this month we saw them doing some activities which confused 
people of Mombasa County. So Mr. Speaker I request this House if they can summon the 
concern ed CECM to explain why  the statements are taking much of the time once they are 
asked  because I believe it is not only my st atement but it has been their behaviour. When w e 
ask for their response we do no t get it from the department , so am not satisfied because 
people were dying on th e street, kindly I request the Committee  you Mr. Chair to intervene 
on  this matter to be take n very seriously. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Faith . Yes, Hon ourable  Ibrahim 
are you aware as a Committee Member of Transport about this issue or you are just seeing it 
today?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  We are aware Mr. Speak er and we had already communicated to the 
said. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Do you have the copy of that letter which you 
communicated to  the department ? 
 
Hon. Omondi:  No I do  not have the copy now Mr. Speaker , maybe the Chairman has 
it. 
 
The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : When did you communicate to the Transport 
Committee?  
 
Hon.  Omondi: Mr. Speaker , I am not aware of that but what am aware ... 
 
[Interruption]  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon ourable  Ibrahim I think you just said that . Yes, 
Honourable  Juma?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  I think Mr. Speaker Hon ourable  Omondi Ibrahim is a Member of this 
House and there is no room for jokers here. We have been frustrated by the same said 
department and the dramas that have been taking place are so grave. We would wish him he 
adhere tha t this person ... the said officer  to appear before  the House to explai n as to why ! 
  
[Applause ] 
 
Simple like that, w e are not going to  buy any kind of a joke because  he is not  even 
aware of the said letter  and I would wish if the worst comes to the worst apart  from me being 
given action. Hon ourable  Omondi if actions are not going to be taken on you, you need to 
apologise before this House. We are not here to joke around, we are seri ous and we need 
serious answers ; if you are not aware of the said letters you need to withdraw yourself from 
this statement. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
February 9, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 [Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi , please respond  
to the statement, are you aware of this issue?  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
Hon. Omondi:  I do not know which lan guage the Member want s me to use Mr. 
Speaker ; I have stated clearly that I am aware of this and being aware does not mean I must 
have a copy of the same . I am just aware that indeed we did a letter, but I am not having a 
copy of the same, that  is what I know Mr. Speaker  and I should not be sacrifice d for the 
Committee.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you asked for one week?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker , I am humbly and requesting for one week.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : And this thing you are tak ing it personally you and your 
Committee so it is you who will bring this response after one week.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker I  am responding.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : We want to see that letter the one which you wrote as  
well as a Committee.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I  will do the same to the Chair.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So next week ... by next week.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker . Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Members just sit down ple ase. I have already ruled 
that issue , so next order please.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY HON OURABLE ATHMAN MWAMWIRI , CHAIRPERSON  COMMITTEE 
ON ENVIRONMENT , WASTE MANAGEMENT AND  ENERGY ON GARBAGE PILE -UP AT MCHELENI 
COLLECTION POINT IN KIPEVU WARD  
 
Yes Hon ourable  Athuma n Mwamwiri , Chairperson Committee on Environment 
Waste Management and Energy , please respond.  
 
Hon. Athumani Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker this statement is a 
response to the request made during  the 117th sitting of the Assembly held on Wednesday 3rd 
November, 2021. The County department of Environment , Waste management and Energy is 
the one mandated in collecting and disposal of solid waste  to designated collection point ; 
over the time however the department faced a serious series of great challenge s thus 
paralyzing the normal collection routine. The regular repair and maintenance of truck and 
related machinery has not been facilitated ow ing to the delayed remittance of finances from 
the national government.  
February 9, 2022                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          4 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 This has since led to the consequent grou nding of almost 50  per cent  of the total fleet, 
thus limiting the Department’s capacity t o collect the accumulated waste.  The shortage of a 
consistent fuel supply has majorly attributed to the challenges as the supplier put on hold 
supplying due to the accumulation  of debts  brought about by the late disbursem ent of funds 
from the national government.  It is quite unfortunate that M cheleni col lection point has been 
affected  but the si tuation has since been remedied ; the Department has since assigned  and 
moved to clear app roximately 75  per cent  of the uncollected waste material at the said 
collection point from 25th November, 2021.  
The Department further assigned additional trucks to collect the re maining materials 
in due course ; the supply of fuel has also been boosted thus the co llection of waste at the 
collection point and within the County at large has improved.  However Mr. Speaker  to add 
on, this request was made on 1st of December but of now the Department has also 
experience d some other challenges including the bre akdown of the shovels so the said 
dumpsite has piled up ag ain and the Department is aware . We are working to try and resolve 
the situation since the said site is within a residential area and is a challenge to the Members 
there because it  is a health hazard  there and we promise to do our best once the t rucks and the 
machinery  have been resolved to be taken back to the site for the same Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Athuman Mwamwiri. Yes Clerk , 
next order please?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourn ed until Tuesday 15th February, 2022 
at 10:00a .m. 
 
The House rose at 2:57p .m. 
 
 
  
 
 