July 3, 2018                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 3rd July, 2018  
The House met at 2:39p .m. 
 
(The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): You may have your seats . Hon. Members 
welcome to o ur today's sitting.  Yes Clerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE CO UNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, the Leader of Majority?  
 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I would like to 
table a Procedural Motion on Adjournm ent of the County Assembly.  
 
That Pursuant to the Standing Orders 25 (3) of the County Assembly Standing 
Orders, this House RESOLVES to adjourn on 3rd July, 2018  today  and resume 
sittings on Tuesday 17th July, 2018.  
 
 Mr. Speaker as you are aware that most  of the Members have gone for an i nduction 
and whoever  has remain ed here by next week they will not be around because some of them 
are leaving for burial ; for the burial of one of our colle ague's  wife. So Mr. Speaker I was 
requesting this House to be adjo urned for those days from 3rd to 17th because the Members 
will not be around here in the Assembly. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members I now propose a question or 
before I propose a question can the Motion moved by the  Hon. Leader of Majority be 
seconded by one of you.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I second .  
 

July 3, 2018                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Now I propose that the Motion on 
Adjournment of the County Assembly be debated . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Majority?  
 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mheshimiwa Spika kama nilivyotangulia 
kusema tuko katika hali ya huzuni kwanza ya mwenzetu ambaye atakuwa na mazishi ya 
mkew e Migori na kuanzia kesho kuna W aheshimiwa ambao ni lazim a waondoke kuelekea 
kwa mazishi. T ukionge zea hapo bado t una W aheshimiwa zaidi 25 wako kwa  mafunzo,  kwa 
hivyo itakuwa hatuna uwezo wa kufanya vikao vya Bunge labda kitu kinaweza kufanyika ni 
mikutano ya Kamati  ndio inaweza kufanya kazi lakini kwa vikao vya Bunge  haitakuwa na 
uwezo wa kufanya.  Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika ningeomba W aheshimiwa tukubaliane kwa 
moyo mmoja kwa hizi wiki mbili tuwapatie nafasi wenzetu wanaokwenda kwa mazishi na 
tuwapatie wenzetu wale wenzetu wanaokwenda kwa mafunzo  waweze kurudi tuweze 
kuendelea na vikao vyetu vya kawaida. Ah sante Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa now the floor 
is open for the contributions or insights from the Members. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii. Nimesimama 
kuunga  mkono hoja ya Kiongozi wa Walio  Wengi wa Bunge hili Mh eshimiwa Hamisi Musa 
na zaidi na mpongeza kwa hii ya kwamba Bunge liende mapumziko zaidi tukipeana heshima 
kwa Mheshimiwa Samba ambaye alipoteza mkewe na  matayarisho ya mazishi safari 
yanaanza kesho.  Mheshimiwa Spika izingatiwe ya kwamba kila familia hupatwa na msiba na 
kila familia huwa na masuala ya kijamii kama harusi lakini kwa hili la msiba zaidi kwa 
Mheshimiwa ambaye ni Mbunge wa Bunge hili, kwa Bunge ku peana fursa hii  na nafasi hii 
inaonyesha ni j insi gani tunathaminiana, tunapendana na tunaenziana katik a hali zote 
zikiwemo za furaha na huzuni.  
 Kwa hivyo ni naomba mbali na nafasi hii pia Waheshimiwa tujiwe keni In shaa Allah  
Mungu akituwezesha tuweze kusafiri na mwenzetu kumsafirisha mkewe kwenda ku muweka 
makao yake ya milele ya mapumziko ili na yeye ajihisi ana wenziwe kwa sababu anazikwa 
Kaunti ya mbali ya Migori na kule yeye atahesabika kama mgeni. Kwa hivy o wenziwe wa 
kumliwaza ni sisi W aheshimiwa wa Bunge hili kwa hivyo pamoja na nafasi hii kadh alika 
tujitahidi na tuji bidiishe tuweze kusafiri na mwenzetu  na Mwenyezi Mungu a tupeleke salama  
katika safari ile na aturegeshe salama. Shukrani ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Yes Hon. 
Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir thank you very much for this opportunity. Mr. 
Speaker Sir first and foremost I also want to join my  colleagues  in this very sad moment that 
we are having especially the  Mombasa County Assembly to have lost one of our family , of 
course the wife to Hon. Samba . We consider her as one of our family in this particular 
Assembly and therefore it is very important at this time we need to adjourn so that we should 
be able to attend to the burial and even other activities that are going to a ccompany those 
particular arrangements.  
July 3, 2018                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Mr. Speaker Sir I don't want to say much but I want to emphasize or rather to stress 
that this is the time we need to have what we call emotional appeal to our brother Hon. 
Samba when we are together with him he fee ls that he also has a family and therefore it is 
important that this House will have to adjourn for that particular purpose. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim, I think we have 
exhausted the contribution and as things  stand Hon. Members is like we have resolved to 
adjourn so as we may attend to some other crucial functions outside the Assembly. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no other business the House stands to adjourned until 
Tuesday 17th of July, 2018 at 2:30p.m . 
 
The House rose at 2 :49p.m. 
 
 
 
 