June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
  
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 27th June, 2019  
The House met at 2.56p.m.  
 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael Bwire ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire ): Hon. Membe rs you may be seated . Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon. Members with us is Bridge International Academy from Kwa Hola and the list of 
the delegation comprise s of: 
 
Teachers  
1. Ms. Vicencia Nyaminde  
2. Ms. Doreen Osedo  
3. Mr. Liverson Mwasala  
 
 Members those are the teachers from Bridge International Academy . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 We also have pupils : 
1. Daisy Nicolate  
2. Levis Mumar  
3. Teddy Ogosi  
4. Samson Baraka  
5. Samwel Were  
6. Morgan Otieno  
7. Nathan Ashira  
8. Rehema Omar  
9. Lawren Akoth  
10. Chris Onyango  
11. Fatma Mwinyikai  

June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 12. Melody Ndanu  
13. Haron Obama  
14. Jacob Omondi  
15. Dianah Khatiala  
16. Javan Omondi  
17. Henry David  
18. Zainab Tumaini  
19. Gloria Nyakio  
20. Mary Kambua  
21. Joy Cathrine  
22. Sharon Kavengi  
23. Gibril Shuma  
24. Stella Maina  
25. Benson Samu el 
26. Zacharia Tendwa  
27. Vincent Raila  
28. Esther Namayi  
29. Jared Mwaliko  
30. Patience Akello  
31. Faith Atieno  
 
(Teachers and pupils bowed before the House)  
 
 Hon. Members we have the retired President of US in the House and we also have the 
former Prime Minister Hon. Raila in t he House, welcome back.  
 
(App lause) 
 
 Now the deleg ation from Bridge International  Academy to this Mombasa County 
Assembly that do the representation, oversight, legislation and any ot her related activities  that 
takes  place here  so you a re well represented with those  you elected. Otherwise welcome , we are 
very honoured to host you today.  Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
 
 Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri? There is Hon. Hamida Noor . 
 
 Hon. Noor:  Yes I am standing in for Hon. Lucy . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Of course I can see the letter  on my table.  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Yes I have a Paper to lay.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Please?  
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 (Paper laid) 
 
 Hon.  Noor:  Mr. Speaker Sir, we have a report on Committee on Legislation about the 
Coast General Teaching and Referral Hospital.  Introduction of the Committee on Legislation 
and the meeting that we held yesterday 26th June, 2019 at 11:00 a.m. Observed that the  Coast 
General Referral Order  was in line with the Constitution of Kenya , 2010 and the Mombasa 
County Cooperation Act , 2016…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Just a minute Hon. Member, r esume your seat 
just a minute I consult with my Clerk…   
 
(Consultation)  
 
 Hon. Member you will be granted time to read out t he Paper that you have just laid . Yes 
Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
STATUS OF COMPLETION OF THE 2.5KM MAJAONI ROAD IN B AMBURI WARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Robert Nyiro , MCA Bamburi Ward?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Yes Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker I stand for Hon. Nyiro who is out on another issue. 
Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give a statement regarding Majaoni, Bamburi Ward.  I wish to give the 
following state ment ; I seek to to know from the Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations concer ning the completion of the 2.5 km Majaoni Road in Bamburi Ward since 
December to -date it has not been completed.   
 Mr. Speaker the contractor who was in charge of this roa d from the Gr eatcom Agency 
claims he has not been p aid which is the main cause of this stalled project.  So Mr. Speaker Sir , 
Hon. Nyiro wants to know  what is  happening for that road since it is exactly one year today since 
it started to be repaired until to -date the road has not been c ompleted. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member  get your figures right ; it is not 
yet one year , it is December last year till ...; it is almost on e year that is , I would wish to. Y es you 
have somethi ng to say?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir  the worry is that  the financial year is ending  on 
30th June, 2019 and if this road has not been completed again it means it will be car ried to the 
next financial year and  if it has not been budgeted , again it will  not be completed in time and that 
is my worry . Thank you.  
 
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. I get y our concern ; of course it is  
valid and I am directing the Committee on Finance to make sure that the concerns raised by the 
Hon. Member are taken seriously . We have been having th ese issues sometime  back also it was 
raised , the same issue was raised in  conjuction with Junda Ward , unfortunately  there ha s been  no  
response so far. So we want this Department to take these issues  seriously Hon. Members  so that 
at least you get a relief ; I am directing it to the Committee on Finance, I cannot see the Chairman 
but I hope the Member s are within so that you can act quickly on the same issue. Yes Clerk?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 What is it Hon. Faith?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Mr. Speaker I am standing under Standing Order 41 2(c).  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is your concern?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  I have a statement to make Mr. Sp eaker if you can grant me permission . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : But we communicated sometimes back Hon. 
Members that in case you have a statement that has not been captured on today’s business  you 
notify  the office of the Speaker in advance so that you ar e featured in todays’ programme . 
Otherwise I do  not know whether the issue is very urgent but you are given two minut es to 
express your views please . 
 
STATUS OF KWA HOLA ECD CENT RE 
 
 Hon. Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  I would like to know from the 
Committee  of Education Vision 2035 whether he i s aware about the  status of Kwa Hola ECD 
Centre  which was su pposed to be renovated in this financial year which is ending 30th June, 2019 
and up to -date not hing is happening on the ground. T hank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Fortunately  enough there is a Member from the 
said C ommittee , yes Hon. Mwam wiri? 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Before I respond Mr. Speaker I want th e Member to declare 
her interest first .  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Hon. Me mber you are  asked to declare your 
interest . It seems you are a Member of the said C ommi ttee, you declare your interest . 
 
 Hon. Mwende : Mr. Speaker my great concern i t is about the children wh o are learning 
under iron sheet s. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You are from the same C ommittee , right?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Yes. 
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker my colleague is right because she i s not supposed to 
declare interest  when she i s raising an issue pertaining  to Education ; the interest of education is 
more important than anybody else 's so the matter of declaring interest when somebody arises for 
issue of such stateme nt should not arise . Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : But still I do  not see any problem when 
somebody declares interest and then you go with a statement that  means you are in the same 
docket but  less is happening in the same C ommittee that you are sitt ing. So there is no problem , 
it is good to declare interest as well as you express  your view s. I think the issue has been taken, it 
will be referred  to the House B usiness and  again the Committee on Education will respond  latest 
next week Thursday . Yes C lerk? 
 
MOTION  
REPORT ON THE COAST GENERAL HOSPITAL TEACHING AND REFERRA L ORDER  
 
 Yes Hon. Hamida Noor . 
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you once again Mr. Speaker .  As I said earlier the County Assembly 
of Mombasa C ommittee on Delegated Legislation report on C oast General Referral Hospital 
Order 2019.  
 Introduction of t he Committee on Delegated L egislation had a meeting yesterday, 26th 
June, 2019 at 11 :00a.m. and observed that the Coast General Teaching and Referral Order was in 
line with the Constitution of K enya,  2010 and the Mombasa County Corporation Act,  2016 . 
 Recommendation; The C ommittee recommends that the Coast General Teaching and 
Referral Order be passed by this H onourable House, and this regulation be published so that 
Coast Gene ral Hospital to be an independent corporation so that wananchi  can receive quality 
medical services.  
 Conclusion; The C ommittee recommends that report on The Coast General Teaching and 
Referral Order with its recommendations b e adopted by this House by the H on. Members.  
 With that the House adopts the report  of the Coast General Teaching and Referral Order 
Dated this Thursday, 27th June,  2019.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwir e):  Thank you Hon. Hamida Noor.  Hon. Members 
I now propose a question, who is to se cond the Motion before I propose a question Hon. 
Member?  
 
 Hon. Noor:  I want Hon . Amur to second me on this .  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Hon. Amur kindly second the Motion.  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : I second the Motion Mr. Speaker.  
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  The Temporary Speak er (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank  you. Hon. Members . I now  propose the 
question that the Motion by Hon . Hamida Noor on report on the Coast General teaching and 
Referral hospita l Order, 2019  be considered in this House as the same terms as moved . 
 
 (Question proposed ) 
 
 Now Hon. Members the floor is open for insights or rather contribution s towards the 
Motion moved by Hon. Ha mida Noor . Yes the seconder Hon.  Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir it is  high t ime that 
Mombasa Coast G eneral is changed and uplifted to Level S ix; as you know  Coast  
General serves the entire C oast region that is Kilifi County, Kwale, Lamu, Tan a River and even 
Mombasa itself. Mr. Speaker  in order for us to have better qu ality of service ; and if this Hosp ital 
is becoming a referral and  teach ing facility we shall have more students to be trained there and 
we may have good doctors . At the same time Mr. Speaker  when the other hospital s are open ed; 
the Level Fou rs, the decongestion of the Coast General Hospital will be much better  so it will 
remain as referral hospital but not for any other sickness es.  
 Mr. Speaker  again we are empowering the B oard to have its own powers  such as 
employment, sacking, purchasing, and procuremen t other than being control led from one sector ; 
so the B oard that will be composed with  learned people from the Ministry of E ducation and 
maybe professionals. Mr. Speaker so for us it will be a great mileage to have appointment s of 
people  with experience  in medical issues . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Member . Yes Hon. Kibwana.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you  Hon. Speaker, as the Chair of Health C ommittee  the 
idea o f even  changing the name from  the Coast G eneral Teaching and Referral H ospital is an 
idea that is welcoming  to this County. Hon. Speaker  this will make our facility , that i s the Coast 
General T eaching  Referral Hospital getting even a chance going to Level Six.  Hon. Speaker I 
have been in with  discussion with my Committee  a day  before we  laid this paper  and we found  
that this is  a good idea for us as a County . 
 Hon. Speaker this concept is going to he lp the facility under  this hospital getting coll ege 
services  if they depended o n the facility  it will be  better than present whereby we cannot procure 
some item s before they  get any notification from the County.  Hon. Speaker I think this is 
something that Members will support because our people will get service s, we will find current ly 
that most of the patien ts are being referred from the small facilities to the  Coast General Hospital  
and through this process Hon. Speaker you will find that most of the patients  who are co ming all 
the way from Changam we will be  treated at the new facility at Chaani  Level Four H ospital.  
 So you will find that peo ple from Changamwe and Jomvu S ub-County  will not be 
comin g again to the Coast G eneral Hospital because there will be an outreach within Jomvu and  
Changamwe Sub -Counties  that will be at the Chaani Hospital .  
 Hon. Speaker the other challenge that we have been facing from Likoni  it will be the end 
because most of the people will be treated from other facility hopeful ly from M ilimani if am not 
wrong ; even the challenge from Kisauni will end,  and this means we are going to have high 
quality  doctors who will be attending to our patients which  currently  is very difficult to get these 
consult ants.  
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  So I think this is a welcoming move and am happy that the Governor h as seen it  is very 
crucial for us to  go to  this idea,  this idea is not only in Kenya  because if you look at Ag a Khan 
Hospital  currently  they have their own outreach ; you will find that in Changamwe  we have Aga 
Khan Hospital the same model , if you go to  Kisauni  you will find there is Aga Khan Hospital  
and even when you go to Kilifi  you will find that there is an outreach of Aga Khan Hospital.  
 So I think Hon. Speaker this is very imp ortant and I ask M embers to support this idea so 
that our people can get good  services  and also improve the li ves of people of Mombasa County . 
Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwir e): Yes Hon. Naliaka?  
 
 Hon. Naliaka:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Bwana Spika ukiangal ia hata mazingira ya 
Coast General H ospital wak ati mwengine mazingira yanakuwa duni kwa sababu ya ile idadi 
kubwa ya wagonjwa ambao wanafu rika kule lakini ikiwa itakuwa Referral  inamaanisha 
itashughulikia tu zile shida ambazo zimeshindwa mashinani. Kwa hivyo huduma itaboreshwa na 
hata wale wafanyikazi Bwana Spika nina  imani ya kuwa hata na wao watazidisha ukakamavu 
wao maanake unapohusishwa na jambo jema hata wewe mwenyewe hiyo  furaha peke yake 
inaongeze a hiyo hadhi ya huduma ambayo inatolewa pale. Utaona kama shule kwa mfano  
mwalimu anaweza kuwa katika  ile shule ambayo si n zuri sana labda kimijengo lakini 
anapopelekwa kwa ile shule ambayo iko na vifaa , iko na mijengo mizuri hata na yeye huwa 
anakuwa na hima  ya kufanya kazi kisawasawa Bwana Spika.  
 Jambo lengine Bwa na Spika ningependa tu kuambia Waheshimiwa wenzangu ya kuwa 
tuchangie hii mada kwa wepesi mno maanake imeleta sura mpya katika Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa . Hili jambo litafanya hata hiyo hospitali yetu yenyewe ikaweze kuheshimika . Bwana 
Spika kwa ha yo machache naomba kuunga mkono, a hsante.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Naliaka . Yes Hon . Member 
from Mwakirunge?  
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Your microphone is on!  
 
 Hon. Mbura : Maumbile Mheshimiwa Spik a. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Okay . 
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Pole, Maumbile yana  shida…  
 
(Consultations)  
 
 Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ningepend a kuunga mkono ripoti hii asilimia mia 
kwa mia  kwa sababu nikiwa muhusika ama muathiriwa wa Mwakirunge . 
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Nashukuru kwa sababu hospitali imeje ngwa pale saa hii mimi nasikia furaha kubwa sana 
kwamba hospitali ile itakuwa kama Coast G eneral kwa sababu changamoto ambazo kina  mama 
wanapata katika lile eneo la Mwakuringe kwam ba mama mja mzito yuko karibu na  kuzaa 
anabebwa na boda boda  mpaka Coast G eneral hiyo tutaizika katika kaburi la sahau.  
 Kwa hivyo mimi ning ewaomba Wahes himiwa mbali na Mwakirunge ile hospitali ya 
Makadara ama Coast G eneral imebeba watu wengi  hivyo basi  watu wanapofika pale wakati 
mwengine kuna kuchelewa ; wakati tutakapo pitisha hii ripoti na C oast G eneral kuingia 
mashinani bas i pia tutapeana afueni kwa ile hospitali . 
 Kuongezea ni kwa mba kazi zitaongezeka mashinani ; vijana wetu watapata kazi na hata 
wale madakitari ambao walikuwa hawajaajiriwa wataaj iriwa kwamba ameajiriwa Coast G eneral 
hiyo kusema kweli niku inua uchumi katika Wodi zetu katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa. Kwa 
hivyo ningeomba wenzangu waweze kuipitisha bila hata kusita , na watakapofanya hivyo 
tume inua uchumi na tumesaidia jamii mashinani . Ahsa nte sana Mheshimiwa Spika na nimeunga 
mkono ripoti hii.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Member from Mwakirunge , 
the far end of Mombasa County. Yes Hon. Faith ? 
 
 Hon. Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speaker the floor is very much honoured. Mr. S peaker I 
would wish also to support the report but I would like the C ommittee of H ealth  to assure us 
whether the said hospital will be equipped with modern facilities or equipments and we will be 
having enough drugs since we have been having claims being b rought in this House claiming 
that the hospitals in Mashinani  do not have drugs. So that is my concern if I will be assured by 
that I d o not have any problem. Anyway,  thank you very much.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Yes thank yo u Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker I want to assure my colleague that we were  called for 
a site visit at Coast General H ospit al and we were taken round the hospital by the Senior Doctor; 
Dr. Kadruan a and his team and we saw the drugs that are there . Mr. Speaker since it is a referral 
hospital that hospital I can assure any Kenyan or Coastal person there will be no single day that 
they will  miss drugs .  
 Mr. Speaker  what we are trying to do we are trying to send the patients to the District 
Hospitals so that the Coast General will become a Referral H ospital a nd again it will oversee 
those Sub H ospitals in issues related to medicine. Thank you Mr. Speaker and that  was just a 
clarification ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Mwende : Point of  information S ir. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Who do you want  inform?  
 
 Hon. Mwende : The House. Mr. Speaker  my concern was about the said hospitals in 
Mashinani ; I know the C hairman o n Health has been facing a rough time in this House and we 
shou ld not deny that he can agree with me that he had been facing a rough time in this House . 
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  People are claiming or complaining that the status of H ospitals in Mashinani are not 
equipped and they do  not have enough drugs. T hank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you , that is a nice observation Hon. 
Members I do  not think whether it is an ill motive , It is a good observation we have been 
experiencing the same but I thank the C ommittee on H ealth it has been up to tasks to ensure that 
all the concerns raised by Hon. Members are ta ken care of being one of those M embers who 
raised concerns once some time back I mean. So it is  in good faith and I think the Committee 
will take charge. Yes Chairman you had something you want to say?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : I think Mr. Speaker you have said it well and I think it  is our 
duty the concern s should be noted down but we hope with this new way  of going it will improve 
a lot. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you. Y es I think you have exhausted the 
opinion or the views or rather  …I will therefor invite Hon. Noo r. 
  
 Hon. Noor: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Once agai n and I am glad that my fellow Members 
have supported me on this one and I am happy to see that we are  a going forward ; that Coast 
General hopeful is going to be a Level S ix facility  and we will have our institution s at Mashinan i 
that are going to be better so that our wananchi  do not have  to come every now and then to Coast 
General. I assure you that we are going to equip  them and I loo k forward to this since I am a 
Member of Health C ommittee myself I will ensure that this is going to go forward. Thank you 
for your support and thank you very much. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Members . Now Ho n. Members 
allow me to put a question that this House adopt s the Motion by Hon. Hamida Noor on the report 
of Coast General Teaching and R eferral Hospital O rder 2019 . 
 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
 Before I invite Clerk to read the next Order,  is this Bridge International Academy from 
your W ard Hon. Faith?  
(Hon. Faith nodd ed) 
 
 Okay thank you, I heard you talking about the ECD from Kwa  Hola ECD centre and I am  
also informed that the Bridge Internation al Academy is from Kwa  Hola is it the same Ward? 
 
 Hon. Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speak er. The said school is in Port Reitz W ard it is only 
that Kwa  Hola is  at border but since I come from Changamwe I want to take this chance to 
welcome the pupil s who have v isited us today together with their teachers, we feel honoured and 
this is how we do business , thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
June 2 7, 2019                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           50 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 (Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you Member , you have represented the 
whole of Changamwe S ub-County. That is very nice. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there having being no other business the House stands adjourn ed till 
Tuesday 2nd of July , 2019.  
 
The House rose at 3:32p.m.  
 
 
  
 
 