May 4, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              50 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 4th May, 201 7 
The House  met at 2:40p. m. 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Memb ers you may sit down. Yes , Clerk . 
MOTION  
 Hon.  Murfad Amur…  
 Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion  
(Hon. Amur moved the Motion )  
 BLOCKAGE OF ROAD DRAINAGE  DUE TO RAINS WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 
 THAT AWARE  that, it is the mandate of the County g overnment to ensure proper 
drainage systems on the roads under the Fourth S chedule part two 5(a) of  the Constitution of 
Kenya 2010 ; 
 FURTHER AWARE that, poor drainage systems and lack of proper garbage 
collection on roads within the County  cause s clogging and blockage of the system ; 
 CONCERNED THAT, the ongoing rains are causing floods leading to oversaturated 
soils swells causing structural foundation damage, severe distress and damage of pavement, 
sickness as a result of breeding mosquitoes among  other effects  
 I therefore urge the Assembly to RESOLVE t hat; 
1. The Department of Roads and Infrastructure to ensure that the drainage are 
unclogged,  
2. The Department of Environment to ensure that they sweep the roads and collect the 
garbage to avoid clogging of t he drainage Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I want my colleague Hon. Mary to second the Motion . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir I rise up to second 
the Motion .  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : If it has been seconded, I  think I will 
propose the question , blockage of road  drainage  due to rains within the County. Yes Hon.  
Amur  Murfad . 
 Hon. Amur : Thank Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir  I want  to emphasize  on the 
Motion , we all  are seeing that  what is happening now the heavy rains are coming down am 
not saying that the  infrastructure  is not that good but our system of maintenance has been a 
problem . As we speak in today’s N ation paper the re are areas  have been flooded in 
Changamwe, Kisauni, in town s, all round -about s are not accessible . It is not that we don’t 
have a proper system but  the proper system that we require  is to people to  be engaged i n 
cleaning this drainage system , and  if the department has no manpower then this department at 
least to come out and employ casual labourer s so that we can empower the departme nt. I 
know that the department is under staffed ; as we speak the rains are all over Mombasa 
County and the department is under staffed  and that is well known but for us Mr. Speaker to 
help our people in such  a situation we need to come with a small budget so that casual 
labourers  can be  employed to every department in seeing that floods are  sweeping our houses  
and our residents  are in better position staying there.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, it is sad as we speak the mo st of the roundabout s have caused jams 
because of the  floods  that are  being seen o n the roads , so it is upon us ; this House  to agree 
May 4, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              50 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 and empower the departments to at least e mploy casual workers so that the se young people 
can be employed on  temporary measu res. We speak  that the department is under st affed and 
we believe if we approve  this so that the department  is given the  authority to employ at least 
one hundred  or two  hundred  people so that they can assist the department in fighting this 
issue , and  it will be of great help  because we don’t know how long these  rains are going to  
take, the rains have just started and the roads are not accessible . All the areas  of the estates  as 
we speak they are flooding  Mr. Speaker , it is upon us now, this House  so that we can allow 
either the department to employ casual labourers  for temporary measures so that we can make  
the town be  acceptable  by people  and the law should be  enforced . We have good laws but the 
laws are not enforced , this  drainage system is blocking because people are throwing  trash in 
the drainage  system,  it is a matter of law enforcement , a Motion  was brought  in this 
Assembly  and it was passed so  it is about the law enforcers  to enforce the rule  that those who 
put garbage in this drainage be caught and prosecuted , otherwise Mr. Speaker we will blame 
the rains yet it is our own problem . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari.  
Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon.  Speaker . Mr. Speaker the problem of flooding in our 
estates and in  our roads is something that has been  happening  year in year out . Mr. Speaker 
it’s high time that we as a County take  permanent or proper measures to ensure that this 
problem does not re-occur  year in year out. Mr. Speaker we as a government  have  an 
obligation to ensur e that ther e is no flooding in this County, the issues of unclogging  the 
drainage sy stem should be a regular program  particula rly bearing in mind that we have rainy 
season s and during th e rainy  season we experienc e these flood s. This matter  is not something 
that come s by surprise  it is someth ing that we are always expect ing and therefore we should 
be prepared to encounter  or to  counter such a  situation. Mr. Speaker the department  in charge 
of roads and infra structure should have a program  to ensure that we  take measures or  
preparedness measures to ensure that a situation like  this one does  not occur,  therefore  Hon.  
Speaker I wish to support this Motion  and also wish to suppo rt the idea of recruiting youth s 
or young people to help to  eradicate this problem,  thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Mary Akinyi.  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nishaunga  
mjadala huu mkono na  bado ninaendelea kuunga mkono mjadala huu hata  ijapokuwa  baadhi 
yetu  ama wengi wetu  tunapigia hili Jumba kwaheri, lakini tusione jambo linakuja na 
tulinyamazie. Mheshimiwa hili ni janga ambalo linakuja kutokana na mvua ambayo  saa hi zi 
inanyesha , mvua ambayo ni  kubwa sana.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ni kile kitengo cha mazingira  na kitengo cha  barabara na miundo 
msingi wachukue majukumu ha ya kwa sababu hata hivi tunavyo ongea serikali kuu imeleta 
hawa vijana wa N ational Youth Service  (NYS) ambao wanaendelea na kazi, lakini hii kazi 
ambayo wanaendelea nayo naona kwamba inatakikana tuongezee ma arifa zaidi, ama serikali 
yetu ya Kaunti iweze kuangalia vile inaweza kukutana na wale wakuu ambao wako katika 
hiyo sehemu ya  wale  vijan a ambao wako kwa NYS,  waweze kusikiza na vile wanavyo weza 
kufanya kazi ili waweze kufungua mitaro ili maji yaweze kupita.   
 Mheshimiwa Spika mitaro iko mingi sana ambayo  tayari  imeshaundwa lakini imezib a 
mpaka maji hayawezi kupita, hivyo basi hawa wahus ika ambao wako kwa NYS, wakiwa 
wamekaa chini na serikali ya Kaunti ikatengeza mipangilio mizuri, hii mitaro inaweza 
ikafun guliwa. Mheshimiwa Spika unapata kuwa hata mitaro wakati mwengine  hawa watoto 
ambao wako katika Nat ional Youth  Service  wakis hatoa takataka katika ile mitaro 
wanaziweka tu u kando ya barabara, ambapo ten a zinarudi tena kwa mitaro ikiwa inaziba ile 
mitaro  ambako  maji hayawezi kupita.   
May 4, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              50 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Hivyo  basi Mheshimiwa S pika, hili ni janga ambalo lina kuja na haifai tungoje, 
inatakikana tufanye v yovyote iwezekanavyo, kwa haraka iwezekanavyo tuone kitengo cha  
mazingira na kitengo cha  barabara na miundu m singi waweze kuangalia jinsi ambayo 
wanaweza kufungua  hio mitaro ili maji yapite kabla hatuja patwa na janga ambalo hili 
linakuja. A hsante Mhes himiwa.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  Muriuki . 
Hon. Siminyu : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Mr. Spe aker 
prevention is better than cure a nd we used to have before we came this new dispensation the 
Municipal C ouncil use d to have special unit working under special section which dealt with 
the drai nage plus the both the normal ; the storm water and drainage system which affect our 
estates, bu t unfortunately it came to the formation of water and sewerage  with the new 
department of MO WASCO, plus the other formation of  the another  department which deal s 
with water and sewage these people were transferred to that section hence the Mom basa 
County government have no s pecial department for  that matter.  
Mr. Speaker since Mombasa County do es not have that section there is a need for 
formation  of a special unit to specially  take care of the drainage sys tem; both the solid waste 
plus the st orm water, in fact from where I represent Tudor we use d to have worker s special ly 
assigned to take care of the sewer system but at the moment we don’t have any . Mr. Speaker, 
I agree with my colleagues who are suggesting that at least we have people hired on a casual 
basis to work on these departments  because we don’t have finances to employ permanent 
ones and these people should be employed specific ally for this st orm water drainage system 
plus th e drainage system in our estate . 
Mr. Speaker I fully support this Motion because it’s goi ng to do good and prevent 
these occurrence s which come always when we have rainy season, thank you . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Omar.  
Hon. Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I  also stand to 
support this Motion  concerning the b lockage of road drainage  due to rains within the 
County. Mr. Speaker this has been a very bad problem concerning our drainage system  with 
lack of proper garbage colle ction , I think that is  where the  problem lies . As a youth in this 
Assembly today I can public ly stand and say there is a program from the department of 
transport and infrastructure which is involving  the units of every Ward in this C ounty , 
Kongowea be ing one of them b ecause  even two weeks back the Ward Administrator ca me to 
my village and I also saw some youth  groups being recruited in order to  clean the drainage 
and when I asked  about that program  I heard that it will be handled  on quarterly bases and 
the youth sh ould be given that work to handle it.  
So I think Mr. Speaker for now the work has not started because maybe they lack 
financial muscle but t he C ounty is looking for a way in which they can assist the youth 
financially so that the progr am can begin . So the problem here lies with the depart ment of 
environment to ensure that they sweep the roads and collect the garbage to avoid problem s 
of the drainage but the issue of the transport and infrastructure  department  there is a progr am 
if other Members  have not heard about it then am letting them know,  that  the C ounty is 
handling it ... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Patrick  Muriuki  Siminyu  what is it ? 
Hon. Siminyu : Thank you Mr. Speaker if there is a program  I think it’s best for this 
House to be informed,  the Hon.  standing should give us specific information, not to say 
maybe there is financial muscle problem , we have to have  reliable in formation from the 
Hon.  who is speaking and I beg that this House  should be given direction or the person in 
May 4, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              50 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 charge of that department to give us a comprehensive report so that we  can know as 
Members, thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Meti you are not supposed to 
be debati ng, you are supposed to inform the Motion , you are now trying to amend your 
stand ; are you sup porting the Motion , opposing th e Motion  or are you giving the H ouse 
information, what are you trying to do?  
Hon. Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar : Mr. Speaker according to this Motion  there are two 
departments involved ; first department is the department of roads and  infrastructure the 
second department  is the department of environmen t concern ed with the sweeping  of the 
roads so on th is first point I was just informing the H ouse that the department is taking care 
of this issue and if I can get some time  next week I will c ome with a report to do ….. 
(Interruption ) 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Point of information . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mary what is it?  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. Mr. Speaker Sir I would like to 
inform this House the youth s who are doing those  works are the youth s from the National 
Youth Service (NYS) but not from our C ounty that is what  I know very clear ly. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari . 
Hon. Odari:  We should respect the concern  regarding  the answer from the Hon. 
Omar Ebrahim, b ut if there is any such program  involving yo uths from the County 
government department  I think it i s important that we as the representatives are aware of 
such a progr am. I want to speak in  regards to my area I have never seen such a program if 
there is anything that is in the pipeline let us know, these rains have  started  almost  two 
weeks ago and already people are  experiencing flooding everywhere , you can see 
everywhere houses have been flooded a nd roads have been flooded , how long is it going to 
take them to bring those y ouths on board to av ert this situation because we are taking too 
long and in fact this problem of flooding is as perennial as the rain itself they should have 
come up with this pr ogram a  long time ago, we should not be talking of next week next 
week when our people are suffer ing. 
Hon. Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar : Mr. Speaker that’s why am saying that concerning 
this issue of the  unclogging on the drainage systems, I  heard  there was a program which our 
County will recruit youths ... 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Meti are you speaking ... just one 
minute, are you speaking on behalf  of the  Executive ? 
Hon.  Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar : It is not on their behalf Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Because we are debating here , we are 
debating whether you are against or for the Motion , you are speaking as if you are giving as a 
report.  
Hon.  Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar : Mr. Speaker a m supporting with an amendment . 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashi d): Yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari what is it?  
Hon. O dari:  It's unfortunate Hon. Speaker when you hear the Member respondi ng 
using the word ‘maybe‘ maybe ; maybe is an indication that he himself is not sure of what is 
saying. You cannot give an answer using the word 'maybe' if you are not sure of what is 
happening it 's better you l eave it to the people concerned . As Hon. Speaker you have ask ed  
him  whether he is speaking on behalf of the government or whether he is supporting  or 
opposing the Motion , he should be clear on that . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Patrick Muriuki Siminyu?  
May 4, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              50 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Hon.  Siminyu : Mr. Speaker the Hon.  Member ha s to be clear because you see he 
doesn’t have concrete information  towards the Motion . Mr. Speaker it is  the duty of the 
House to give a direction when such information can be retrieved ; if the Hon.  Member h as 
concrete information then he should forward for scrutiny and see if those things, because we 
are not against anybody what we want is to  get a  solution  for this probl em that is affec ting 
our people Mr. Speaker Sir . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Ahmed Omar Ebrahim . 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar ): Mr. Speaker if I can get time until next 
week I can present this kind of informatio n concerning the  issue of the youths being given 
this work of unclogging the drainage system  of our C ounty . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes but unfortunately nobody has asked 
you for that, nobody has asked you for that, nobody has as ked you for that . 
Hon.  Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar : I know Mr. Speaker , yes S ir.. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : So what we have to do is debate this 
Motion  whether you are against this Motion  or you are for this , for the Motion ... 
(Interruption)  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar ): Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : ….and if you know there is such a 
program then you support the Motion  and say t here is such a program and the government 
should speed up the program to add  any assistance.  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ebrahim  Ahmed Om ar): Okay Mr.  Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Because nob ody has asked for the 
statement or anything…  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar ): Okay Mr.  Speaker so am supporting 
because I  also….  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Jimmy O dari?  
Hon. O dari:  I think Hon. Speaker the Member is out of order because this question is 
not about or defending the interests of the youth , it’s about tackling the problem of flooding 
in Mombasa County ther efore Mr. Speaker I think this m atter should be directed to the 
department conc erned to take drastic measures to make ensure that flooding does not cause 
ravages , does not cause damages to the residen ts in Mombasa and it’s not about representing 
the youth s, it is not about agitating for the youths to be employed or whatever th at is out of 
order Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, can you finish?  
Chief Whip (Hon. Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar) : Mr. Speaker I h ave the concerns of the 
fellow Members and I stand firm to support this , to let the House know that it’s suppose....  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes what is it Hon. Mary?  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Hon. Speaker it is not right for an Hon. Member to doze....  
Chief Whip (Hon. Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar) : What is the meaning of doze?  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Who is sleeping in the House Hon. Mary?  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Hon.   Onje.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Onje are you sleeping?  
Hon. Onje:  Thank you Hon. Speaker for giving me this opportunity , I do not know 
the meaning of dozing let her explain the meaning of the word dozing because I know am  
here i am getting everything  clear  Hon. Speaker I don't know if there's something Hon. Mary 
want s from me?  
(Laug hter) 
May 4, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              50 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Mary  what do you want from Hon. 
Onje?  
(Laughter ) 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Nothing but he should be awake . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : She wants you to be awake and follow the 
debate properly , yes Hon. Patrick Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu:  The Hon. Member that was saying Hon.  Onje  is dozing, he was 
praying for us , i do not know what Hon.  Mary  is saying he was praying and interceding for 
us. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Meti  can you continue and 
finish up you presentation , please time is up . 
Chief Whip (Hon. Ebrahim  Ahmed Omar) : Mr. Speaker I thank the House and I 
support this Motion  and I just urge the government to speed up the programme so that the 
blockage  of drainage can be unbloc ked as soon as possible to safe guard the lives of our 
people of Mombasa , so I stand to support.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon. Amur can you reply to 
the Motion  please ? 
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I want to thank the Members for 
contributing and understanding the issue , I want to be clear ly quoted am n ot blaming the 
County but I want to urge the County to perform.  I know the department is under staffed that's 
why I have brought this issue because the staff who are there will be overworked and hence 
after 24 hours those same staff cannot be able to work that's why I was emphasizing if  the 
department is under staffed then casual employment should be given to the young men so that 
they can help in this situation.  
Mr. Speaker I know we have invested a lot of money in the drainage systems and I 
want to thank the County government but the issue of maintaining the drainage syst em is an 
issue because of under staffed department ; the department is under staffed so I urge as much as 
the drainage system did not (??) it is the issue of maintenance . Mr. Speaker we should have a 
number of good people of the department  so that th ey can maintain on a weekly or monthly 
basis so that when rain comes there's no such problem that we will be experiencing , I don't 
want to be quoted that am misquoting that the County does not have a good infrastructure no  
but it is the maintenance that is lacking  and if the department is under staffed  am emphasizing  
that casual workers  be employed to deal w ith the situation as it is.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon. Amur and now I  put the 
question in the House?  
(Question p ut and  agreed t o) 
(Applause ) 
Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members , this House stands adjourned to Tuesday afternoon.  
The House rose at 3:10p.m. 
 
 
 