April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 13th April, 2016  
The House met at 2:34p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair ) 
PRAYERS  
(Sergeant At Arms rung q uorum b ell) 
(Resumption of business  to amend the Mombasa County Roads Bill, 2015)  
BILL  
COMMITTEE  STAGE  
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Members  this Hous e will resolve into a 
Committee  stage . 
COMMITTEE  OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
(Sergeant At Arms lowered the Ma ce from the Table)  
 (Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) left the Chair)  
 ORDER FOR COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
 (Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ) took the Chair ) 
       Chair person:  Mem bers there is a notice to amend the Mombasa  County  Roads Bill  
2015, we are in a Committee  stage.  
NOTICE OF AMENDMENTS TO MOMBASA COUNTY  ROADS BILL, 2015  
       NOTICE is hereby given to move the following amendments ;  
 
1. THAT  the year of the Bill be changed  from  2015  to 2016  hence  the title of the Bill be 
amended  to read, ‘Mombasa  County  Roods  Bill, 2016 . 
 
2. THAT  the long title be deleted  and be rephrased  to read as follows;  
       AN ACT of the County  Assembly of Mombasa to provide for the integration, 
constr uction, maintenance and management of public roads, motor ways, public transport 
systems and protected roads, tolling of public roads and others matters incidental to the 
proper management of the County  road network systems.  
       3. THAT  the following wo rds in the Interpretation  Clause  be deleted;  
       “Statutory undertaker” means a person or organisation mandated by the Constitution of 
Kenya 2010 to carry out certain duties;  
       “Superannuation benefits” means pensions, gratuities and other allowanc es payable on 
resignation, retirement or death;  
       “Transition to Devolved Government Act” means the Transition to Devolved 
Government Act, 2012;   
       “Vacate” means to terminate the existence of the road by direct action of the court  of law;  
4. THAT the following  words  in the Interpretation  Clause  be defined  as follows;  
       “County  road” means a public road or a proposed public road within the County  except a 
road classified as a national road;  
       “Development plan” means an aspect of Count y planning comprising of a set of 
documents that set out policies and proposals for the development and use of land in the 
Mombasa County ; 
       “Planning  authority” means the department in charge of land and physical planning;  
       “Service area” means  an area beside or in the proximity of a public road where services 
and facilities for users of the road are provided;  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        “Structure” means an authorized building or construction, vegetation, amenity, movable 
or immovable that is connected to and form s part of the roads system;  
       “Traffic sign” means any sign, notice, signal, light or other device erected or in any way 
displayed by or with the consent of a relevant authority, for the purpose of regulating, 
restricting or prohibiting traffic and ve hicles of any kind, on a road;  
“Toll” means a charge, fee, payment, levy, tariff or tax payable for the use of a road;  
5. THAT  Clause  4 be deleted . 
6. THAT Clause  5 be deleted . 
7. THAT Clause  6 be deleted . 
8. THAT Clause  7 be redrafted to read as follows;  
“Classification of County  roads  
1) Where  a road has been  classified  as a County  road under  any applicable  law, the 
Executive  Member  shall  by order  classify  such road as a County  road.   
2) The Executive  Member  may by order — 
a) designate  particular  roads  for particul ar purposes  taking  it into account  
existing  numbering  system;  
b) Divide  a particular  class  of roads  into sub classes.  
3) The Directorate  shall  assign  a number  or other  identifying  mark s to each County  road 
in respect  of which  it has responsibility.  
4)  
a) The Director ate shall  keep  a schedule  and map of all public  roads  in respect  of 
which  it has responsibility.  
b) The Directorate  shall  prepare  the schedule  and map as soon  as practicable  after 
the commencement  of this act and shall  take all reasonable  measures  to keep  
the schedule  and map up to date.  
c) The schedule  and map shall  be kept at the offices  of the Directorate  and shall  
be available  for inspection  during  office  hours.  
d) The schedule  and map may be kept otherwise  than in a legible  form  provided  
that the information  contained  therein  is capable  of being  reproduced  in a 
legible  form.  
5) The Directorate  shall,  at the request  of the Executive  Member  and in such manner  as 
may be specified  by him, carry  out an inventory  of all public  roads,  or of any class  or 
subclass  of public  road,  in respect  of which  it has responsibility.  
6) The Executive  Member  shall  upon  the recommendation  of the Directorate,  order  for 
the removal  or demolition  of any encroachment  or structure  on a County  road.  
7) Any demolition  or removal  pursuant  to sub sectio n (6) above  shall  be by notice  of not 
less than 30 days and not more  than 60 days and shall  be served  by–– 
a) Delivering  it to the person  encroaching  on a County  road;  
b) Leaving  it at the usual  or last known  place  of abode  of the person  encroaching  a 
County  road; or 
c) Sending  it by registered  post addressed  to the person  encroaching  a County  road at 
his usual  or last known  address.”  
9. THAT  Clause  8 be re drafted  to read as follows;  
“Declaration  of public  roads  
1) The Executive  Member  may in consultation  with the department  in charge  of physical  
planning,  by order,   
a) Declare  any road over which  a public  right  of way exists  to be a 
public  road,  and every  such road shall  be deemed  to be a public  
road and responsibility  for its maintenance  shall  lie on the 
Directorate.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 b) Where the Executive  Member  proposes  to declare  a road to be a 
public  road he shall:  
I. Satisfy  that the road is of general  public  utility,  
II. Satisfy  that the road is not on private  land,  but if on 
private  land,  the owner  of the private  land shall  be 
adequately  compensated.  
III. Consider  the financial  implications  for the Directorate  
of the proposed  declaration.  
IV. Publish  in one or more  newspapers  circulating  in the 
area where  the proposed  road is located  a notice  
indicating  the time (Which shall  be not less than one 
mont h), place  and period  during  which  a map showing  
such road may be inspected.  
V. State  in the notice  that objections  or representations  may 
be made  in writing  to the Directorate  in relation  to such 
declar ation  before  a specified  date (The notice  shall  be 
not less than two weeks  after the end of the period  for 
inspection).  
VI. Consider  any objections  or representations  made  to it 
under  this section . 
2) The consideration  of objections  or representations  and the making  of an order  under  
Sub Section  (1) shall  be a reserved  function  of a review  Committee  comprising  of five 
Members  appointed  by the Executive  Member.  
3) The review  Committee  established  in sub section  (3) above  shall  consist  of; 
a) An Advocate  of the High  Court  of Kenya  with not less than ten years  post-
admission  experience;  
b) A Valuer  with not less than ten years  experience;  
c) A Land  Surveyor  with not less than ten years  experience;  and 
d) Two representatives  of the public  from  the area in which  the land is to be declared  
a public  road. 
4) The Executive  Member  may prescribe  criteria  for the declaration  of roads  to be public  
roads  and the Directorate  shall  comply  with any such prescribed  criteria  when  
exercising  its functions  under  this section.”  
10. THAT  Clause  9 be redrafted  to read as follows;  
1) “The  County  shall  re-classify  a public  road in accordance  with the provisions  of this 
Act. 
2) Where  the Directorate  proposes  to re-classify  a public  road it shall —  
a) Publish  in one or more  newspapers  circulating  in the area where  the 
public  road proposed  to be re-classified  is located  a notice indicating  
the times  at which,  the period  (Which shall  be not less than one month)  
during  which  and the place  where  a map showing  such public  road may 
be inspected  and stating  that objections  or representations  may be made  
in writing  to the Directorate  in relation  to such proposal  before  a 
specified  date (Which shall  be not less than two weeks  after the end of 
the period  for inspection) , and stating  that persons  making  such 
objections  or representations  may make  a request  in writing  to state 
their case at an oral hearing  conducted  by a person  appointed  by the 
road Directorate  for that purpose,  
b) Affix a copy  of such notice  in a prominent  position  at each end of the 
public  road proposed  for a period  not less than fourteen  days,  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 c) Consider  any objections  or representations  made  to it under  paragraph  
(a) and not withdrawn,  
d) If it considers  it appropriate,  afford  an opportunity  to persons  making  
objections  or representations  and who so request  in writing  to state 
their case at an oral hearing  conducted  by a person  appointed  by the 
Directorate  and consider  the report  and any recommendation  of the 
person  so appointed.  
3) (a) The Directorate  shall  no longer  be responsible  for the maintenance  of a County  
road from  the date on which  the order  re-classifying  it is made  by the Directorate,  
            (b) The re -classification of a public road shall not affect any public right of way over 
such road and the Directorate shall not do anything to interfere with such right of way save as 
is provided for in law.  
4) The Directorate  shall as soon  as may be after a public  road has been  re-classified  
publish  notice  of such re-classification  in the newspaper  or newspapers  in which  
notice  of the proposed  re-classification  was published  under  subsection  (2) (a) and 
shall  notify  in writing  any person  who made  written  objections  or representations  to it 
in relation  to such Re-classification.  
5) A person  who,  without  permission  of the Directorate,  removes,  or who defaces  or 
damages  a notice  erected  under  subsection  (2) (b) shall  be guilty  of an offen ce and 
liable  on conviction  to a term of imprisonment  not exceeding  six months  or to a fine 
not exceeding  fifty thousand  shillings,  or to both.”  
(Interruption)  
(Question of consideration of amendments 1 -10 proposed)  
       Chairperson:  Members  it is propos ed that this House considers the amendments from 
number 1 to 10.  
(Question put  and agreed  to) 
(Question of a mendments 1 -10 to be part of the Bill proposed)  
       Members  I propose that this House adopts the amendments number one to 10  be part of 
this Bill . 
(Amendments 1 -10 agreed to)  
11. THAT  Clause  10 be redrafted  to read as follows;  
“Responsibility of the Directorate for the maintenance and construction of public 
roads ” 
1) The maint enance  and construction  of all County  roads  shall  be the function  of 
the Coun ty Directorate.  
2) The expenses  of the Directorate  in respect  of its functions  under  subsection  (1) 
shall  be charged  on the departmental  financial  allocation.  
3) In the performance  of its functions  under  this Act the Directorate  shall  
consider  the needs  of all road users.  
4)  
a) A person  or group  of persons  may,  with the consent  of the 
Chief  Officer,  carry  out maintenance  works  on a County  road.  
b) A consent  under  subsection  (a) may be given  by the Chief  
Officer  subject  to such conditions,  restrictions  and requirements  
as it thinks  fit. 
c) Where  the Chief  Officer  gives  its consent  under  subsection   (a) 
and the works  have  been  carried  out in a bona  fide manner  and 
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 in accordance  with every  condition,  restriction  or requirement  
specified  under  paragraph  (b)—  
I. The works  shall  be deemed  to have  been  carried  out by 
the  Directorate,  and 
II. The person  or group  (and each member  thereof)  who 
carried  out the works  shall  be indemnified  by the 
Directorate  against  all actions  and claims  howsoever  
arising  in respect  of the works  and the carryi ng out of 
works.  
d) The Directorate  may provide  materials,  plant,  equipment  and 
the services  of its staff to a person  or group  carrying  out works  
under  this subsection.  
5) The Directorate  may do all such things  as may arise  out of or are consequential  
on or are necessary  or expedient  for the performance  of its functions  under  this 
Act or otherwise  in relation  to public  roads  or are ancillary  thereto.  
6) Notwithstanding  the definition  of “road”  in this act, nothing  in this Act shall  
be construed  as imposing  on the Directorate  any liability,  duty or obligation  
to— 
a) Construct  or maintain  fences  or retaining  walls  adjoining  a 
public  road which  are the responsibility  of any other  person  and 
which  do not form  part of the road,  or 
b) Construct  or maintain  any bridges,  tunnels,  railway  crossings  or 
any other  structure  which  by virtue  of any enactment  are the 
responsibility  of a railway  company  or National  government  or 
other  person.  
7)  
a) A person  who,  without   approval  of the Directorate  or the 
consent  of the Chief  Officer — 
I. Erects  an illegal  structure  or amenity  on a public  road, 
II. Defaces  a public  road by writing  or by any other  means,  
III. Damages  a public  road,  
IV. Excavates  a public  road,  
V. Places  or deposits  any material  or thing  on a public  
road,  
VI. Permits  dung  or urine  from  an animal  owned  by him or 
any material  or thing  which  falls from  a vehicle  owned  
or used by him, to be left on a public  road,  or 
VII. Does any other  thing,  such that the material,  thing,  dung  
or urine  or the doing  of such other  thing  is a hazard  or 
potential  hazard  to persons  using a public  road or 
obstructs  or interferes  with the safe use of a public  road 
or the maintenance  of a public  road,   
Shall  be guilty  of an offence  and liable  on conviction  to 
a term of imprisonment , not exceeding  two years  or to a 
fine not exceeding  one million  shillings,  or to both.  
b) A consent  under  paragraph  (a) may be given  by the Directorate  
subject  to such conditions,  restrictions  or requirements  as it 
thinks  fit and any person  who fails to comply  with such 
conditions,  restrictions  or requirements  shall be guilty  of an 
offence.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 c) Where  a person  does anything  in contravention  of paragraph  
(a), the Directorate  may remove  any defacing  and repair  any 
damage,  fill in any excavation,  remove  any material,  thing,  
dung  or urine  or remove  or reduce  any hazard,  potential hazard,  
obstruction  or interference  and may recover  from  such person,  
as a simple  contract  debt in any court  of Law,  any costs  
reasonably  incurred  by it.” 
12. THAT  Clause  11 be redrafted  to read as follows;  
“Agreements and arrangements between Nation al government road a uthorities and the 
County  Government ; 
1) Whenever  it appears  to the Executive  Member  that arrangements  should  be 
made  by two or more  road authorities  for the joint discharge  of any of their 
functions  relating  to national  or County  roads  the Executive  Member  may 
request  the road authorities  to enter  into arrangements  in accordance  with such 
terms  and conditions  as the Executive  Member  may specify.  
2) Any arrangements  entered  into under  this subsection  shall  not be revoked  save 
with the consent  of the Executive  Member.  
3) The Executive  Member  shall  carry  out any agreement  or arrangements  to 
which  this section  relates  and to which  it is a party  in accordance  with the 
terms  thereof.  
4) It shall  be the duty of the Executive  Member  which  is a party  to an agreement  
or arrangement  under  this Act to furnish  to the Executive  Committee  and 
County  Secretary  a copy  of such agreement  or arrangement.”  
13. THAT Clause  12 be deleted.  
      14.  THAT the words “HIGHWAYS, COUNTY  ROADS AND PROTECTED ROADS”  
      on part III title be deleted and replaced by the following words;  
 “PART III -ROAD USAGE AND PROTECTED ROADS”    
14. THAT Clause  13 be redrafted to read as follows;  
“Use of a County  road shall be subject to this Act, regulations and any other applicable law.”  
15. THAT the word “highway” be deleted on the head notes of Clause  15 and the words 
“public roads” be inserted to read as follows;  
“Prohibition and restriction of access to public roads, streets and protected roads”  
16. THAT Clause  15 be redrafted to read as fo llows;  
1)  
a) “Upon recommendation of the Directorate in consultation with the physical planning 
authority, the Executive Member may, by notice remove any protected road, or part thereof, 
from the protected road scheme.  
b) Upon recommendation of the Direc torate in consultation with the Physical Planning 
authority, the Executive Member may modify a protected road scheme and such 
modifications shall take effect from the date of such order.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 2) A person shall not undertake any development of land which would p ermit or involve 
direct access to or from a public road or which would contravene the provisions of an 
approved protected road scheme relating to direct access to or from a protected road.  
3)  
a) Any person who constructs or provides or attempts to constru ct or provide a means of 
direct access to or from a public road in contravention of this Act shall be guilty of an 
offence.  
b) Any person who contravenes subsection (2) shall be guilty of an offence.  
c) Any person who constructs, provides or retains or att empts to construct, provide or 
retain a means of direct access which contravenes a protected road scheme approved by the  
Executive Member under this Act shall be guilty of an offence.”  
17. THAT section 16 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “The Directora te shall prepare an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of any 
proposed road development and construction of a public road.  
2) Where the Directorate considers that any proposed road development consisting of the 
construction of a proposed public road or the improvement of an existing public road is likely 
to have significant effects on the environment, it shall inform the Executive Member in 
writing and where the Executive Member concurs with the road Directorate he shall give a 
direction to the road Dire ctorate.”  
18. THAT the words “and implementation of Roads” be deleted from Clause  17 head 
notes to read as follows;  
               “Acquisition of land”  
19. THAT Clause  17 be redrafted to read as follows;  
“Whenever there is a need to construct a road accor ding to approved County  integrated 
development plan, the Executive Member shall acquire the required land or rights in relation 
to land through compulsory acquisition.”  
20. THAT Clause  18 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “Any works to be done on public roads that can affect the road network system, shall not 
be undertaken without the consent of the Directorate.  
2) The carrying out by a state authority of emergency works necessary to eliminate or 
reduce danger or risk to persons or property or of mainten ance works shall not require 
consent; however it shall be necessary to inform the Directorate as soon as is practicable.”  
(Question for consideration of amendments 11 to 20 proposed)  
       Chairperson : Members  I propose the ques tion, it is proposed that t his H ouse considers 
amendment number 11 to number 20.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Question for amendment 11 to 20 proposed)  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8        Since there is no consideration , no amendment I proceed to put the question. Members  I 
put that amendment on Clause  11 to 2 0 be part of this Bill…  
(Amendment s 11 to 20 agreed to ) 
21. THAT the words “highway scheme” be deleted from Clause  19 head notes and the 
words “or public roads schemes” be inserted to read as follows;  
“Service areas or public roads schemes”  
22. THAT Clause  19 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “A public road scheme may include provision for a service area.  
2) Where a public road scheme approved includes provision for a service area or a 
service area provided is located on a public road, the Directorate  may— 
I. Provide or operate in the service area facilities or services for persons and vehicles 
using the public road,  to which the scheme relates,  
II. Make an agreement with any person whereby that person, either by himself or herself 
or jointly with the Chie f Officer in charge of transport provides or operates in the service area 
such facilities or services.”  
23. THAT Clause  20 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “The County  may prepare a scheme for the establishment of a system of tolls in 
respect of the use  of a public road.  
2) The Chief Officer in consultation with the Directorate, may give special consideration 
to the question of exempting from tolls.  
3) A scheme prepared under subsection (1) shall ; 
a) Specify the public road or proposed public road in res pect of the use of which it is 
proposed to establish a system of tolls,  
b) Indicate  the classes of vehicles and road users for whose use the toll road is intended,  
c) Indicate  the classes of vehicles which and road users who will be charged tolls in 
respec t of such use,  
d) Include  an estimate of the amounts of the tolls that it is proposed to charge in respect 
of the use of the toll road by such vehicles and road users,  
e) Specify  the manner and method of the charging of and collection of tolls,  
f) Specify  such other information as the road Directorate making the scheme considers 
appropriate or the Executive  Member prescribes by regulations.  
4) A scheme under subsection (1) shall be accompanied by an explanatory statement 
outlining the provisions of the sche me and its purpose and effect and shall include — 
a) Information in relation to the general arrangements for the construction, maintenance 
and operation of the toll road to which the scheme relates and for the payment of the cost of 
such construction, main tenance and operation,  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 b) Estimates  of the cost of the road, capital costs and operating costs of the tolling road,  
c) Estimates  of the volume and kind of traffic that will use the road and the amounts of 
the tolls in respect of such traffic.  
5) The Chief Officer may amend a toll scheme adopted by him under this Act.  
6)  
a) The County  shall, before adopting a scheme prepared under this Act, send a copy of 
the scheme to the appropriate road Authority and serve a notice stating — 
I. That a scheme has been prep ared, and  
II. That representations may be made in writing to the Directorate in relation to the 
scheme before such date as is specified in t he notice (being not less than six  weeks from the 
date of service of the notice).  
b) The Directorate shall consider any representations made to it pursuant to a notice 
under paragraph (a).”  
24. THAT Clause  21 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “The Executive Member shall publish in one or more newspapers circulating in the 
area where the proposed toll road is located o r is to be located a notice — 
a) Stating  that a draft toll scheme has been prepared,  
b) Indicating the place, time and a duration of not less than thirty days  for viewing of a 
copy of the scheme prepared, inspection of the map and any explanatory statement , and  
c) Stating that objections to the draft toll scheme may be made in writing to the  
Directorate before such date as is specified in t he notice (being not less than two  weeks from 
the end of the period for inspection referred to in paragraph (b).  
2)  
a) Subject to paragraph (b), the Directorate may adopt a scheme prepared by it under 
subsection (1), with or without modifications and, subject to subsection (3), a scheme so 
adopted is hereafter in this Act referred to as a “toll scheme”.  
b) If an objecti on to a draft toll scheme is made to the Chief Officer and the objection is 
not withdrawn, the Chief Officer shall cause an oral hearing to be held into the matters to 
which the objection relates, by the Review Committee  established under section 5(2), and  
shall consider the report of and any recommendation made by review Committee . 
3) The Chief Officer upon approval shall gazette a toll scheme and the same shall come 
into force on the day of such publication.”  
25. THAT Clause  22 be redrafted to read as fol lows;  
1) “The Chief Officer may provide and maintain buildings, structures, works and 
apparatus as it considers necessary or expedient for or in connection with the charging and 
collection of tolls and the operation of toll roads.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 2) Subject to the provisi ons of this Act, the Directorate may collect revenue in 
accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2012.”  
26. THAT Clause  24 be deleted.  
27. THAT Clause  25 be deleted.  
28. THAT Clause  26 be deleted.  
29. THAT Clause  27 be redrafted to read as follow s; 
1) “The amount of any toll due and payable by a person under this Part and unpaid may 
be recovered from the person as a simple contract debt by the road undertaking concerned in 
any court of competent jurisdiction.  
2)  
a) Notice of the charge of a toll may be served on a person by the road undertaking 
concerned by post:  
I. At the place where the person ordinarily resides or carries on business, or  
II. If an address for the service of such a notice has been provided by the person, that 
address, or where arrangements have been made between the person and the road undertaking 
by such means specified (such as electronic mail) to the place or address specified, in the 
arrangements.  
b) In any proceedings for the recovery of a toll it shall be presumed, until t he contrary is 
shown, that the defendant received the notice under this paragraph to which the proceedings 
relate and that payment of the toll has not been made.  
3) The Directorate may approve cameras or other apparatus and the location of them, to 
be set up and operated by the road undertaking having charge of the collection of tolls on a 
toll road, for the purposes of:  
a) Recording  the date and time of a vehicle passing through the toll road and whether 
payment in respect of the vehicle for the use of the  road has been discharged or incurred, and  
b) Taking  photographic images of the vehicle and its identification mark.  
4) A person who is liable to pay a toll and who fails, neglects or refuses to pay the toll is 
guilty of an offence.  
5) A person who on a to ll road, fails, neglects or refuses to obey a lawful instruction or 
direction of a person authorised by a road undertaking to provide, operate or manage a toll 
road or collect or charge tolls on the road is guilty of an offence.  
6) A person who by his or h er actions does anything to avoid being charged or paying a 
toll while on a toll road is guilty of an offence.  
7) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable on conviction to a fine not 
exceeding fifty thousand shillings or to impriso nment f or a term not exceeding six  months, or 
to both.”  
30. THAT Clause  28 be deleted.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 31. THAT Clause  29 be deleted.  
(Question of amendment 21 to 31 proposed)  
       Chairperson : Members  I propose the question that this house considers amendment 
number 21 to num ber 31?  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
       Since there is no amendment to it I proceed to put the question, Members  that 
amendment number 21 to 31 be part of this Bill …...  
(Amendment 21 to 31  agreed to ) 
32. THAT Clause  30 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “A person using a public road shall take reasonable care for his own safety and for 
that of any other person using the public road.  
2) A person using a public road shall take all reasonable measures to avoid  
a) Injury  to himself or to any other person using the public road,  
b) Damage  to property owned or used by him or by any other person using the public 
road.”  
33. THAT Clause  31 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “The Directorate may construct or otherwise provide and maintain a cycle way.  
2) Where t he Directorate constructs or otherwise provides a cycle way it shall by order 
declare either — 
a) That the cycle way is for the exclusive use of pedal cyclists, or  
b) That the cycle way is for the exclusive use of pedal cyclists and non - motorized 
transport ation.  
2) Any person who uses a cycle way in contravention of an order under subsection (2) 
above shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to imprisonment to a term not 
exceeding three months or to a fine not exceeding ten thousand shillings or, or to both.”  
34. THAT the words “temporary dwelling” be deleted from Clause  32 head notes and the 
words “temporary structures” be inserted to read as follows;  
“Temporary structures on County  roads”  
35. THAT Clause  32 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “Any person who without authority or the consent of the Directorate erects, places or 
retains a temporary structure on any other prescribed road or prescribed class, subclass or 
type of road shall be guilty of an offence.  
2) An authorised person may remov e a temporary structure from a County  road.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 3) An authorised person may store, or procure the storage of, a temporary structure 
remov ed by him under subsection (2).  
4) Where the name and address of the owner of a temporary structure removed and stored 
unde r this section can be ascertained by reasonable inquiry, the Directorate shall serve a 
notice upon the owner informing him of the removal and storage and of the address of the 
place where the temporary structure may be claimed and recovered, requiring him to claim 
and recover it within one month of the date of the service of the notice and informing him of 
the statutory consequences of his failure to do so.  
5) A temporary structure removed and stored under this section may be given to a person 
claiming the temporary structure if he makes a declaration in writing that he is the owner of 
the structure or is authorised by its owner to claim it  
6) The Directorate may dispose, or procure the disposal, of a temporary structure removed 
and stored under this section  in if— 
a) The owner  of the temporary  structure  fails to claim  it and remove  it 
from  the place  where  it is stored  within  one month  of the date on which  
a notice  under  subsection  (4) was served  on him, or 
b) The name  and address  of the owner  of the temporary  structure  cannot  
be ascertained  by reasonable  inquiry.  
7) A temporary structure shall not be disposed of under this section within forty five days of 
the date of its removal under this section.  
8) The provisions of this section are without prejudice to the fun ctions of a public authority 
under any other applicable law.”  
36. THAT  Clause  33 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “The  owner  of any structure  or anything  introduced  to a land which  is situated  on a 
public  road shall  take all reasonable  steps  to ensure  that;   
a) the structure  or the use of the land thereof  is not a hazard  or a potential  
hazard  to other  road users.  
b) It does not interfere  or obstruct  the safe use or maintenance  of a public  
road.  
2) Any person  who contravenes  subsection  (1) above  commits  an offence  and is liable  on 
conviction  to a term of imprisonment  not exceeding  six months  or to a fine not 
exceeding  fifty thousand  shillings,  or to both.  
3) Any person  not satisfied  with any action  taken  pursuant  to this section  may appeal  to 
the Review  Committee  establ ished  under  section  5(2) 
4) Any person  not satisfied  with a decision  of the Review  Committee  may seek legal  
redress  in a Court  of Law.  
5) Where  the Directorate  considers  that a structure  or the use of such structure,  tree, 
shrub,  hedge  or other  vegetation  presen ts an immediate  and serious  hazard  to persons  
using  a public  road it may take immediate  action  to reduce  or remove  the hazard.  
6) Where  the Directorate  takes  action  under  subsection  (5) it may recover  any reasonable  
costs  incurred  by it from  the owner  or occu pier as a simple  contract  debt in any court  
of competent  jurisdiction.  
7) Where  the Directorate  has entered  or proposes  to enter  on any land under  subsection  
(5), it shall  as soon  as may be served  on the owner  or the occupier  of the land,  a notice  
stating  that it has entered  or proposes  to enter  on the land and specifying  the action  
that it has taken  or proposes  to take thereon.  
8)  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13 a) Where  a person  takes  action — 
I. to remove,  modify  or carry  out specified  works  in relation  to a 
structure,  or 
II. to preserve,  fell, cut, lop, trim or remove  any tree, shrub,  hedge  
or other  vegetation  to which  this section  relates,  he shall  take all 
reasonable  measures  to ensure  as far as is reasonably  
practicable  the safety  of persons  using  a public  road.  
b) A person  who contravenes  this subsec tion shall  be guilty  of an offence  
and is liable  on conviction  to a term of imprisonment  not exceeding  six 
months  or to a fine not exceeding  fifty thousand  shillings,  or to both.”  
37. THAT  Clause  34 be deleted.  
38. THAT  Clause  35 be deleted.  
39. THAT  Claus e 36 be redrafted  to read as follows;  
1) “A person  who intends  to hold,  organize  or promote  a road race shall  give at least one 
month's  notice  or such other  period  of notice  as may be prescribed  by the Executive  
Member  in writing  to the Directorate  and to the Kenya  Police  service  within  whose  
jurisdiction  the road race is to be held.  
2)  
a) The Directorate  may by notice  in writing  served  on a person  
who intends  to hold,  organize  or promote  a road race or, where  
the name  of that person  cannot  be ascertained  by reason able 
inquiry,  by notice  published  in one or more  newspapers  
circulating  in the area in which  the road race is to be held— 
I. Prohibit  the holding  of the road race,  
II. Prohibit  the holding  of the road race unless  specified  
conditions,  restrictions  or requirements  are complied  
with,  
III. Impose  specified  conditions,  restrictions  or 
requirements  in relation  to the holding  of the road race 
which  must  be complied  with.  
b) The conditions  under  paragraph  (a) may include  the giving  of 
security  or the provision  of an indemnity.  
3) Any person  who contravenes  subsection  (2) shall  be guilty  of an offence.  
4) The  Executive  Member  may make  regulations  for the purposes  of this section  and 
such regulations  may in particular  make  provision  for— 
a) Requirements  in relation  to the making  and 
consid eration  of objections,  
b) Requirements  in relation  to the giving  of security  or 
 the provision  of an indemnity.”  
40. THAT Clause  37 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “The  Directorate  may by order — 
a) for the purpose  of facilitating  a road race under  section  
25, or any other  event,  
b) for the purpose  of facilitating  the carrying  out of works,  
or 
c) for any other  purpose,  
 Close  a public road to traffic for such specified period and subject to such specified 
conditions as it thinks fit.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 2)  
a) A person  who uses a public  road in contravention  of an 
order  made  under  subsection  (1) shall,  unless  he is 
authorized  in writing  by the Directorate  to do so, be 
guilty  of an offence.  
b) A person  who obstructs  or interferes  with the holding  of 
a road race or any other  event  or with the carryin g out of 
works  or any activity  in respect  of which  an order  under  
subsection  (1) is in force  shall  be guilty  of an offence.  
c) A person  who holds,  organizes  or promotes  a road race 
or other  event  or who carries  out works  or any other  
activity  in respect  of which an order  under  subsection  
(1) is in force  and who contravenes  any condition  
specified  in that order  shall  be guilty  of an offence.  
d) A person  who without  lawful  authority  closes  a public  
road shall  be guilty  of an offence.”  
(Question of amendment of numb er 32 to 40 proposed)  
       Chairperson:  Members  I propose a question that this House considers amendment 
number 32 to 40 . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
Since there's no any amendments ; i proceed to put a question that Members  allow Clause  32 
to 40 to be p art of the Bill . 
(Clause  32 to 40  agreed to)  
41. THAT  Clause  38 be re -drafted to read as follows;  
1) “The  Directorate  may construct  and maintain  drains  in, on, under,  through  or to any 
land for the purpose  of draining  water  from,  or preventing  water  flowing  onto a public  
road,  
2) Before  entering  on any land to perform  a function  under  subsection  (1), the 
Directorate  shall — 
a) at least one month  before  the date upon  which  it proposes  to 
enter  on the land,  serve  a notice  on the owner  or occupier  of the 
land— 
I. stating  that it proposes  to enter  on the land,  
II. specifying  the function  that it proposes  to perform  
thereon,  
III. stating  that objections  or representations  may be made  
in writing  to the Directorate  in relation  to the proposed  
performance  of the function  before  a specifi ed date 
which  shall  be not less than two weeks  from  the date of 
service  of the notice,  and 
IV. informing  him of his right  to restoration  of his property,  
b) Consider  any objections  or representations  made  to it under  
paragraph  (a). 
3)  
a) Where  as a result  of flooding,  landslide,  subsidence  or other  
emergency  there  is an immediate  and serious  hazard  to persons  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 using  a public  road or serious  damage  has been,  is being  or will 
be caused  to a public  road,  the Directorate  may take immediate  
action  to remove  or reduce  the hazard or prevent  or reduce  the 
damage  or any further  damage.  
b) In the exercise  of its functions  under  paragraph  (a), the 
Directorate  may enter  on any land and carry  out any works  or 
do anything  which  it considers  necessary  for the purposes  of 
paragraph  (a). 
4) The owner  or occupier  of any land adjacent  to a public  road shall  take all reasonable  
steps  to ensure  that water,  soil or other  material  is prevented  from  flowing  or falling  
onto a public  road from  his land.  
5) The Directorate  may serve  a notice  in writing  on the owner  or occupier  of any land 
adjacent  to a public  road requiring  him to carry  out specified  works  or take specified  
measures  to prevent  water,  soil or other  material  from  flowing  or falling  onto a public  
road from  his land.  
6)  
a) A person  on whom  a notice  under subsection  (5) has been  
served  may,  within  fourteen  days from  the date of service,  
appeal  against  the notice  to Review  Committee  established  in 
this Act on any one or more  of the following  grounds — 
I. that he is not the owner  or occupier  of the land,  
II. that water,  soil or other  material  was not and is not 
flowing  or falling  onto a public  road from  his land,  
III. that compliance  with the requirements  of the notice  
would  involve  unreasonable  expense,  
IV. that the notice  specified  an unreasonably  short  time for 
complyi ng with its requirements  or any of them.  
b) Notice  of the appeal  shall  be given  to the Review  Committee  
through  the Chief  Officer.  
7) An owner  or occupier  who fails to comply  with a notice  under  this section  shall  be 
guilty  of an offence  and liable  on conviction  to a term of imprisonment  not exceeding  
six months  or to a fine not exceeding  fifty thousand  shillings,  or to both.  
 
8) Where  an owner  or occupier  fails to comply  with a notice  under  this section,  the 
Directorate  may take the action  specified  in the notice  or such other  action  prescribed  
by law. 
 
9) Where  the Directorate  takes  action  under  this section,  it may recover  any reasonable  
costs  incurred  by it from  the owner  or occupier  as a simple  contract  debt in any court  
of competent  jurisdiction.  
10)  
a) A person  who,  without  the consent  of the Directorate — 
I. within  5 metres  of a public  road measured  from  its 
nearest  edge,  scours,  deepens,  widens  or fills in any 
existing  drain  or excavates  any new drain,  
 
II. interferes  with,  or carries  out any works  which  interfere  
with,  a bridge, culvert,  retaining  wall,  embankment  or other  
structure  providing  lateral  or other  support  for a public  road,  
shall  be guilty  of an offence  and liable  on conviction  to a 
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16 term of imprisonment  not exceeding  six months  or to a fine 
not exceeding  fifty thousand  shillings,  or to both.  
 
b) A consent  under  paragraph  (a) may be given  by the road 
Directorate  subject  to such conditions,  restrictions  or 
requirements  as it thinks  fit and any person  who fails to comply  
with such conditions,  restrictions  or requirements  shall  be 
guilty  of an offence.  
c)  
I. Where  the Directorate  considers  that the carrying  out, 
with or without  its consent,  of an activity  referred  to in 
paragraph  (a) has damaged,  is damaging  or will 
damage  a public  road,  it may serve  a notice  in writing  
on the person  carrying  out such activity  or on the owner  
or occupier  of the land on which  such activity  is being  
carried  out requiring  that the activity  cease  forthwith  
and a person  who fails to comply  with a notice  served  
on him shall  be guilty  of an offence.  
II. The Directorate  may repair  any damage  and take 
measures  to prevent  or reduce  any damage  relating  to an 
activity  under  paragraph  (a) and may,  where  it has not 
given  its consent  under  that paragraph,  recover  from  the 
person  carrying  out the activity  or the owner or occupier  
of the land,  as a simple  contract  debt in any court  of 
competent  jurisdiction,  any costs  reasonably  incurred  by 
it. 
11) Where  the Directorate  proposes  to enter  or has entered  any land under,  it shall  as soon  
as may be served  on the owner  or occu pier of the land,  a notice  stating  that it proposes  
to enter  or has entered  on the land and specifying  the action  that it proposes  to take or 
has taken  thereon.”  
42. THAT  Clause  39 be redrafted to read as follows;  
1) “Any  authorized  person  shall  be entitled  to enter  at all reasonable  times  subject  to 
producing  his authority  in writing  or identification  and inspect  any land for the 
purposes  of this Act. 
2) An authorized  person  shall  be entitled  in the performance  of his functions  under  this 
section  to take with him on to land such persons  and equipment  as he considers  
necessary  to assist  him and to carry  out such surveys,  investigations,  excavations,  
borings  or tests,  to take samples  or to do any other  thing  which  he considers  necessary  
for the purposes  referred  to in subsection  (1). 
3) Where  an authorized  person  is denied  entry  to land in the exercise  of his functions  
under  this section  the Executive  member,  or the Chief  Officer,  as the case may be, 
may apply  to the Court  for a warrant  authorizing  such entry.”  
43. THA T Clause  40 be redrafted to read as follows;  
“Whenever  the Executive  Member  is satisfied  in relation  to a notice  required  to be 
served  under  this Act that: 
a) reasonable  grounds  exist  for dispensing  with the service  of the 
notice,  and  
b) the dispensing  with the service  of the notice  will not cause  
injury  or damage  to any person,  he may dispense  with the 
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17 service  of the notice  and every  such dispensation  shall  have  
effect  according  to the terms  thereof.”  
44. THAT Clause  41 be deleted.  
45. THAT Clause  42 be deleted . 
46. THAT Clause  43 be deleted.  
47. THAT  Clause  44 be redrafted to read as follows;  
“Monies  accruing  to the Directorate  under  this Act shall  be applied  in accordance  with 
Public  Finance  Management  Act, 2012.”  
48. THAT  Clause  45 be redrafted to read as fol lows;  
“Where  the Directorate  will become  entitled  to dispose  or procure  the disposal  of 
anything  removed  from  a public  road under  this Act, the Directorate  shall  do so in 
accordance  with the Public  Procurement  and Disposal  Act, 2005  and any other  
applicabl e law.”  
49. THAT  Clause  46 be deleted.  
50. THAT  a new Clause  46 be inserted to read as follows;  
“General  Penalty  
Any person  contravening  any provision  of this Act, for which  no other  punishment  is 
given  is liable  on conviction  to a fine not exceeding  one hundred  thousand  shillings  or 
imprisonment  for a term not exceeding  one year,  or to both.”   
51. THAT  a new Clause  47 be inserted to read as follows;  
“Regulations  
The Executive  Member  may make  regulations  prescribing  any matter  which  is 
referred  to in this Act as prescribed  or to be prescribed  or in relation  to any matters  
referred  to in this Act as the subject  of regulations  or for the purpose  of giving  full 
effect  to this Act.”  
(Question  of amendments  41 to 51 proposed)  
        Chairperson:  Hon.  Members  I propose that this House considers amendments 41 to 51  
(Question put and agreed to)  
       I proceed to put the question, yes Hon.  Hatimy...  
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I want to amend number 48 Clause  45 Mr. Chair , now that we 
don't have the Public Procurem ent and Disposal Act, 2005 so we amend the Act to read the 
Public Procurement and Disposal Act, 2013 sorry 2016 ; we do hav e a new Public 
Procurement Act I  think it is 2015 or 2016 so we delete the 2005 . 
(Question of amendment of 48 Clause  45 proposed ) 
       Then Members  I proceed to put the question that amendment 41 to 51 to be part of this 
Bill. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
       Members  I think the Committee  of the Whole House is now over and we resume back to 
the Assembly sitting.  
April 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     51 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 18 (Sergeant At Arms raised the Mace on the Table ) 
PLENARY  RESUMED  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Members  you may sit down.  Members  you 
think it is now time for Hon.  Amir Thoya to report to this House what transpired in the 
Committee  of the Whole House. Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
       Hon.  Thoya: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika;  kwanza nataka kushukuru Mwenyekiti 
wa Nyumba hii , pili ni kuwashukuru waheshimiwa wote ambao waliweza  kupitia 
marekebisho haya. Mheshimiwa Spika sheria hii iliweza kupitishwa katika Bunge letu na 
ikaweza kupelekwa kwa Mheshimiwa Gavana Hassan Joho ili ikaweze ku tiwa sahihi  na iwe 
sheria kamili.  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumshukuru Mheshimiwa Gavana kwa sababu 
kabla ya ku tia saini sheria hii aliweza kufa nya mashauriano yeye mwenyewe binafsi pamoja 
na Waziri na akaona iko haja ya dharura ya baadhi ya vipengee kuweza kurekebishwa kabla 
ya sheria hii iweze kusainiwa kuwa sheria na baadhi ya vipengee vipya vimeweza kuwekwa 
na baadhi ya vipengee vyengine vimew eza kurekebishwa na vyengine vimeweza kufutiliwa 
kabisa .   Lengo na dhumuni ni kufanya sheria hii iweze kuwa ya manufaa kwa wakaazi wa 
Kaunti ya Mombasa yule ambaye anatumia barabara zetu.  Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika zaidi 
ningeweza kuomba wahesh imiwa wa Bunge hili tuweze kupitisha ili iwe sheria ya barabara 
za Kaunti yetu ili mapendekezo yote wenye Gavana alipendekeza kwa sheria hii na baada ya 
kurekebishwa yaweze kupitishwa na Nyumba hii ili iweze kuwa sheria na iweze kuwa sheria 
kamili. Kwa hi o ombi langu kubwa ningeomba waheshimiwa ni kuhakikisha mapendekezo 
haya ili iweze kuwa sheria kamili ya Mombasa Kaunti. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Question proposed)  
       Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Amir Thoya for  that M otion 
so i think i should move forward and put a question in this House , Members  that the County  
Assembly do agree with the Committee  on the said report . 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       This House stands adjourned until t omorrow in the afternoon.  
The House rose at 3:40 p.m. 
       
 
 
 