May 10, 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               52 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 10th May, 201 7 
The House  met at 9:25a.m . 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
 Yes Hon.  Mwinga . 
 Hon. Mwinga : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr Speaker the owner of the Motion  has just 
called me now, and he has informed me that he is not feeling well , so Mr. Speaker I think that 
should be given another time so that he can move the Motion . 
(Business deferred ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It’s okay. Yes Hon. Mwinga you requested 
you said  you have a statement .  
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Mwi nga:  Yes, Mr. Speaker  as we have been seeing almost the weather of th is 
week it has rained very heav ily, almost the whole County is affected and there is a lot of 
destruction in our areas . So Mr. Speaker i was just request ing the Committee in charge of 
Disaster to go round the whole of Mombasa County and make a very good report  so that we can 
know exactly what are the destruction in our areas , and also whether there  are some deaths which 
we have been  seeing in the news, there are some areas where people lost lives so I’m just 
requesting the Committee in charge of Disaster to go round  and make a very good report so that 
we can know exactly  what happened in our area s. Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Mwinga that is a concern  
which was brought at the right time although rainfall is in the hands of God we have nothing to 
do as a man cannot stop the work of God  because we don't know what time exactly the rain is 
coming , and  the Committee in charge  has to give us some precautions which can save pro perty 
and money of people . 
 So we have heard your request that the Committee, the sa id Committee should traverse 
all the  County of Mombasa to ascertain the loss or the havoc  brought about by the rainfall or by 
the heavy down fall which is an act of God and which can bring measures which can prevent the 
damages. Thank you.  Yes Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Members there being no other business, this House is adjourned  until in the afternoon . 
The House rose at 9: 31a.m. 