October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 7th October , 2020.  
The House met at 2: 40p.m  
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
  The Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : Hon. Members we  may be seated.  
[Consultatio ns]  
  Yes, Clerk next Order please?  
STATEMENT S 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON EDUCATION , INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY AND MV 2035   HON. IBRAHIM OMONDI ON CONSTRUCTION OF E ARLY 
CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION (ECDE)  CENTRE IN MAGOGONI W ARD  
  Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi, Chairperson Committee on Educ ation, Information, 
Technology and MV 2035 please respond to the S tatement?  
[Silence]  
  The Vice Chair for Committee on Educ ation, Information, Technology and  MV 2035?  
[Silence]  
  Any Member in that Com mittee?  
[Silence]  
Clerk? Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire?  
  Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker it is very sad that the Chairperson and the Deputy are not here 
but the Members of the said Committee are here, can the  Members tell us if they have a response 
or even if they do n ot have can they please say that they do not have so that the y seek more time 
as a Committee?  It is wrong for them to keep quiet and yet they are in this House Hon. Speaker. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Milka Moraa?  

October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2   Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Even though I have just walked in  I heard a 
message from the Chairman that this response is not ready we will respond in the next session, 
maybe we need one week and we will bring response on the same.  
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok. Than k you. So next week Wednesday. Yes, Clerk next 
Order please.  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON WATER , SANITATION AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES HO N. HAMIDA NOOR , ON ACUTE WATER SHORTAGE  IN MWAGOSI 
AREA , AIRPORT WARD  
  Yes Hon. Hamida Noor, Chairpers on Committee on Water, Sanitation and Natural 
Resources?  
  Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker as you know that we had a reminder 
that we send to the Minister of Water and Environment but they have not yet replied and we still 
need to get a reply  from them. I ask for another week.  
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, so next week Wednesday?  
  Hon. Noor:  Ok. 
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Clerk next Order please?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON TRADE , TOURISM AND INVESTME NTS, 
HON. KIZITO OPEYA ON RELOCATION OF HAWKER S IN THE C ENTRAL BUSINESS DIST RICT (CBD) 
  Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya, Chairperson Committee on Trade, Tourism and In vestment 
please respond to the S tatement?  
  Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I seek your direc tion on this 
statement because it is now like 21 days and I have also talked to the Member who asked the 
question, I have talked to the Deputy Governor twice on Monday and yesterday and he told me 
as a task force they have identified two places; one is Ton onoka and the other is here at 
Makadara Grounds and they have forwarded the names to the Governor and they are waiting for 
the Governor to pick the one so that they can do the relocation.  
 So maybe you can give us direction because now it is taking too lo ng and maybe the 
Member might think that the task force is not taking us seriously. So maybe you can give us 
direction on what steps we can go next. Thank you.  
 
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Amur do you want to reply on that?  
  Hon. Murfad Amur:  I want to inform the Member Mr. Speaker, the idea of Makadara 
that land does n ot belong to the Mombasa County, s o there is no way they are going to tell us to 
shift people to Makada ra. I t is not a County property ; it belongs to  a Muslim Welfare 
Association which is under the Trust Mr. S peaker . Unless they seek from the Trustee and yet the 
same place we have event s every Islamic Calendar  year s o allocating the hawkers in that CBD or 
Makadara I do not see it happening . Let the m tell us the truth of the fact,  thank you.  
 
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya?  
  Hon. Opeya:  Mr. Speaker that is why I was seeking direction from your office because 
that is the reply that they have given me that they have picked two places . 
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3   As you can see one is a lready controversial and even Tononoka it is a football field;  
youth play soccer there so how are they going take people there? Maybe you can give us the 
direction on how we can go forward. Thank you.  
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But did they give you time line for the relocation or not?  
  Hon. Opeya:  No, they forwarded the two names of the places to His Excellency the 
Governor, and the Governor was supposed to pick one.  
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Maybe you should ask for the timeline so that you can 
inform this House  how long will the process take.  
  Hon. Opeya:  Ok, I can bring an answer next week Wednesday .  
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, thank you Hon. Kizito Opeya. Yes, Clerk next Order?  
MOTIONS  
REPORT BY  COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERV ICE BOARD (CASB ) ON REMIT TANCE OF GRATUITY PAYMENTS 
FOR  MEMBERS OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY AND STAFF  BY THE COUNTY GOVERN MENT OF MOMBASA  
 
  Yes Hon. Murfad?  
 
  Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir I have a response to the 
issue raised on 16th September , 2020 by Hon. Sh ebe Athman i which has not be en allocated today 
and I think it is better I give the Report today for the purpose of Members to know because this is 
a worry ing issue of Members gratuity .  
 I want to be very clear that  we had done what was required  to be done but the report that I 
have received I wa nt it to be shared in this Honourable House and way forward by this 
Honourable  House to be made . Mr. Speaker,  if permission granted I may continue with your 
permission.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are giving us the S tatement or you are just asking for 
permission.  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Permission to respond to that S tatement by Hon . Shebe Athman i. 
Hon. Speaker with regards to gratuity ... 
[Interruption]  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Amur sit please . 
[Consultati ons]  
 So Hon . Amur I am informed that you are supposed to give the response next week 
which is on 14th , but you are saying that you have expedite d the process and you have the 
response to give us today . So I think that is fine as long as you have  the res ponse you can just 
give us the response.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you M r. Speaker Sir. T he issue was raised on 16th 
September by Hon . Shebe Athman i in regard s to remittance of gratuity of Members and the staff. 
Mr. Speaker S ir, on behalf of the B oard a nd on behalf of the Assembly we did write two lett ers 
to the Executive M ember of F inance , both letters were dated 29th September . 
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 One was requesting her to reply on remittance  of ou tstanding service gratuity for M embers of 
County Assembly and contract staf f, the other one was a n invitation letter to the Executive 
Member to come and meet with the B oard so that we could deliberate on the issue of this matter .   
 Mr. Speaker it is unfortunate that the letters were sent on 29th September , 2020 , they were 
receive d according to the delivery book yet the Hon . Member or the Executive  Member showed 
us something  that is never expected to be seen ! Mr. Speaker Sir , the time  and the place of the 
meeting was clearly stipulate d in that letter that was to be at 12:00p.m on 6th the meeting to take 
place at the Clerk’s  office.  The M embers of the B oard Mr. Speaker S ir met at 12 :00p.m. exactly 
the first agenda on that issue was the Executive M ember to come an d deliberate on issues in 
regards to that .  
 Mr. Spe aker S ir, it is unfortunate we waited until 12: 45p.m. the M ember never showed 
up; in fact we went to other agendas buying  time maybe she would appear but unfortunately we 
deliberat ed all the agendas on that day until the meeting had been called off . The Executive 
Member show ed up after the meeting had been called of f Mr. Speaker ; so what I want to say the 
Board invited not summ oned her so that we can deliberate  on the issue so tha t we can bring a 
comprehensive R eport in this House . Unfortunately that is what happened  that day  she never 
appeared before the Committee  Board M embers  Mr. Speaker and in return late in the evening 
what we received was a letter from the Executive M ember not even stipulating what had been 
asked by the letter that was sent in regards to the contribution  of gratuity , the CPF  but the issues  
that were brought  back we re differe nt from what we asked from the Executive M ember .  
 Mr. Speaker we wanted to know how much has not been remitted , when was it going to 
be remitted  and what are the days to be remitted ; but that was never to happen . I want if allowed 
to read the response  that the Executive M ember wrote to us , if I am allowed I can read it … 
 
[Hon. Murfad Amur read the letter]  
 
The C lerk of County Assembly of Mombasa ,  
Dear Sir , 
Re: Invitation to County  Assembly Service Board  
The above subject matter refers;  
I wish to respond  to the issues on the agenda o f the meeting as follows…  
 
 Mr. Speaker you cannot respond to the agenda of the meeting that you did not appear;  
maybe she is responding to the letter of gr atuity that was written , there we re two different letters,  
she never appeared before the Committee . So there is nothing like saying I wish to respond to 
issues on a genda of the meeting as follow s, she did not appear before the C ounty Assembly 
Service Board. I want it to be very clear in this House so the response that the Executive M ember 
brought is another issue Mr. Speaker Sir , different from what we asked … 
  
Number one , the entity has to raise vouchers  for remittance  for gratuity for CPF , note 
that from July, 2017 to September , 2019 the County Assembly  did not raise vouchers  for 
process and remittance …  
 
 She is now asking us for more vouchers , how did she or the department pay for other 
payments for the Assembly yet they  were paying during those times? T hey were under their 
mandate paying salaries, statutory deductions each and everything now . 
 
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 She has twisted the ball Mr. Speaker  saying that the departments should remit  vouchers  
and as per our records all the vouchers  that are sent were sent with deliveries  and signed for , so 
there is nothing like saying that all the vouchers  that were supposed to be remitted  they were not 
remitted.  
 2. Kindly  provide clarity on the matter to  enabl e us to respond expedit iously ...  
What clarity? The letter was very clear Mr. Speaker Sir that the remittance  of gratuity , 
the remittance  of the loan of Ksh.7.3 Million owned by Chase Bank that was deducted from 
Members and not remitted  to the bank . Mr. Speaker this is something that they know , they used 
to deduct money from Hon. Me mbers but they did not remi t; so I do not see there is no clarity  
needed  there yet they were deducting money from the Hon . Member s yet they  were not 
remitting Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker , on National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF)  deductions for the Assembly 
they are telling us they have paid from 1st July to 30th September , 2019 , in our letter we did not 
request for 2019 we requested for the current , for the last three months . Mr. Speaker no statutory 
deductions have been remitted  so we do not want to take th e blame as  Board on behalf of other 
people.   
Mr. Speaker we want to inform the M embers clearly today here the B oard is trying its 
best that i s why it invited the Executive M ember so that we could expedite this issue and  come 
up with a concrete response , but unfortunately they had not paid for NHIF and statutory 
deductions  including  loans recovery . 
 Number four , she is telling us due  to settlement of Senate under performance  of local 
revenue owing to adverse effect s of COVID -19 the County E xecutive secured a  bank loan ... Mr. 
Speaker if we refer to  the Constitution Article 212, I would wish to read it says; Borrowing by 
Counties , 
 A County government may borrow only ;  
a) If the national government guarantees the loan and , 
b) With the approval of the County G overnment Assembly , 
 
 This loan which was paid for the salaries ...Mr. Speaker I want to say it here openly and 
freely that there was no approval from this Assembly, we do not know how th e approval was 
granted because as a B oard when we were  deliberating on the issue of taking a loan, we wanted 
clarification of such information like, how m uch per cent is going to be charged ? We were told 
0.5 per cent , we wanted more information about the service charge , how much are they going to 
charge before we got that docu ment . Mr. Speaker we found our salaries in our bank accounts , we 
as the B oard we are not an oversight body but we are a body that can sue and be sued so this 
matter must be brought to this Assembly and the Assembly may or shall make a final decision , 
eithe r I am allowed to bring a M otion in regards to forming an A d Hoc Committee  to expedite  
the issue because as a B oard we do not have the mandate of oversight . But again Mr. Speaker 
even if you go to the Constitution  of Kenya ; 
 
a)County Executive M ember of the Finance may on behalf of the C ounty government 
raise a loan for that government purpose only if the l oan and the terms and condition... , 
 
 The terms and condition s is what we wanted to be given , more information on the terms 
of the loan , what is the perc entage , what is the Memorandum Of Understanding (MOU)  saying , 
what is the commission ?  
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  But Mr. Speaker S ir that MOU was not given to us, we never saw it as a C ounty 
Assembly Service Board (CASB) , we never saw it in this House ! We  do not know how it was 
used because according to this we did not get any MOU to see and  grant the approval by this 
Honourable  House . Mr. Speaker so for me I want to be very clear ; Members this money is the 
money  after your  term, each and every M ember will benefit out of it, it  is not Amur’s  money nor  
anyone’s  money it is our money . If it has  reached the amount of Ksh.34M illion  Mr. Speaker Sir, 
it is now Ksh.34M illion, I want to give the figures to Hon. Members so that  they wanted to know 
the figure.  Mr. Speaker Sir as we stand th e figure is Ksh. 34,228  Million. .. 
 
[Interruption ]  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire?  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  I am  up to make a special request. 
Hon.  Speaker the issue raised by the Hon. Member is of a gr ave concer n, I was or I appeal to 
your C hair if it pleases you we suspend today’s activity to discuss much on what the Hon. 
Member has just tabled, if it so pleases you because it is an issue that touches  on the welfare of 
Hon. Members plus the staff and its issues to do with finance.    
 Hon. Speaker it also does not make sense if Hon. Members plus the Board can request  or 
invite the CEC Member and  she fails to come without  reason, it makes this Assembly look  
awkward . So am up Hon. Speaker to request you if you can gua rantee us or give us time we 
suspend today’s agenda and discuss the issue tabled by the Hon. Member, if we finish it in time 
we can then come back to our business today . Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire but your request for disc ussing the 
issue I think we are guided by l aw in this House so when we want to discuss the issue it depends 
on how the issue you are going to bring it in the House ; either by a Motion and S tatement . We 
cannot debate on a statement so the Hon. Member I think he was stating it very clear ly that he 
will come up with a M otion on the  same issue whereby to form an Ad Hoc  Committee whereby 
they will investigate or look into this matter . I think that is what Hon. Amur was saying so 
maybe  we should just give  a chanc e to the Hon. Member to finish the response to the statement.  
 Hon. Murfad  Amur:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Mr. Speaker the amount that had not 
been remitted as at today by the E xecutive department is at Ksh. 34,228,319.80 Million , this is 
since when we were b eing paid by the Executive our  salaries and allowances . Mr. Speaker they 
used to pay us then sometimes from October , 2019 the County Assembly started to pay its 
salaries and its deductions directly and the A ssembly paid Ksh. 10, 113,879.8 5Million  through 
our own Human R esource d epartment . So the Ksh.34 M illion  has not been remitted, and in this 
letter of the E xecutive Member has not even said whether she is going to remit it when or how 
Mr. Speaker .  
 So this is why Mr. Speaker I brought this issue , I do not want  the blame to be placed on 
the B oard, that is why am saying this House has the power through your Chair to appoint an Ad 
Hoc Committee so that it can go and investigate and get a true picture of how this money is 
going to be because as a Board we inv ited the CEC for F inance so that we could deliberate  and 
she never showed up in the Committee . So for us we think it is best if an Ad Hoc Committee is 
appointed and go and do a follow up Mr. Speaker, we w ill not be taken for granted as a B oard. 
Mr. Speaker  not only that Ksh. 34 Million has not been paid even the Ksh.7.5 Million  of Chase 
Bank that was from the last Assembly the Hon. Members were deducted and yet ha s not been 
remitted . 
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Mr. Speaker, i t is not  only that ; NHIF Members have been admitted and forc ed to pay 
again yet they have been deducted money from their pay slip s in regard to NHIF. I t is very 
unfortunate Mr. Speaker, we do  not want to be taken for granted as a Boar d, the House has more 
power than the  Board , we have limited power but this Honoura ble House and that is why I 
brought this issue here.  
Mr. Speaker , again I said for borrowing there is a way of borrowing mo ney unless there 
is an approval;  I did not see that approval from this House so it is upon the House to confirm 
whether there  is an approval for the loan or not. Mr. Speaker , again  I said the Memorandum of 
Understanding ( MOU ) for the loan we wanted clarification on that in regards to the service 
charge, the 0.5  per cent,  is it after? But to my understanding Mr. Speaker Sir, after 30day s each 
day it will incur a 0.5  per cent service charge , so on behalf of the Board I do not want us to be 
taken as a Board that is not performing . Mr. Speaker, we have done our dut y, it is upon this 
House to either when I bring that M otion of formation of Ad Hoc Committee be agreed or this 
House to give another way of following it up. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur. Hon. Amur i think you have made 
your response and you have given us the way forward that you are going t o see how you are 
going to bring that issue in the House again. Hon. Raphael as well you can sit down and see what 
is the best way to bring it back to the House so that we can have more discussion about it and the 
way forward and the conclusion of this mat ter. Yes, Clerk next order  please ? 
DECONGESTING THE STR EETS AND ENSURING ST EADY FLOW OF CLIENTS  TO SELLERS OUTSIDE T HE 
CENTRAL BUSINESS DIS TRICT (CBD) 
 Yes Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri , MCA Likoni Ward please move the M otion.  
 Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to move the 
following M otion;  
THAT AWARE that the street hawking and vending has been perennially problematic for 
many years now;  
FURTHER AWARE that the hawkers are small traders seeking to self -employ 
themselves and income for their families and helps to employ thousands of Kenyans;  
NOTING that hawkers tend to concentrate in the Central Business District near bus 
termini and around market areas;  
CONCERNED that if the issue of street hawking and vending is not properly manage d 
especially in the areas such as Likoni, it will continue to pose a menace and contribute to 
congesting pathway s, road reserves, petrol situations and markets;  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
1. THAT, the County g overnment to come up with a compre hensive policy 
framework and legislation to address the street hawking and vending with a view to 
safeguarding businesses and livelihoods of all players  and decongesting the Central 
Business District;  
 
2. THAT, the County g overnment to relocate b us and matatu  termini from the 
Central Business D istrict so that street traders will shift to the new commuter transport 
stations;  
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 3. THAT, in Likoni, buses and Matatus  termini be moved from termini be moved 
from Caltex petrol station to the Shika Adabu new C ounty mar ket to decongest the ferry 
area;  
 
4. THAT, in Likoni, Tuk Tuk termini at Ujamaa  and B arabara ya mchango, Shika 
Adabu b e moved to the Shika Adabu new C ounty market.  
 I do ask  Hon.  Mwalim u Hamadi Mgwisho to second the M otion. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Mwalimu?  
 Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi:  I second.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu. Hon. Mwamwiri. Hon. 
Members i n ow propose the q uestion that the Motion by Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri on the 
decongesting the streets an d ensuring steady  flow of clients to sellers outside the CBD be  
considered by this House in the same terms as moved ? 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri please make your 
contribution.  
 Hon. Ath man  Mwamwi ri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika hoja hii iko 
bayana  kujaribu kutafuta suluhu y a shida ama almaarufu wanaitwa wachuuzi kutoka 
msongamano katikati ya miji ili  kuwezesha shughuli nyingine kuweza kuendelea . Mheshimiwa 
Spika  tutambue ya kwamba ha wa wa  shida ni watu muhimu ambao wameji ajiri na wameajiri 
baadhi ya W akenya katika kukimu mahitaji ya mahitaji yao . Kwa hivyo hakuna sababu ya 
kutumiwa nguvu kuwalazimisha kutoka  isipokuwa kwa mipangilio maalum Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Mheshimiwa katika tafiti z angu kabla kuja na hoja hi i nilithathmini hali halisi ya  soko la  
Muthurwa kule jijini Nairobi ambapo hawa ni sehemu ile ilikuwa wazi na ikafanywa ki tuo cha 
kuegesha magari ya umma  ambayo baada ya kituo kile kuanza kutekeleza majukumu  basi 
wachuuzi wengi wa liokuwa wamejaa katikati ya mji  iliwalazimu pasi na msukumo, kwa hiari 
yangu  Mhe. Spika kuenda katika soko la Muthurwa  ambapo pale kwa sababu ya kieg esho kipya 
na usafiri wa abiria iliwezesha wao kuwafikia watu ambao ni waleng wa katika biashara zao  na 
weny ewe ikawa wanawacha sehemu ya katikati ya mji Mhe. Spika.   
 Hii Mhe. Spika ikitekelezwa hapa kwetu  itaweza kusaidia pakubwa pasi msukum o; japo 
nimeona  Mhe. Mwenyekiti wa maswala ya Biashara, Uchumi na U wekezaji akikataa na jawabu 
la jinsi gani atawaondoa w achuuzi katikati ya mji maeneo ya soko ya M arket alma arufu Marikiti  
lakini kwa kuzingatia hoja hii ikiwa wataweza tu kuondoa kiegesho cha matatu pale Marikiti na 
kututaf utia st eni nyengine  bila shaka wachuuzi wenyewe watatoka pale kuf uata kiegesho kilipo, 
kwa sababu palipo na kiegesho ndipo pahali palipo na abi ria, ndani ya abiria wale wale ndio 
walengwa ama ndio clients wa wachuuzi hawa.  
Kwa hivyo Mhe. Spika mikakati ipo , taratibu zipo, ikiwa idara itaitekeleza basi suluhu 
itapatikana ; kutilia nguvu swala hili k una soko jipya ambalo serikali Gatuzi  imejenga na 
kufungua ka tika maeneo l a Likoni almakhususi Shika A dabu . Lakini soko lile Mheshimiwa  
limekosa nguvu na uwekezaji kuimarika kwa sababu liko kando na mji na mtu kwenda  kufanya 
biashara pale inakuwa mushkil  kwa sababu, mtu anapotoka kiegesho cha Ferry vit uo vyote vya 
mabasi, matatu na Tuk tuk viko maeneo ya pale.  
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 Kwa hivyo atanunua kwa wachuuzi walioko pale na k usafiri pasi kushuka maeneo ya 
Shika Adabu ; lakini Mhe. Spika tukiweza kuondoa k iegesho cha matatu kilichoko Likoni Caltex  
na kukipeleka katika soko lile  kitasaidia kupungua kwa msong amano wa wachuuzi Ferry ; moja , 
pili kitasaidia ku peleka wanunuzi katika soko la Shika A dabu na kulifufua  kwa sababu wachuuzi 
sasa hivi walioko katika en eo lile Mhe. Spika  wanafanya biashara ya hasara kwa sababu hakuna 
wanunuzi.  
Mhe. Spika pia maeneo ya Ujamaa sasa hivi imekuwa ni hatari na matokeo ya ajali 
yamekuwa yakitokea mara kwa mara  kwa sababu kumelazimika kufanywa kituo cha Tuk tuk 
katika maeneo yale ya Ujamaa na bara bara ya mchanga  na wachuuzi wamesongamana pale  ili 
kuweza kuwafikia wasafiri hawa na wakuuzie bidha a zao.  
Kwa hivyo Mhe. Spika idara ikiweza kuwagurisha kituo hik i na ku wapeleka katika soko 
la Shika A dabu  ambapo kuna nafasi kubwa wa naweza kufanya huduma zile  na hata 
msongamano wa Shika Adabu utapungua na aja li hizi katika maeneo yale  yatapungua.  Mhe. 
Spika ni kwa moyo mkunjufu tu na nia njema kuomb a Bunge hili kuitazama hoja hii  kwa 
manufaa katika pande mbili, kupunguz a msongamano na wakati huo huo kusaidia wachuuzi 
wetu k uweza kuendelea na shughuli zao , na hali kadhalika kuweza kuwa na mwelekezo wa 
wanunuzi wa bidha a zao katika maeneo yanayos tahiki. Kwa hivyo Mhe. Spika ni nakuomba tu 
Bunge hili kwa nia safi  tuweza kuunga mkono hoja hii  kuweza kusaidia serikali yetu Gatuzi kwa 
kuwanufaisha wachuuzi katika jiji letu la Mombasa, ahsante Mhe. Spika kwa wakati huu.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Ahsante Mhe. Athman Mwam wiri. Yes, Deputy 
Speaker?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Ahsante sana Mhe. Spika . Mhe. Spika 
mimi ni mesimama kupinga hoja hii ya ndugu yangu Mhe. Mwamwiri. Mhe. Spika tukiweka ama 
sote tuna ufahamu ya kuwa ni juzi tu  Mahakama  iliweza kuamua masahala kuhusiana na Finance 
Bill, ile ya mwa ka ya fedha iliyopita . Mhe. Spika  sana iliangaziwa masahala ya kuongeza bei ya 
bidha a na kutokumfikiria mwana nchi; ikiwa leo Bunge letu tutashikana  kwa pamoja 
kumuongezea mwananchi gharama, ya kuwa kituo cha mabasi ama kituo cha uchukuz i kiwe 
kitaondolewa pale kilipo sasa kipelekwe  zaidi ya kilomita tatu ama nne  kipelekwe katika maeneo 
ya Shika Adabu. Mhe. Spika tunaelewa wanaovuka kituo kile pale Ferry wengi ni mama zetu, 
wengi ni baba zetu, wengine hata kuna wale walemavu   amba o itakuwa ni masikitik o makubwa 
kama itakuwa hatutawafikiria watu w ale, tutakapokuwa tumeshirikian a pamoja kupitisha hoja 
hii. 
 Mhe. Spika tukia ngazia kuwa kuna soko jipya la Shika Adabu  twaelewa sababu ambazo 
serikali ya  Kaunti imeweka soko lile  na tuna  imani soko lile l imewekwa kwa wakaazi wa Shika 
Adabu  na ni mwanzo ndio soko lile kido go tunaona labda wanunuzi ni wa chache. Lakini nina 
imani Mhe. Spika tutakapoendelea kwenda mbele soko lile litaweza kupanuka , mimi ningeomba 
alioleta hoja hii ni afadhali ingekuwa kupunguza wingi wa watu kwenda soko la Kong owea  basi 
magari mengine ambayo yanaleta bidha a yawe yataweza kufikia soko la Shika Adabu  ili watu 
ama wachuuzi wawe wanaenda katika s oko lile la Shika Adabu badili ya kuja soko la Kongowea  
ili mahali pale ama soko lile liweze kupata biashara . 
 Mhe. Spika  lakini kuwaondolea wananchi wetu kituo kile cha kuabiri magari  itakuwa 
tunawaongezea gharama katika matumizi yao , maana itawalazimu labda watumie mfumo wa 
boda  boda  kufika Shika Adabu  ama mfumo mwengine mb adala  na kwa kusema kweli kutembea 
kuanzia pale mpaka kwa soko la Shika Adabu  hiyo itakuwa tunawapa adhabu ambayo si 
malengo ya Bunge letu  wala Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa  kuweza kuwa adhibu wana nchi wetu . 
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Malengo yetu Mhe. Spika tuweze kukuza maeneo yale kama Shika Adabu  ili yaweze 
kupanuka , ningeomba aliyeleta hoja hii  arudi nyuma abadilishe matakwa yake katika hoja hii  ili 
iwe itakuwa ni matakwa ambayo yatakuwa yanaleta  manufaa kwa serikali ya Kaunti  na 
yatakuwa ni matakwa ambayo hayatakuwa ni yenye kugandamiza mwan anchi wa Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa . Ahsante Mhe. Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Makaran i. Yes, Hon. Amriya Juma?  
 Hon. Amriya Juma : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. Langu pia ni  
kidogo kuwa na wasiwasi manake  tukisema tunatoa kituo pale  Caltex tukipeleke mpaka Shika 
Adabu  nafikiria wale dada zetu, mama zetu tunawapa mbinu gani m badala ? Pia naona hii hoja 
haikusema mbadala watakuwa wanatumia nini ; kusema ukweli watu ni wengi, maelfu y a watu 
wanavu ka pale kituo cha Ferry na we ngi ukitazama ni watu  ambayo wanatembea kwa miguu 
Bwana Spika, wale ambayo wana  bahati ya kuvuka kwa magari ni wachache, labda ni kampuni 
ama sisi wachache amba o tuko na manyumba kuvuka Ferry. Kwa hivyo wengi ni wale ambao 
wanavuka kwa miguu , sasa naona hoja ni nzuri  lakini ningemuomba Mheshimiwa mwenza atoe 
mbadala kwa wale ambao  manake washazo wea ukishuka Ferry tu unapata boda boda pale pale 
unapanda a ma unapata pale Caltex wapata k abla hatujak uwa na magari ulikuwa ukishuka Ferry  
unapanda pale ngazi unashuka unapanda boda  boda  ama unapanda matatu unaanza kunyoosha . 
 Sasa ukisema tutoke  hapo twende mpaka Shika Adabu  kule soko  najua katika hoja hii 
Mheshimiwa hapa anataka pia kuhamasisha watu watumie lile soko la Shika Adabu manake pia 
yeye ameona kidogo soko la Shika Adabu halijashika moto kama soko la Kongowea . Sasa labda  
pia katika hilo wazo lake kufanya pia lile sok o liuzike ni kwamba matatu na Tuk tuk zianze pale 
Shika Adabu lakini kusema kweli Waheshimiwa tutakuwa tumewaumiza katika kujenga hoja ya 
soko na kulijenga soko tutakuwa pia tumeumiza watu wengi sana . 
 Kwa hiyo  akija kujibu atueleze wale watu tukitoa kituo c hao hapa Likoni Caltex 
tukipeleka Shika Adabu twadhamiria vipi ama tutawapa mbadala gani ndio kabla hatuja unga  
hiyo hoja ndio hawa watu wasiathirike . Shukran.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amriya. Yes Hon. Raphael?  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I beg to support the Motion moved by 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri. Hon. Speaker we all understand that the County government of 
Mombasa has used a lot of resources in building up the Shika Adabu Market that needs at the 
end of the day to bring back the returns to the County government a nd the people of Mombasa 
and by having activities within or around the market it will also create that income or returns that 
am talking about.  
 Two Hon. Speaker it has come to my knowledge that the termina l at the Likoni , the 
current one that is being used  is not the County government 's facility , instead it is a private 
facility . Hon. Speaker , that means if the owner wakes up today and decide s to close it up our 
people will have no alternative . 
 So it is better  the County government comes up with a plan as early as today to have an 
alternative so that when  the private investor or the owner of that place decides to close it up our 
people will not have a problem or will not have a lot of headache thinking wher e to relocate to , 
so Hon. Speaker I support . Of course du ring the pand emic we all know we  decongest ed the 
Kongowea Market and we transferred so many activities to Tononoka and so many people had to 
cope up so it is just a matter of initiat ing the project and the people of this County will just cope 
up. 
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  So it is better to have our own  place wher e we relocate our people  safely where we know 
this is a County facility, that these are  ground s owned by the County government and the levies 
that will be  collected there  goes direct to the County government as opposed to what is 
happening today where a lot of revenue collected there is being cha nneled to private pockets of 
people because the place is owned by the private developer.  
Hon. Spe aker, I just want to urge my fellow Hon. Members to think outside the box ; in 
fact those people who use those Matatu s are from other Counties ; mostly from Kwale because 
those Matatus  do ferry people mostly to Kwale , our people will not be much affe cted as we may 
think . Hon. Speaker , so kindly  Hon. Members let  us support it, i t is a good initiative our people 
in the beginning just like some of us or some of the people used to see distance from Tononoka 
to maybe Kongowea being a very long distance but at  the end of the day they cooperated and we 
had a solution to the pandemic .  
Therefore  let us have a final solution of having this terminal being transferred to Shika 
Adabu so that Shika Adabu can also be busy and that market can also be busy  and we can also 
gener ate income from there. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Yes, sorry Hon. Raphael . Yes Hon. 
Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker indeed the intentions of the Hon. 
Member are good but again the  reasoning I think he has not done his research well ; let me begin 
by informing Hon. Mwamwiri that the people who are flocking Likoni is not because of bus 
terminal or machinga  it is because of the Likoni ferry . So all these people who are coming  to 
Likoni ferry to do business are coming there to target people who cross using the ferry , so Mr. 
Speaker even if you move the bus terminal to Shika Adabu those people who will have crossed 
using the F erry will always be in large numbers across the Ferry and of course the machingas  as 
he had said or the hawkers will always be there because most of these people who cross do not 
even bo ard the Matatus  and the buses as he suggests .  
 Most of these people who cross live around the ferry and the nearby villages so they just 
buy their  things and walk to their homes ; the issue of th ese people  suggesting to relocate the 
terminal because of th em... they are just  a few who board Matatus to go outside Likoni or to the 
far end of Likoni . So Mr. Speaker in my own thinking I do not think m oving the bus terminal 
and the Tuk tuk to Ujamaa will be good for the people because as they cross most of them will 
be forced to walk and we will not have decongested the area.   
 Again Mr. Speak er the reason why if you get in to town , even here i n the Central Business 
District ( CBD ) most of these Matatus  like the buses and the other Matatus  that go outside this 
town are hosted within petrol stations ...for example  if you go to Mwembe Tayari those Matatus  
which commute the  route to Voi, Taita Taveta  are host ed at the petrol station and t he other petrol 
station s across the other side .  
 So Mr. Speaker it is because of lack of enough space within our County or within our 
CBD ; remember this is an island  and it is very small and that is why the Chair of Trade is finding  
it hard to find land t o relocate hawkers because we do  not have enough  land here in the town and 
we had a case with the bus and matatu owners last time and we did not succeed because there is 
no space . There is no way we can relocate buses terminals to places because we do not hav e 
space, the County does not have space for us to relocate them.  
Mr. Speaker I think it is an all-inclusive  thing, we need to bring on board stakeholders so 
that we can know what we are doing, we cannot just do it for Matatus  and Tuk tuk owners . 
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 This is  because they  are doing business with us and we are als o collecting a lot of 
revenue from  those people so if you relocate them from where their customers are Mr. Speaker 
we wil l be asking for war from these Tuk tuk and Matatu  owners because they are paying levies 
and the y must go where the customers are and in this case most of their customers ar e the people 
who are crossing  the ferry . 
Therefore  I think Hon. Mwamwiri being a resident of Likoni you should by now know 
people do  not come to do business, they do not come to Likoni across  the ferry just to do the 
business but they just waiting for the people who cross so that  they can do business with them . It 
is very difficult for us to relocate anyone to do business because as long as the ferry leaves they 
will always be many people acr oss the ferry and they must be a terminal and the re must be Tuk 
tuks and there must be people who are selling their w ares and again Mr. Speaker as I wi nd up we 
should be able to bring on board all these stakeholders so that we can see the best way forward . 
Otherwis e as it is Mr. Speaker I do  not agree with th is Motion , i beg to oppose.  
 
[The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri ) exited the Chair]  
[The  Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the C hair] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Y es Hon. 
Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speake r thank you for the opportunity . Mr. Speaker I was no t feeling 
well but the importan ce of the Motion and my appetite is up to contribute to this particular 
Motion  despite  the fact tha t am not feeling well.  Mr. Speaker Sir , first of all I may not have 
practical experience a s much as those people who stay  in Likoni and those who cross the ferry 
often . But, I remember that I can try and fi gure out the advantages and may be the di sadvantages 
that may occur if the Motion pass es through or does not pass through , and that is why I am up . 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to say that Members when sometimes they come up with 
Motions  it is very important to share or whip other Mem bers outside before the Motion is 
brought because the Motion might be very important . Again you find that the re are som e of the 
issues that Members want to add on it even before it comes to the House because it is already 
polished that it can go through .  
 Mr. Speaker , one; I would like to support the Motion with the following facts, 
considering the Corona Virus Pandemic that we are just going through I think this M otion is in 
agreement with the health regulations because you will find the congestion s at the ferry will be 
reduced and therefore it will also contribute to the decongestion of people and activities and of 
course it will be easier to tackle the pandemic.  
 Number two Mr. Speaker I also support the Motion due to the congestion of the people 
and trucks , especially this one will reduce airborne diseases and even some water borne diseases 
like noise pollution and so on will be able t o be controlled in that place. You will find Mr. 
Speaker that  in a very organized city o r a very organized to wn or a CBD actually the noise and 
unnecessary movements are not important in such places and that  is why am saying the trucks 
will be decongest ed in a certain area then it becomes an organized place for people.  And then 
another thing Mr. Speaker I also suppo rt the Motion because of the criminal activities which 
increases when there  are a lot of people around, there is a lot of pick  pocketing here and there 
and again you find out that now the criminals  are taking advantage of such situations and you 
find that  they actua lly participate in those criminal activities and therefore d econgesting the place 
I think  is good for us Mr. Speaker…  
October 7 , 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          52 
DISCLAIM ER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 [Interruption ] 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I think there  is a Member who is up. Yes 
Hon. Raphael?  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker indeed the debate is good and it is for 
the interest of the people we represent but looking around am afraid that we do not constitute the 
quorum that will fit the debate of the Motion as it is . I am the refore worried about  this lack of 
quorum and maybe through your directions if Members can be called in the House so that we 
wind up on this session. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Clerk confirm if there  is quorum or 
not? 
[The Clerk confirmed lack of  quorum ] 
 Hon. Members under the St anding Order 32 , I order the Serj eant-At-Arms to ring the 
quorum bell .  
(The Serjeant-At -Arms r ung the Quorum  bell) 
ADJ OURNMENT  
 Hon. M embers under Stand ing Order 32 (2) (a) the House stands adjourned until Tuesday 
13th October, 2020 at 10:00a .m. 
The House rose at  3:4 p.m.  
  
  
 
 