August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 2nd August , 2023  
Third Assembly – Fifty Third  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:52p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Speaker ( Honourable  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable  Members , you may be seated . Yes C lerk? Next 
order please.  
 
STATEMENT S 
HARASSMENT OF BOAT OPERATORS AND BEACH TRADERS AT BAMBURI PUBLIC BEACH  
 
Yes, Honourable  Abdulrahman Abdulkadir , Chairperson Com mittee on Tourism, C ulture 
and T rade, please respond to the statement.  
 
Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir:  Thank you so much Hon ourable  Speaker.  I am 
standing to respond to a request for statement that was made by Hon ourable  Patrick Mbele on the 
harassment of Boat Operators and Beach Traders at Bamburi Public Beach. I want to believe it is 
not Hon ourable  Allen Katana? ! 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker , because I want this to go on record, I think  Honourable  
Member after admitting t hat I am the one who brought that issue, I suggest he starts a fresh, thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you , just put it on record Hon ourable  Abdulrahman . 
 
Hon. Abdulkadir Abdulrahman:  Thank you Mr . Speaker , I stand guided. Hon ourable  
Speaker , I am up to respond to a request for a statement by Hon ourable  Allen Katana M ember of 
County Assembly  Shanzu Ward, on an issue concerning the harassment of Boat Operators and 
Beach Traders at Bamburi Public Beach. Honourable  Speaker , as a Committee we deliber ated on 
this issue and we wrote several letters to the concern ed department ; the department of Tourism, 
Culture and Trade  but we did not get a response . However, we wrote to them a reminder and I 
am pleased to inform that  we got a response from the department . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 If you will allow me  Honourable Speaker,  I can read the response  as I have it here . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes please.  
 
Hon. Abdulkadir Abdulrahman:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and I quote.  The Department of 
Tourism, Culture and Trade through their le tter of Ref: CGM/DTCT/TOURISM/1/VOL.1/13 
dated 1st August, 2023  stated that the Directorate of Tourism invited the Chairman of Mombasa  
Boat Operators, Mr. Ahmed Fumo on 20th June, 2023 to shed light on the harassment of Boat 
Operators and Beach Traders at Bamburi Public Beach where Mr. Fumo informed the 
Directorate that they are not being harassed and are working well with the authorities. I repeat , 
Mr. Fumo informed the Directorate that they are not being harassed as it was alleged by 
Honourable  Allen Kat ana. The Department also informed the Committee that the Directorate of 
Tourism had initiated the Beach Management Bill in order to brin g sanity and order in public 
beaches in the County. The legislation also proposes for the rehabilitation and modernization of 
the Jomo Kenyatta Public Beach.  The Department further informed the Committee that in due 
course they will forward the Bill to the County Assembly for Consideration.  Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Abdulrahman . Yes, Clerk 
next order please.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker but since I am still a lea rner le arning the procedures 
of this House, I thought I would also first have a copy of this before the Hon ourable  Member just 
walks in with a paper  and I do not know whether he is the one who ha s just typed so that h e can 
just present because  in fact he is even asking me who  is this, Fumo ?  Now he is the one coming 
with information and then asking me who is Fumo ! So, I humbly ask for your guidance 
Honourable  Speaker, but I am 101 percent not satisfied with this Report, thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Abdulra hman?  
 
Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir:  Honourable  Speaker , I was asking him whether h e 
knows the Chairman of the Beach Traders Association , one Mr. Ahmed Fumo and I am surprised 
the Hon ourable  Member does not know him and he is here purporting to bring a n issue 
concerning the harassment of beach operators . The department , like I said contacted Mr. Ahmed 
Fumo, whom I am informed he is the Chairman of Mombasa Boat Operators and he denied any 
allegation of harassment, so I have a written copy of the response and I can share it wi th him . 
Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Allen?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa ruhusa yako nitaomba nichukue karatasi hili, 
ambalo hata uhakika wake sijui maana sijapata watanisaidia kutafuta lak ini anaongea kuhusu 
Boat operators , mimi niliongea kuhusu wafanyikaz i wote wanaofanya kazi kule ufuoni;  wale 
wavuvi, wale wanao fanya michezo kule, wanaofanya kazi za kupeleka watalii . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Lakini Ripoti iliyojibiwa na ananiuliza habari za Bwana mmoja anayeitwa Fumo, 
anayesimamia  vidau peke yake na hii niliyouliza ni kwanzia mwisho Flamingo kule baharini 
kuja mpaka mpakani Pirates.  Sasa akiniambia Boat operator’s  peke yake Mheshimiwa hainisaid ii 
na swala langu muhimu  ilikuwa shida wanazopitia hawa watu wana pitia shida za kupeana pesa 
kwa mikono mingi ya serikali, ikiwemo TRA  ambayo ni Tourism Regulator Author ities, 
ikiwemo KWS , Kenya Mart ime ikiwemo mikono minne ya serikali inachukua pesa kwa m vuvi 
ama mfanyikazi katika ile ufuo wa bahari. Kwa hivyo Mh eshimiwa Spika na mimi ni ombi 
langu, Mwenyekiti asiparamie Ripoti tu , akae vizuri ili wapate majibu mazuri kwa maana  
wananchi wetu wanateseka kule . Ahsante.  
 
[The Sp eaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair] 
[The  Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M walimu  Makarani ) in the  Chair ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Yes, what is it Hon ourable  Abdulrahman? You do  
not need to respond to what Hon ourable  Katana has raised.  
 
Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir:  Okay I want  to believe that this issue has been is sorted.  
  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): I will give direct ion. 
 
Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Abdulrahman for bringing 
back to the Assembly this response  but as pe r the Hon ourable  Members from Ba mburi  he is not 
satisfied with this response . So, I request the Committee  to go back and have  a site visit, invite 
the said d epartments that were named by the Hon ourable  Member and bring back  to this 
Honourable  House bring back your Report in three  weeks time.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
What is it Hon ourable  Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker I am so rry to say this but it i s not the Hon ourable  Member 
from Bamburi , I am from Shanzu . Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you the Hon ourable  Member from S hanzu 
Honourable  Allen Katana . Yes, Clerk next order please?  
 
BLOCKAGE OF  PUBLIC ACCESS ROAD NEAR KIEMBENI BAPTIST CHURCH  
 
Yes, Honourable Amriya Boy Chairperson Committee on Lands, Housing a nd Urban 
Planning or any other Member from that Committee?  
  
[Silence ] 
 
Any Member from Lands Committee? Hon ourable  Madialo, are you a Me mber?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Yes, I am a Member . Thank you.  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Makarani ): Okay.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  We request the Hon ourable  Chair to give us two more weeks.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Honourable  Madialo , I think last week you 
requested for some more weeks and we accorded you one more week, of which you are supposed 
to bring back the response today, so what transpired that you do  not have the response?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Because I am a good Christian,  I do not want to lie to you , we just want to 
seek your gracious permission to allow us to br ing it in two weeks time.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Honourable  Member from Bamburi Hon ourable  
Mbele , do you have any objections?  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Mr. Speaker Sir , I am very dissatisfied with the an swer from the Committee 
of Lands ; the reason of my dissatisfaction is that  this is a matter that has a lot of people involved 
including my residents whom for a very long time I have been waiting for this answer. I urge 
under your discretion that y ou then forward this matter to the whole House because  this has been 
a matter that has been there,  I think almost a month or two now and the temperature s on the 
ground are still very high, it  is a matter of l and Mr. Speaker Sir. So , kindly if you can delegate 
the i ssue whether to an Ad-Hoc Committee or to the Whole House I would really appreciate 
because  I think the Committee had this for a very long time . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Patrick . Yes, Hon ourable  
Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Through your kind permission Mr . Speaker Sir , I would request  that if you 
would allow us, then I can give you my personal undertaking as a Member of the Lands 
Committee that this Report will come to this House in two weeks time.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Makarani ): Honourable  Majority Leader , what is it?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  
Spika … 
 
[Silence ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Yes, Majority Leader?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mhe shimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa  
Spika ni masikitiko ya jinsi baadhi ya mambo yanavyo endeshwa ...Nikiwa mwakilishi wa 
serikali, serikali yetu inastahili ku wajibika lakini ni jukumu la utenda kazi wa Kamati 
kuhakikisha inawajibisha sehemu am a serikali upande wa serikali.  Mheshimiwa Spika hoja hii 
ambayo Mheshimiwa w a Bamburi alikuja nayo ni swala la ute tesi wa ardhi. Mhe shimiwa Spika , 
tuna ushuhuda katika Jamhuri yetu kuna sehemu watu wameuana kwa sababu  ya ardhi  na Kamati 
ina mamlaka mbali na kukaa katika mae neo ya Bunge  pasi na idhini ya upande wa serikali 
kwenda nyanjani Mhe shimiwa Spika, kut athmini yaliyojiri na kuja na Ripoti w anachokisubiria ni 
taarifa kwa karatasi kutoka kwa upande wa serikali.   
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 Hali halisi ya nyanjani, Kamati haijafika.  Mheshimiwa  Spika , Mheshimiwa aliyekuja na 
hoja hii ambaye kwake kuna utesi yuko hapa. Kamati katika vikao ambavyo vimekaa kwa 
takriban mwezi sasa, ha kuna hata kikao kimoja katika aj enda zake kinachohusu maswala ya 
Bamburi, waliomwita Mhe. Wa Bamburi kutaka kuskia kutoka kwake ni yapi yanayojiri walisia 
wa mamba pale nyanjani.  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba uwajibishe hizi Kamati, kwa sababu 
Kamati zikikosa kufanya kazi ni aibu kwa Bunge ya kwamba tumelala, kwa sababu maju kumu  
mengi yetu sisi kama wawakilishi wa j amii yapo katika Kamati hizi Mhe shimiwa Spika. Kwa 
hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika ni wito wangu tu  kwamba Kamati ya ardhi iwajibishwe katika hili na 
ipewe mda mfupi inavyoowezekana na ikilazimu wachukue hatua wenyewe kuzuru maeneo yale, 
kuzuru walalamishi kuwa hata kama ni kumwona yule ambaye anadai anamiliki sehemu ile, il i 
wawe na msimamo kama Kamati na  kuja kuele za Bunge hili, ili angalau Mhe shimiwa wa 
Bamburi na yeye aweze kukaa na amani na watu wake na kwamba amewajibi kia lile ambalo 
limetujiri . Lakini Mhe shim iwa Spika tabia ya Kamati kuandika barua na kusubiri jibu kutoka 
kwa idara, jibu likija asubuhi wanalileta saa nane alafu mwisho wa siku inaonekana upande wa 
pili wa serikali haijawajibika  katika Kamati zenyewe zinazembea . Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Makarani ) exited the Chair ] 
[The  Speaker (Hon. Khatri) in the Chair ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Thank you Hon ourable  Mwamwiri . Yes, Hon ourable  
Jacktone Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Ahsante Mhe shimiw a Spika , bado ninaomba kwa niaba ya Kamati  ya 
Ardhi ya kwamba  tupatiwe mda m fupi na tutaleta majibu haswa a lafu pia ni wajibu wa uongozi 
wa Bunge ya kwamba  baada ya miaka m iwili ikifika mupige msasa na muangalie wenye viti, ili 
wapatiwe wale ambao wana wajibika na baada ya miaka m iwili, baada ya kunyorosha l eba 
naweza kunyorosha  Ardhi … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spika nikiwa M wanachama katika Kamati hii na 
mwanachama mwenzangu kusimama, sijui kama atakuw a muwazi nimuelewe kama a nasema, 
Mwenyekiti wa Kamati yetu hafai ama ni mimi ndio nimemuelewa vibaya? Tafadhali.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Sijasema hivyo na hata mimi ndi o 
nimesimama mara tatu kutet ea Kamati yetu, kwa hivyo sijasema hivy o. Mimi ndio natetea 
Kamati ndio isipelekwe kwa Kamati ya Ad-Hoc, wewe kama m wanachama wetu umekaa hapo 
mimi nikitetea Kamati alafu unadakia d akia mambo …  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Kwa hivyo jifundishe kutulia, kuwa mtulivu.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana?  
 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa uongozi wako, mimi shida yangu ni kubwa na kazi 
yangu iliyonileta hapa ni ya kukutea  kila mtu na nataka kusema hivi  Mheshimiwa aliposimama 
ameongea hoja ya maana si ku tetea tu Kamati, ameongea kilicho kweli ya kwamba tuliandika 
barua na hatujajibiwa na Mhe shimiwa  Kiongozi wa Wengi, akatupa mwelekeo ambao ni wa 
maana ya  kwamba tuna kibali kwenda pa le. Sasa, ilikuwa ni Mheshimiwa akubali mashauri 
tuliyopewa, yeye anasema Mwenyekiti wetu hafai mpaka  kwa kuwa yeye ni wa l eba apewe. 
Mhe.Spika  kila Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti aliyechaguliwa hapa anafaa kuongoza Kamati na 
Mheshimiwa  Amriya Juma Boy anatosha . Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much . Yes, Hon ourable  Patrick Mbel le? 
Please.  
 
Hon. Mbel le: Mheshimiwa Spika kufikia sa a hizi nikisikiza wenye Kamati ya Ardhi  
wanavyo ongea  ni kama hii Kamati imechanganyikiwa kat ika swala hili la mambo ya ngu… 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika tunavyoongea hili ni swala ambalo ni swala dharura , swala nyeti 
ambalo linahusisha kina mama zangu, wajane, watoto, wazee watu ambao hivi sasa 
tunavyoongea  ni yule ambaye anasema anamiliki sha mba ameenda kutafuta akimiliki na kuweza 
kugawanya lile shamba. Kwa hivyo ni kiti ambacho kwa wiki ama miezi kadha, wale watu 
wangu watakuwa wanaweza fur ushwa . Sasa ikiwa leo hii Kamati imechanganyikiwa ndani ya 
Bunge, sijui kama wataweza kusaidia katika siku zijazo a ma itakuwaje ? Kwa  hivyo nakuomba 
Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwezekana itengezewe Kamati ya Ad-Hoc ama utafute njia mbadala ya 
kuweza kusaidia kuweza kupata suluhu ya ta tizo hili, kwa sababu  limekuwa donda sugu na ni 
jambo  ambalo tukiliacha, litakuwa ni  jambo ambalo litak uwa ni la aibu kwetu kama Bunge , 
kwetu kama serikali ya Kaunti . Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Members . Yes, who is the 
Vice -Chair of that Committee?  
 
[Loud consultation s] 
[Laughter ] 
 
Honourable  Nyundo…  
 
[Laughte r] 
 
Honourable  Ahmed  Khamis ? Ok. Yes, Honourable  Mwaka, are you a Member of that 
Committee?  
 
Hon. Mwa ka Bakari:  Naam  Bwana Spika . Nashukuru Bwa na Spika naona swala hili la 
ardhi  kila mtu anatungólea macho ; kwa kusema ukweli ni ukweli hatujaleta Ripoti ama kujibu hii 
statement ambayo imeletwa hapa, lakini ilikuwa tuko mapumziko ya kutosha nafikiri . Kwa 
sababu tumekaa nje karibu miezi miwili. Bwana Spik a, kama alivyosema mwenzangu wa 
Kamati, mwanachama mwenzangu hapa kwamba tutaileta ya uhakika tupeni wiki m bili na 
kusema kwamba M weny ekiti wetu ha wajibiki ana wajibika, Kamati yetu ina wajibika na sisi tuko 
tayari kuleta majibu ambayo ni wa uhakika ba ada ya wiki mbili .  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika naomba .  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Prischilla Mumba please.  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba) : Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika . Nilikuwa nataka kujuza 
Nyumba hii ya kuwa  hata kama tulikuwa likizo Mhe shimiwa Spika umetu hurusu kuwa Kamati 
zilikuwa zinaendelea na kazi na Kamati ilikuwa ina wajibu kuendelea na kazi na ule md a ambao 
sisi tumekaa katika hili Jumba, tume pelekwa katika usomi wa kujielewa kufanya hizi kazi . 
Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Wengi amejaribu kueleza  majukumu yetu na k ueleza ni kwa nini 
ingelikuwa sa a hizi watu washafika hata kwenye site, ya kuwa h ili jambo Mh eshimiwa Spika 
liangaziwe kwa umakini,  kama unavyojua tetesi kubwa katika Kaunti ya Mombasa ni kuhusu 
ardhi na ikiwa kuna mahali kuna furusha za ardhi huwa Mhe shimiwa Spika kuna fujo, kuna vita, 
kuna mauwaji na kuna maafa yanaweza kutokea pale . Kwa hivyo si si kama viongozi 
Mheshimiwa Spika huwa ni wakati mgumu sana kuwa ha ta kulala huwezi kulala manake grupu 
litakuf uata pale kwako ndani ya nyumba.   
Mheshimiwa Spika kuna Kamati hapa ambazo zinatakikana ziwajibike na ziwe zinafanya 
kaze yake kwa wa kati unaofaa ; hapa hatuko hapa kulenga mtu, hatuko hapa kulenga mtu binafsi, 
kila mtu hapa anapenda mwenzak e, lakini ni wakati tuwajibike waheshimiwa wenzangu u lipo 
pewa uongozi wa mamlaka wa hili Jumba Mhe shimiwa Spika, hukutup a mamlaka ya kuwa 
tuambie tuwe Wenyekiti  tuwe viongozi alafu twende tukazembee katika Kamati zetu. 
Hatukusema kuna mtu amba ye anatakikana ama hatakikan a, lakini ni wajibu saizi kila 
mwenyekiti wawajibike  jamani. Sisi tuliyochaguliwa nyanjani tunajua ule moto tunaopata kama 
viongozi, tunajua moto ni mkali kule chini, tusiteteani hapa kutaka kufurahishana uso na ilhali 
kule chini kunaharibika. Mheshimiwa Mbel le ni mtu amechaguliwa na viongozi na watu, wakati 
wiki ya kwanza anaonekana hakuna kitu kinafanyika, ataonekana amezembea hakuzembea?  
Sasa, sisi tukizungumza hapa ni kuwa tunasema mtu hawezi kufanya kazi? Ni mtu awajibike na 
wajibu wake na kazi ya ardhi ni namba moja katika Jumba hili,  iangaliwe nendeni kwa site, 
nendeni mkatulize kwa Mhe shimiwa  Mbel le na wengine nao wafuate kusaidi a. Jumba hili 
tumezembea kwa mambo mengi tusizungumze mengi hapa Mhe shimiwa Spika ni wakati tuamke 
sasa.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa . Yes, I thought you were on a point of 
information?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Naomba kumalizia Mhe shimiwa Spika , naona kir anja wa Bunge 
amekuwa mkali mpaka pressure  yataka kutoka. Kwa kweli jambo la mambo ya ardhi ni jambo 
muhimu sana kwa hivyo Bwana Spika mimi kama mwanachama tunachukua uhakika, tumesema 
wiki mbili lakini sasa kwa sababu naona kumewaka moto wiki moja Mhe shimiwa Spika … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Wiki moja Mhe shimiwa Spika Mungu akitujalia hapa jumanne mtaona kazi yetu ya 
Kamati ya  Ardhi . Naomba Nyumba hii muweze kutuchukulia kwamba sisi ni binadamu, na pia 
mwanadamu akikosa akirekebi shwa ukubali makosa yake . Kwa hivyo kama  Kamati ya Ardhi 
tumekubali  makosa hayo na tutayachukulia haraka iwezekanavyo . Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Waheshimiwa wa Kamati ya Ardhi .  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 Nafikiri munaweza kuomba wiki moja, hii statement  imeweza kuja sa a hii ni zaidi ya miezi 
miwili ambayo iko katika hapa Bunge na nafikiri ikiwa k weli mumeandikia wizara ya ardhi , 
kuuliza hayo maswala muko na  barua zenu nakala  sijui kama muko  nazo hizo barua za 
kuon yesha manake tulikuwa tunatarajia kam a wanachama wa  Kamati  mungekuwa m uko na 
barua za kuon yesha kwamba muliandikia Wizara na hamjapata hayo maj ibu. Kwa hio kwenda 
mbele Mheshim iwa Jacton e Madialo you have a sked for one week, we will give you one we ek so 
that we get the response  na hapa tuko na ile gari pia iko hapa  chini van ambayo tuliinunua kazi 
yake ni hiyo…  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Nyinyi kama Kamati  munaweza tumia hiyo van mukaenda kwenye hapo site mukaangalia 
hata ofisi ya Ardhi  haiko mbali nafikiri iko hapo pia munaweza mukapitia pale mukamuona 
waziri ama Chief Officer  mukubalian e kuhusu hilo swala na wiki ijayo jumatano muwe  na hayo 
majibu, tafadhali  wawajibike kidogo Waheshimiwa. Thank you very much, yes Clerk next orde r 
please . 
 
STATEMENT  
BLO CKAGE OF PUBLIC ACCESS ROAD NEAR KIEMBENIBAPTIST CHURCH  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri): Yes, again Committee on L ands, Housing and Urban 
Planning. Yes Members, any Member from that Committee? Yes , Honourable  Allen Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker as you can see am not  up by choice and for sure I would also 
plead with this Hon ourable  House to gi ve us until our next sitting , hopefully next week so that 
we can s it with our C hair. It is clear that it  is very much visible in this House that the Lands 
Committee is not very a ctive or somebody has said it is over worked so Hon ourable  Speaker, this 
is my humble plea that you give us up to Tuesday next week th en we come with all the replies. 
Thank you , Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Katana. Hon ourable  Members for 
Lands Committee if I may ask, when was the last time yo u sat as a Committee ; do you even 
remember when the last time was? ! 
 
Hon. Katana:  Honourable  Spea ker, pers onally I have been away  for CAF meetings but 
maybe Hon ourable  Members ca n tell me, can be  upstanding to answer this question.  
 
  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Because with the way am seeing how you are responding it 
seems like you have not sat down soon as a Committee ! Any way we have agreed one week 
right? ! 
 
Hon. Katana:  Yes. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Please next week by Wednesday, let us have the respo nse 
please Hon ourable  Members.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Most obliged.  
 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Clerk next orde r? 
 
STATUS OF MWAKIRUNGE DUMPSITE  
 
Yes, Honourable  Juma Mwalimu Chairperso n Committee on Environment and Solid Waste 
Management . Yes, Honourable  Makanga please.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand  to give a response to the statement on 
status of Mwakirunge dump site, a statement that was sought by Hon ourable  Mwinyi Mtoto on 
seventh June at 2 :30p.m . Honourable  Speaker , unlike the other Committee  this is a reasonable 
Committee, with people full of wisdom  and commitment ready to serve the great people  of 
Mombasa County. Mr. Speaker Sir , as you understand  environment as a department is one of the 
key area s where H is Excellency  the Governor has committed too much resources ; time and 
energy to resolve issues to do with dumpsite and therefore I want to applaud each and every 
Member of the Committee in Environment for work well done. Mr. Speaker , the statement was 
raised as early as  stated on 7th June an d the Hon ourable  Members wanted the following matters 
to be  addressed;  
 1. The Current condition of the Mw akirunge dumpsite along with detailed information on 
the plans in place by the County government of Mombasa to address this pressing issue.  
2. The proposed timeline s for impl ementing viable solutions and any necessary measures 
to prevent similar occurrences in future.  
Mr. Speaker it is important to know that the administration of H is Excellency  the Governor 
has committed to convert the dumpsite in r eference which is Mwakirunge into a sanitary land 
field before the expiry of the first term and of cause befor e we start the second term . Sanitary 
land field are considered to be comparable to the environmental safe guards and standards set 
globally. The department of Environment an d Solid Waste Management and National 
Environmental Ma nagement Authority that is NEMA  has both resolved to convert the dumpsite 
into a land field so as to address environmental harm posed by the facility. Mr. Speak er Sir, I 
would as k the Hon ourable  Members in this House to check the document that have been 
supplied to them, there is an attachment that is why I said this Committee has done a good job, 
on the attachment we have a matrix , an imple mentation matrix giving us time lines, who is 
responsibl e, the performance indicators and their status .  
Mr. Spe aker, if you look at that matrix, it is clear that so far, the boundary identification of 
the existing dumpsite has been completed and that has happened  in the final quarter  of the year 
2022 -2023. The second item is fencing of Mwakirunge dumpsite ; this has started in the financial 
year 2023/ 2024, the department is working towards having a fence around that dumpsite that 
process is ongoing Mr. Speaker.   The third thing that has happened is that  we are looking 
forward to provision  of safe disposal of solid waste while protecting human health, Mr. Speaker 
that is pending because it has issues to do with procurement and therefore,  we have to follow the 
procedur es according to PFM Act. Mr. Spea ker, further we are looking forward to having a 
construction of office block at the dumpsite, again that o ne is pending ; the process has been 
initiated currently in the procurement stage . Mr. Speaker , when you go to the last page of that 
document without  taking much time is to inform this House, because thi s cannot  happen  without 
coming up with a Committee . This will be  a Committee in relation to how the management of 
the dumpsite will be done, the Committee Mr. Speaker has alrea dy been formed and will proc eed 
with the sensitization before embarking on their mandate . Therefore Mr. Speaker as a Committee 
we stand committed to the course and we will continue working with the Member for 
Mwakirunge and any other Member who has an illegal dumpsite in this House .  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 This is  to ensure t hat our people live in a dignified environment. Theref ore Mr. Speaker, 
that is the position of the Committee and again thank you for allowing us to present.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very  much Hon ourable Member an d thank you for 
the good work as a Committee, keep it up…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
I hope other Ccommitt ees will follow suit . Yes , you can do that Hon ourable  Members. Yes , 
Honourable  Allen are you in that Committee as well?  
 
[Honourable  Katana spoke off mic rophone ] 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Under whi ch Standing O rder?  
 
Hon. Katana:  It’s not in orde r when you are speaking and the Member interrupt s you, so 
this Hon ourable  Member is not in order.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes , Clerk  next order please ? 
 
COMMUN ITY HEALTH POLICY IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogutu Chairperson Committee on Health services, please respond 
to the statement.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank y ou Mr. Sp eaker. Mr. Speaker befo re I give the response, I have heard 
Honourable  Frankline Makanga brag ging on the good work the Committee on Environment is 
doing. Mr. Speaker , equally the Committee on Health is doing well and as Chai r of the 
Committee am very much proud of the Committee because whenever we are called to upon to 
give a response to a statement or any other assignment  we normally do it within the record time . 
Back to the statement Mr. Speaker, I wish to respond to the state ment requested in th is 
Honourable  House by Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omon di, the Member for Airport Ward on 
Wednesday 7th June, 2023 at 2 :30p.m. during the 41st sitting of the County Assembly . Mr. 
Speaker , the Hon ourable  Member sought a statement on whether the County government of 
Mombasa has a Community Health policy.  Mr. Speaker , the County Chief Officer for the P ublic 
Health responded via letter reference no. MCG/COPH/PROG/146 dated 27th June, 2023. Mr. 
Speaker , she responded that the Mombasa County department h as not developed a  commun ity 
Health strategy policy, it is guided by the nation al policy, the Kenya Community Health strategy 
policy ; however the department is at an  advance d stage of developing the County Health 
Strategy Bill which has been pass ed by the cabinet and on 7th it will be taken for public 
participation, thereafter it will be brought to this Hon ourable  House . Iam therefore  requesting 
that when the Bill is brought to the House, we pass it with record time Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
for the time.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Ogutu for your response 
and ag ain keep it up even with your Comm ittee for the good work.  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 Yes Clerk, next Order please?  
 
MOTION S  
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF MR . JIBRIL MAALIM  NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
CHIEF OFFICER POLICY AND PLANNING  
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri, please move th e Motion.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I 
beg to move the following Motion . 
 
THAT this Hon ourable  House adopt the Report on the vetting  of Mr. Jibril Maalim the 
nominee for the position of Chief Officer Policy an d planning as laid on the Table on 
Tuesday 2 5th July, 2023 . 
 
With your permission Mr. S peaker , I beg to ask Hon ourable  Kibwana Swaleh to second the 
Motion.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker, I do second.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri and 
Honourable  Kibwana for moving the Motion. Hon ourable  Members , I now propose the question 
that the Motion by H onourable  Athman Mwamwiri on adoption of Report on the vetti ng of Mr. 
Jibril Maalim nominee for the position of Chief Officer Pol icy and planning b e considered by 
this Hon ourable  House in t he same terms as moved . 
 
[Question propos ed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri Vic e-Chairperson Committee  on A ppointment s, 
please make your contribution to the Motion.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker on the 
delegated power s bestowed upon me to this Committee, I wish to urge the Hon ourable  House 
that pursuant to section 7 (8)  of the Public  Appointmen t Act of the County Assemblies, the 
Committ ee observed that th e nominee met  the integrity threshold, the nominee demonstrated 
knowledge of typical administrative a nd technical issues touching on the office he was 
nominated to serve. He also has the requisite abilities, academic qualification and profession al 
exper ience to be approved for the appointment of Chief Officer for the department of Policy and 
Planning. Mr. Speaker , this being among the critical  docket, I urge this House that we approve 
this Report , we approve the nominee so that he can ass ist in the policy d eveloping planning so 
that we move forward as a County. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much . Yes, Honourable  Juma Manuari from 
Bofu Ward please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwanza nimsh ukuru Mwenyezi 
Mungu kwa juma hili na  kutujaalia sote kuf ika hapa wakati huu wa mchana ; nichukue nafasi hii 
nimuunge mkono nd ugu yangu Kiongozi wa Wengi. 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 Katika maeneo yetu kule Mombasa y a wazungu waliita South, yeye ni jiran i yangu kwa 
kutuletea nafasi  ya kijana wetu, ndugu yetu Bwana  Jibril Maalim  awe katibu mkuu wa sera na 
mipangilio ya jiji la Mombasa. Mheshimiwa Spika , tukimtizama ndugu yetu Jibril Maalim 
kwanza ni kijana ambaye sasa hivi akili yake kidogo kulingana na umri wake tunaona imekomaa 
na tukiangalia katika rekodi zake za kazi, twashukuru Mungu kumuona sasa hivi ameingia 
darasani kupania kusomea PHD kwa lugha y a kimombo na vile vile katika mw elekeo wake wa  
kikazi tunaona kuna  baadhi ya ka zi ambazo yeye ana uzoef u nazo na ana  tajriba ya  kutosha ya 
kuwa hii Mombasa yetu anaweza kusimama vizuri na kuhakikisha mipangilio katika ofisi ya 
Gavana na m ipangilio ya jiji letu la Mombasa, mipangilio inakuwa vizuri .  
Kwa hivyo nimpe kongole Gavana kwa kutuletea  ndugu yetu huyu Jibril Maalim i li 
Mombasa yetu iwe itabadilika na tukiangalia k atika nidhamu zake katika rekodi yake ya 
nidhamu, hatujawahi kuona tetesi ama kesi yoyote kutoka ripoti z ile za uchunguzaji wa nidhamu 
ya mwanadamu kuwa wametu letea wakatuambia kuwa huyu Bwan a hana kasoro a u huyu Bwana 
kunatatizo mahali f ulani, ameibia mtu ama amepora mtu. Mheshimiwa Spika hata tukiangalia ule 
utajiri a liona o na tukiangalia ule muda aliohudumu katika hizi nafasi zake t atu ambazo 
zimeelekezwa hapa  tunaona inaendana nae, kwa hivyo basi twasema kwamba huyu ndugu yetu 
anakula halali yake na Mungu amsaidie . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naom ba Bunge hili 
Ndugu zangu tusimameni kidete tumpitishe  ndugu yetu ili hizi kazi zisonge mbele na sote 
tubari kiwe . Ahsante sana.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Manuari from Bofu Ward . 
Yes, Honourable  Fatma Swaleh from Ka dzandani Ward, ple ase make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Fatma Swaleh:  Ahsante sana M heshimwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii . Vile 
vile namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu muumba mbingu na ardhi pasi na kizuizi ; mimi vile vile 
nimesimama kuunga mkono taarifa ili oletwa na Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri. Mheshimiwa Spika , 
ukiangalia taarifa hii upande wa elimu, kijana huyu ni msomi na vile vile  naona hii nafasi 
inamf aa na vile vile naona yeye ndie atakuwa bora kuweza kuongozana na Mheshimiwa Gavana 
na vile vile ni kijana mdogo ambaye aki li zake zita kuwa bado hazijachoka . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika sina  budi na muunga mkono mia fil mia . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Prischilla Mumba please make 
your contribution, the Majority Chief Whip.  
 
The Majority Chief Whip (Hon. Mumba ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika na mimi 
nimesimama hapa kuunga mkono kidete na kutoa taarifa yangu katika kuunga mkon o kwa 
sababu nime angalia katika nakala yale mambo ambayo Kamati hii ili orodhesha na nikiwa nina 
imani kwa sababu nina jua Kamati hii ni Kamati ya nguvu ikiongozwa na wewe Spika wetu 
ambaye ninaju a una busara kubwa wakati unaangalia utendaji kazi wa viongozi ambao 
tunawaweka katika u ongozi. Nina imani kuwa mulipiga msasa vizuri na mukachagua kiongozi 
chipukizi amba e ataweza kufanya kazi, akiandamana na super waziri wetu ambaye tunaju a 
katika hichi kitengo amba ye pia ni kijana chipukizi . Kwa hivyo w atakapokuwa wakifanya hizi 
kazi, watasaidiana katika shughuli nyingi na tunaju a kazi zitafanyika, tunaju a zinaambatana 
katika majukumu yao . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13 Hivyo basi  tunapatia viongozi ambao wana  umri wa kufanya kazi ili Mombasa yetu iweze  
kuonekana na mabadiliko. Tume patia u ongozi watu ambao wana  umri mdogo na watakuwa 
wana  mbio za kufanya kazi ili wamsaidie Gavana kwa sababu tumekaa kwa muda tukiwa 
hatujawaweka katika kazi . Na tuna ona kuna majukumu mengine kidogo yamekwama lakini tuna  
imani ikiwa leo tutapitisha kijana h uyu aweze kufanya kazi  nina imani kuwa sasa kasi itashika 
moto na mimi nimesimama kuunga kidete, kidete bila kuteteleka, sasa nataka kuona k azi 
iendelee na watu waendelee kufanya kazi bila kusitasita. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Prischilla . Yes, 
Honourable  Hamisi Mbaya?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya:  Ahsante sama Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Kwanza 
kabisa nimshukuru Mwen yezi Mungu , pili ni washukuru Waheshimiwa wenza kwa ku weza 
kujumuika kwa hichi kipi ndi cha baada ya chakula cha mchana . Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi 
nitaunga mkono hoja hii kwa asili mia tisaini na tisa kwa mia. Mheshimiwa S pika, ukiangali a nia 
hasa ya Mheshimiwa Gavana Abdulswamad Sharif Nassir ana  nia nzur i na wakaazi wa 
Mombasa Kaunti . Mheshimiwa Spika , ukiangalia jopo ambalo liliweza kupiga msasa huyu 
ndugu yetu kuna watu ambao wana  uzoefu katika Bunge hili ; tuna kila sababu ya kwamba kama 
wenye wal ipiga msasa huyu ndugu yetu Bwana Jibril Maalim basi tuna haki zaidi kuona kama ni  
nafasi nzur i ya kuweza kuunga mkono kwa sababu pia nia na madhumuni ya wale walipiga 
msasa ni kuona ndugu zetu wa Mom basa Kaunti wameweza kupata hudum a ama  mipangilio 
mizuri ili Mombasa Kaunti yetu iweze kuendelea mbele. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasema 
ahsante sana , nimeunga mkono kwa asilimia 99  kwa 100 . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Mbaya from Timbwan i 
Ward. Yes, Honourable  Moraa Milka , nominated MCA please make your contribution . 
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Sp eaker for giving me this opportunity. I stand to support the 
Report on the vetting of the nominee for the position C hief Officer Policy and  Planning Mr. 
Jibril Maalim. I want to start by congratulating the C ommittee that sat to vet him and c ame up 
with this Report chaired by you H onourable  Speaker and Majority Leader . You considered and 
check ed through his documents and on clearance and compliance requirement of EACC, HELB, 
KRA and others and you found him clean.  Looking a t his academic qualifications , the nominee 
has a Doctor of philosophy … no, he is still undertaking meaning has already having a Bachelor’s 
degree and also Masters , well schoo led person wh om we need in this department . He has enough 
knowledge , looking at his employment record h e has worked for about 20 years and that is good 
experience.  
We remember what the President said yesterday ; some of the people that he has given 
work could not even respond to some of th e queries raised to them , but when we have someone 
who has this kind of experience i n order that person is knowledgeable enough to respond mat ters 
to his docket and act de cisevly when it calls for.  He also responded to que stions appropriately  
and if you look at the way he responded to question s on ensuring the policies and plans 
developed by the County government of Mombasa are financially viable, he stated that ‘policies 
are subjected to public participation to engage the public input in decis ion making and give full 
to public input in decision m aking’ . I think that is very key because m ost of the time when the 
public participate in such kind of gathering is when we get to have the real feeling of what is o n 
the ground and now that he ha s real ly properly touched on that one . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 I give him thumbs up and we hope that we are going to have more vibrant public 
participation plan by him and his docket so that we get what is in the ground . In that regard , then 
I want to urge my colleagues that this is the ri ght person to have in that docket so that we can 
have part o f what of  what is in the Governor’ s manifesto on the delivery of se rvices to the people 
of Mombasa. T hank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.   Khatri) : Thank you very much yes Hon ourable  Leila Nyache from 
Kipevu Ward, please give your contribution?  
 
Hon. Nyache : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi kuweza kuniona niweze 
kuchangia. Kwanza namshukuru  Mwenyezi  Mungu kwa siku ya leo ; pili nataka nipongeze 
Kamati ili oleta Ripoti hii katika  Bunge hili. Mheshimiwa Spika , wewe ukiwa Mwenyekiti tu na 
imani ya kwamba huu msasa mlioupiga hapa k wa Bwana Jibril ni  wa kisawasawa kabisa vile 
tunavyokutambua kazi yako.  Mheshimiwa Spika , kwanza nataka n ianze na huyu kijana miaka 
yake kwanza alizaliwa 1985 n i kijana mdogo sana ambaye sas a hivi ana  miaka 38 , huyu 
yuwaonekana anaweza kufanya kazi maana ana  nguvu tayari . Kwa hivyo ni  kijana ambaye 
anaweza kuchapa kazi kisawasawa pasi na pingamizi yoyote … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Jambo lengine Mheshimiwa Spika … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
Nataka unilinde Mheshimiwa Spika…   
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Makanga?  
 
Hon. Makanga : Mheshimiwa Spika labda Mheshimiwa wa Kipevu aelezee Bunge ni  
nguvu gani hizi anazosema  kwa sababu anasisitiza s ana tena huku akitingisha…kwa hivyo 
kidogo Mheshimiwa atuelezee ni n guvu gani kwa sababu ile ofisi ni  ya kutumia akili na hekima 
si nguvu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Milka Moraa?  
 
Hon. Ngare : Mr. Speaker , I was also querying on the same b ecause h aving what she is 
referring as nguvu  maybe nee ds manual work , referring to manual work.  We are not expecting  
Mr. Jibril to come do manual work w e are actually expecting him to use his brain s, his 
experience s and whatever he has acquired to give services , So, let Hon ourable  Leila of Kipevu 
Ward actually ex plain what she meant by that , ‘nguvu ’. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana from Shanzu Ward?  
 
Hon. Katana : Mheshimiwa waheshimiwa waliosimama hawako sawa kwa sab abu 
wanatupotezea muda hata huko kufikiria pia kuanhit aji nguvu Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsan te.  
 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Leila, please?  
 
Hon. Nyache : Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Katana kwa kuweza kunite tea kwa sababu 
waheshimiwa hapa kazi yao kufikiria tu hizo nguvu  zengine hawafikirii nguvu za kazi. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kumaanisha kijana ana  nguvu ni kijana bado 
ni mdogo na ana  umri mdogo. Kwa hivyo huwezi kulinganisha kijana wa miaka 38 na mtu 
mzima mwenye mia ka 58 , nguvu zao hazitakuwa sawa na kuna utofaut i wa ki kazi, unaona haya?  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika nikiangalia kwa upande wa masomo, kijana huyu Jibril Maalim ni  
kijana ambaye aliyekuwa ameelimika na yuko  na sasa hivi anachukulia PHD ya sheria,  kutoka 
chuo kikuu cha Jomo Ken yatta University of Agriculture , Technology na pia yuko na Masters 
Degree in strategic management kutoka chuo  kikuu cha  Mount Kenya  na Bachelors D egree in  
Comme rce kutoka chuo kikuu cha  Moi. Kwa h ivyo ni kijana ambaye ameelimika na kulingana 
na hii kazi tu nayomtafutia sasa hivi na inalingana na haya masomo ya ke. Mheshim iwa Spika , 
kwa upande  wa rekodi yake ya kufanya kazi, a na uzoefu wa miaka 20 kufanya kazi za nje na 
pamoja za serikali. Kwa hivyo kijana huyu anaone kana ni m chapa kazi  na tukimpa hii kazi 
ataichapa kisawasawa. Mheshimiwa Spika pia … 
 
[Interuption )] 
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika naomba unilinde ! 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order Members!  
 
Hon. Nyache : Nilinde Mh eshimiwa Spika  tafadhali .  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order Hon ourable  Member! Wind up please Hon ourable  
Leila , malizia ! 
 
Hon. Nyache : Sawa Mheshi miwa Spika. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , kikazi naona yuko 
sawa hata pia umiliki wake wa mali naona ni size yake kulingana na umri wake. Mheshimi wa 
Spika mimi naomba tu Jumba hili waweze kumpitisha huyu kijan a wetu Jibril Maalim aweze 
kuwa Chief Ofisaa wa policy and planning  katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa na aweze kuchapa 
kazi mara moja kama vile nimesema anaweza kuchapa kazi na nimchapa kazi kweli mimi 
nawaambia. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spik a nimesimama kuunga mkono.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana from Shanzu 
Ward, please make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Katana : Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hakika nisipokushukuru nitakuwa mimi  si mwingi 
wa fadhila kwa kunipa nafasi hii. Mheshimiwa Spika sit aki kuwa kama yule bwana aliyeambiwa 
kwamba utakachoitisha basi huyu mwenzako nitampa viwili sasa yule bwana aliona akiitisha 
gari mwe nziwe atapata gari mbili . Basi akasema naomba unitoboe jicho ili mwenzake 
akatobolewa  mawili mwenz ake akawa kipofu , sasa nisingetoa mfano huo ni kwamba s itaki 
kuongea mengi maana afisaa  huyu aliyeletwa mbele yetu ni rafiki yangu sana na ingekuwa ni rai 
yangu waheshimiwa wenza tukaweze kumuunga mkon o ili akaweze kupata kibarua hiki .  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16 Kama nilivyosikia ana  nguvu za kuchapa kazi , kitu m bali ya kwamba ni rafiki yangu  
namuona hali zake ni kama zangu lakini mwenzangu kumbe yuko vizuri kima hiki cha milioni 
15. Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono ili  tupate mchapa kazi 
atakayesaidiana na m aafisaa weng ine kusongeza serikali yetu na jimbo letu mbele . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiw a Spika. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much . Hamida Noor, please make your 
contribution . 
 
Hon. Noor : Thank you M r. Speaker . I stand to support the Motion as I have gone through 
the Report that was brought in front of us for Mr. Jibril Maalim and first I want to congratulate 
the Committee Members who had vetted him. Mr. Speaker , this is the kind of person that we 
need in our County government so that he can  do for us policies that the County needs . Mr. 
Speaker , we have seen that the nominee has a track rec ord of 20 years work experience that is 
which we need and his performance in his education is well advanced  and with those few 
remarks I do support the Motion. T hank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much . Yes, Honourabl e Abdul rahman Husein 
from Old Town/Mji wa  Kale Ward, please make your contribution . 
 
Hon. Abdilrahman Abdulkadir : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me an opportunity to 
contribute to  this Motion . However , Mr. Speaker before I make any contribution,  I declare 
conflict of interest ; I am ver y familiar with this candidate , he is a friend that I have known for the 
past 15 years , he is  an individual who is very close to me so after de claring the conflict of 
interest perhaps you will guide me whether I can still go ahead and make my contribution.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, of c ourse  you can contribut e because you are 
contributing o n the Motion.  
 
Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkad ir: Thank you Mr. Speaker for your guidance. Mr. 
Speak er, first and for emost  I would like to co mment on the good job done by the Committee on 
Appointment s, and the able Chair Hon ourable  Speaker of this House for a job well done . This is 
a very comprehensive Report which is detailed and Mr. Speaker Sir I am a friend of this 
Committee and I was present in this particular vetting session. Mr. Speaker , I was pleased with 
the variety and the level of the questioning that was happening on that par ticular day, much to 
my surpris e the nominee excelled marvellously. One thing that ou t of this document is on the 
clearance and compliance  requirement s; of all the Committee  Report s I have seen this House. I 
have not seen any that told us the respon se they got from different institutions . For example , this 
one tells us that the EACC wrote to them, there is also a response of EACC attached here, there 
is a response of KRA attached here as well, there is also a response by the police clearance 
certificate  that is attached . I could not find this doc uments that are in the other document that I 
have seen . Honourab le Speaker , going to his academic and professiona l qualification s this is an 
individual who is currently undertaking PHD in the field of law. He holds a Masters  degree in 
strategic management. He has a Bachelor’s degree in commerce  Mr. Speaker and you can tell 
this is an individual that has been on different style of stu dies and his employment record is 
impeccable and his net worth is something close to Ksh.15M illion . Honourable  Speaker , again 
something unique about him is the pro-bono  and charity work  that he has done , the nomi nee 
engaged in the construction of a mosque.  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17 The nominee  is indeed an individual who is very concerned with welfares of our society , 
and w ith those few remarks Hon ourable  Speaker  I stand to support this Motion. T hank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Abdulrahman Hu ssein. 
Yes, Honourable  Solomon Ngugi , please make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Ngugi:  Ahsante s ana Mheshimiwa Spika . M imi Solomon Ngugi mwenye 
kuwakilisha walemavu pia mimi naunga mkono. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Honourabl e Bernard Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Ogutu : Thank you Mr . Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker , first of all I would like to take this 
opportunity to cong ratulate you and your able Committee members for this elaborate and well 
detailed report Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , personally I have not interacted with Mr. Jibril Maalim 
in anyway, but having gone through the Report Mr. Speaker,  I found it that Mr. Jibril is well 
qualified for this job, so I ha ve no option but to support this motion . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Thank you very much . Yes, Honourable  Morgan Matsak i 
from Mtopanga Ward and Leader of Minority Party?  
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki ): Ahsan te Mheshimiwa Spika ; kwanza kwa 
kunipa nafasi hii , pia nawashukuru nyinyi Waheshimiwa wenza kwa kukubali huyu Jibril 
Maalim. Pia mimi sina kubwa la kuongea zaidi ila tu ninaunga mkono kama vile Waheshimiwa 
wenza wameweza kuunga mkono. Kwa sababu mengi yameongewa na kwa kweli ukisema 
upande wa eli mu yeye yuko sawa na nina  matumaini kwamba ata wafanyia kazi wana Mombasa 
Kaunti. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank  you very much Hon ourable  Morgan . Yes, Honourable  
Florence Kachumbo , nominated?  
 
Hon. Kachumbo : Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity to air my views. I would 
like to congratulate this Committee for the job well done . With your guidance  Mr. Speaker 
looking at this Report you can see how qualified this person is , Mr. Jibril Maalim how qualified 
he is . When you look at his employment record,  I believe someone who ha s an experience  of 20 
years is someone who is qualified to do this work and also, he has a professi onal associations 
membership, he is a Certified Public Accountant  which I believe he will be able to do his job 
well. So, I urge this House to support this Motion and agree with this Report. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much . Yes, Honourable Arwa  Ojala please 
make your contribution . 
 
Hon. Ojala : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this 
Motion. Befo re I proceed , I would like to congratulate you and your team Mr. Speaker for a job 
well don e. If I go direct to my contribution Maalim Jibril, I have gone through this Report Mr. 
Speaker Sir and I am convinced that Jibril Maalim is qualified to this position. Even if you see 
the way he re sponded  to the questions during the vetting you can see when he was asked the 
measures,  he will take to ensure reve nue foc used are accurate and reliable . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 18 The nominee stated clearly , ‘that the ICT is the key an d he will sure development of a 
better digitalization system ’. Again, on issues he will handle the situation wh ere the County 
government of Mombasa plan s are in  conflict wit h national or international policy or plans Mr. 
Speaker and as you can see the nominee said, ‘the law is the guiding principle  and by giving a 
dialogue a chance between the conflicting entities by reviewing the policy to become acceptable 
to all’. Mr. Speaker , I stand to support the Motion. Thank you, Mr . Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much Arwa Ojala Pamela , nominated MCA 
for you contribution. Yes , Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri you may reply to the Motion. 
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spik a. Mheshimiwa 
Spika nita kuwa mchache wa fadhla kama sita washukuru Waheshimiwa wenza kwa kuweza 
kuchangia lakini zaidi mchango wao umekuwa chanya kwamba wameweza kuunga mkono hoja 
hii. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika ni  matumaini yangu kuwa punde ut akapouliza  swali katika 
hoja hii kuwe za kuungama na ndugu yetu Jibril Maalim kuweza kupata fursa hii ya  kutumikia 
serikali tukufu ya Mombasa katika majukumu ya sera na mipango Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante 
Mheshimi wa Spika na nashukuru Waheshimiwa wenza.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much  again Honourable  Members for your 
contribution towards the Motion and Hon ourable  Members I stand to put the question that the 
Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri on adoption of Report o n Mr. Jibril Maalim , nominee 
for the position of Chief Officer Policy and Planning  be considered by this Hon ourable  House in 
the same term s as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
And the Motion by Hon ourable Athman Mwamwiri on the vetting of nom inee for the 
position of Chief Officer Policy and Planning Mr. Jibril Maalim is adopted by this Hon ourable  
House.  Yes, Clerk next Order please?  
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF MS . GLORIA MWASI THE NOMINEE FOR THE 
POSITION OF CHIEF OFFICER FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Kibwa na Swaleh Baya Chairpe rson 
Committee on Finance Budget and A ppropriation please move the Motion.   
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker  I beg to move the following 
Motion:  
THAT, this House adopts the Report on th e vetting of Ms. Gloria Mwasi, the Nominee for 
the position of Chief Officer, Finance and Economics Planning as I laid on the Table on 
Tuesday,  25th July, 2023.  
I will ask Hon ourable  Kushe , who i s a Member of F inance to second . Thank you.  
 
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : I second.  
 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 19 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Members. Hon ourable  
Members , I now propose the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Kibwana Swaleh, on 
adoption of Report on the vetting of Ms. Gloria Mwas i, the Nominee for the position of Chief 
Officer, Finance and Economics Planning be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same  
terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh Chairperson Committee on Finance Budget and 
Appropriation, please make y our contribution to the Motion.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Once again thank you Hon ourable  Speaker . Honourable  Speaker , 
I would be very few in words regarding the Nominee Ms. Gloria Mwasi. Hon ourable  Speaker , as 
the Chair of Finance Committee and the Committee we did a job well don e! When you look at 
the qualificat ions of Madam Gloria Mwasi it  speaks for itself ; the nominee is a Member of the 
ICPA(K)  which is a body dealing with accounts. Honourable  Speaker , when  we also look at the 
employment record s, she has experience of 15 years ; both public as well as private s o havin g 
work ed both in the  public a s well as private  sectors gives her much exposure to work on various 
areas on matter regarding public as well as the private sector. Hon ourable  Speaker , when we 
went through the vetting process , the nominee was very honest in submission and she was very 
happy when it came to  the issue of the budget cycle because  most of the people dealing with 
these document s must be a ware of the  budget cycle as it is an  area that is very impor tant. If 
somebody has no knowledge of the budget cycle , it means he has no knowledge of finance and 
this sometimes give s us a lot of problem . Hon ourable  Speaker , the nominee also answered our 
questions fluently a nd she was able to give rea sonable opinion s on many issues ; amongst which 
was on  the pending bills. So, Hon ourable  Speaker I found the chemistry between the nominee 
who is the Chief Officer Finance and also the Coun ty Executive Member for F inance will be 
positive  for the County and we hope  that the y would b ring sanity when it comes to issue of 
finance in this County. Hon ourable  Speaker , I urge the Committee Members as well as the 
Assembly , the Honourable  House to support this Motion as well as approve  the nomin ation  of 
Mada m Gloria Mwasi . Thank you , Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you very much Hon ourable  Kibwana Swaleh . Yes, 
Honourable  Abdulrahman Hussein please, make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity 
to have my input on this Motion  being a Member of this Committee . As a very active Member I 
can add  that I have no otherwise but to agree with the Report tabled here today by our 
Committee and stand in support with my able Chair Hon ourable  Kibwana Swaleh and 
Honourable  Ham ida Noor as well as my co lleague Hon ourable  Fatma Swaleh Kushe. 
Honourable  Speaker , I support the content s of this Report and I urge my fellow colleagues to 
agree with this Committee, we di d a marvellous job and when you put the question, we wil l 
shout to the top of our lungs. T hank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much yes Hon ourable  Morgan Matsaki, 
leader of Minority party? Please make your contribution.  
 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 20 The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa nafasi hii . Pia 
nashukuru Kamati mimi ni kiwa mmoja wao, nawashukuru pia Waheshimiwa wenza, nina 
matumaini makubwa sana wataikubali. Langu sitakuwa mwingi  wa maneno kwa sababu 
Mwenyeki ti wa Kamat i hii ameyazungumzia , mimi tu nitaangalia uadilifu  na nina matumaini 
kwamba Mhe shimiwa  Gavana angependa kufanya kazi na  maofisa ha wa wasiokuwa na kashfa 
yoyote . Ukiangalia ha pa hajawahi kupatwa na kashfa yoyote na ni matumaini makubwa sana, 
Nyumba hii itakubali Mama Gloria kuweza kuu ngana na Kaunti hii ya Mombasa, aweze kufanya 
kazi vy ema. Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
The Sp eaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much . Yes, Hon ourable  Fatma Swaleh? 
Please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika . Kwanza kabisa naipongeza 
Kamati yangu , Kamati ya Fedha  na kama unavyojua Mheshimiwa Spika Kamati ya Fedha ndio 
nguzo y a Kaunti hii ya Mombasa. Mheshimiwa Spika , sina budi pi a mimi kuunga mkono taarifa 
iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Kibwana ; tuliweza kukaa kwa makini , kwa kina, tukamchambua 
tukamwangalia kwa kina  tukaona Bi. Gloria yuko sawa na vile vile  ni mtu ambaye ni mcha 
Mungu na vile vile ni mtu ambaye anaenda kanisani … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Na vile  vile Mhe shimiwa  Spika nikiangalia upande wa kifedha , namuona yuko sawa ni 
kwamba hana njaa yuko sawa, kwa sababu ukiweka mahali nakupa mfano na naomba 
uniruhusu ... 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Nakuru husu. 
 
Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika ukiweka mfugo ambaye ana nj aa hakushiba, 
anaweza  kumalizia wenzake nyasi ! Mheshimiwa Spika turudi katika mada hii yetu ya  Bi. Gloria ; 
kama alivyozungumza aw ali Bi. Gloria ni mcha Mungu na vile vile nam uombea Mwenyezi 
Mungu na nawaomba Waheshimiwa wenza  tuweze kumkubali kumpitisha ili aweze kufanya kazi 
kiuadilifu na vile  vile tumuombe Mungu asije akaingia aka anza kubadilika . Sina mengi ni h ayo 
tu. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank  you very much . Yes, Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo? 
Please make your contribution from Mikindani Ward. 
 
Hon. Madialo: Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity. F rom the times of Jesus Christ 
when Judas Iscariot w as a treasurer had messed up ; subsequent chief executive s have always 
tended when it comes to treasury to give people that they trust,  people that  they have built 
relations with . So, when I realized tha t this nominee worked with the G overnor for alm ost ten 
years, I believe that s he has earned the trust  of the Governor a nd the finance docket being a very 
sensitive one non e other than somebody that you can trust a re such people tha t you can put in 
such dockets . Also going by the Report  that was produced by the ab le Committee chaired by 
Honourable  Kibwana  this nominee is fit for that position and for that reason , I support.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Jackton e. Yes , Honourable  
Franklyne Makanga please make your contribution.  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 21 Hon. Makanga: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Na mimi nasimama k uunga mkono hoja hii 
ilioletwa na Mwenyekiti wa Fedha na mipangilio ya kiserikali Mheshimwia Kibwana amba ye 
kwa hivi siku za majuzi tumepata urafiki ambao tunaende lea kujenga na nitaeleza baada e kwa  
nini mimi na Mheshimiwa Kibwana tumeanza kuwa marafiki.  Mheshimiwa Spika , nasimama 
niunge mkono uteuzi wa Gloria Wando e Mwasi kwa sababu zif uatazo;  kwanza kama ms ichana 
ama mwanamke ambae amezaliwa katika jimbo la Mombasa ambae ameweza kusoma na  
kuhitimu na kufikia viwango vya masomo ambavyo yuko n avyo, ikizingatiwa kwamba 
kumekuwa na historia kwamba was ichan a wanaozaliwa katika maeneo ya P wani, hao ni 
wazaliwe waku e wakubwa waozwe ! Lakini huyu tunamuona ame weza kujikuza kimasomo na 
ameweza kufika kiwango ambacho  amekuwa Mheshimiwa Spika ; nyengine ambayo pia 
yacha ngia mimi kumuuga mkono ni uzoefu ama vile ameweza kuwa exposed  kwa maswal a ya 
kifedha . Mheshimiwa Spika , Bi Glori a ameweza kuwa Fund Account Manager  kutoka 2007 hadi 
sasa kulin gana  na Ripoti.  
Kwa hivyo tunaamini huyu h ataanza kuhema , hataanza kupandisha joto  kwa sababu 
ameweza kukalia kiti ambacho mabilioni ya pesa yanapitia Mheshimiwa Spika.  Lengine ambalo 
ningependa iwe sabab u ya mimi kuunga mkono na naomba Bunge hili twende kwa  ukurasa  8 
number 4 alipoulizwa swali la , on what she will do for the department in her first 100 days and  
five years in the office  should she  be successful in appointment.  Mheshimiwa Spika , aliyoyasema 
ya kwanza ni kwamba , she will ensure to fast track the process of budget  implementation ; 
number t wo ensure employees salary are paid on time . Nataka nianze na hayo mawili 
Mheshimiwa Spika ; kwamba huko nyuma na nikisema h uko ny uma tunaelewa kama Bunge 
tumekuwa n a matatizo haswa kwa utekelezaji w a bajeti ile ambayo hupitishwa n a Bunge hili na 
huyu ametoa hakikisho kwamba ataweza kutilia maanani yale ambayo tunapitisha kama Bunge .  
Pili, Mheshimiwa Spika kwamba ataweza kulipa mishahara ya wafanyikazi kwa m uda 
unao stahili , kwa sababu hi i mimi namuunga mkono aweze kuingia ili anapolipa hiyo  mishahara 
aweze kuhaki kisha number (d) ambayo amesema atashu ghulikia madeni ambayo yamekaa ama 
pending bills  yamelipwa kwa wakati ili tuweze kur udisha heshima kama vile Mstahik i Gavana 
ameweza kudhi hirisha kwa kipindi cha miezi hii kumi amekuwa kwa ofisi . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa S pika mimi kwa niaba ya watu wa C haani na kwa niaba ya wafanyikazi wa 
Mombasa kwa sababu nina historia ya kuja katika Bunge hili kuja kulalamika kwa sababu ya 
Chief Of ficer aliekuwa mzembe na kuleta maringo badala ya kufa nya kazi. Tunaamini huyu 
atafanya kazi na tunaombea Mwenyezi Mungu ambariki anapofanyia kazi wananchi wa 
Mombasa . Ahsante M heshi miwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Moraa Milka.  
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the Report and to congratulate the 
Committee led by Hon ourable  Kibwana Swal eh who has earned trust amongst the Hon ourable 
Members of this House. I support this Report and support the nominee for the appointment as 
County Chief Officer for the County Department of Finance and Economic Planning who is 
Gloria Mwandoe Mwasi, one; because she passed the integrity test , and also Chapter six of the 
Constitution  of Kenya . Money is very tempting and it needs one who has a str aight record an d 
also to some extent because we have ben told she is a very God -fearing person that would also 
want to agree with Hon ourable  Madialo that that also adds credit to why I should supp ort her and 
number two she talked of the three  very important issues that she will handle within her  first 
hundred days . I do not want to rep eat what Hon ourable  Makanga has said b ut just to mention that 
salaries would be pa id on time, something that the G overnor anyway h as already started 
managing . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 22 Also , an increase of County revenue from  County own source revenue which we did very 
well and we are seeing the results ; pending bills  which has also been a very thorny  issue in our 
County of Mombasa . So, we shall hold her resp onsible after the hundred days because  she ha s 
made a promise and we will be closely looking at her  performance to see that t his that she has 
promised is being  done she will be an action person in it. Finally, as we vet the chief officers we 
also look at the tw o third gender being a woman like myself, I want to support her nomination 
because we must meet the two third gender rule in this nomination exercise ,  I see the Majority 
Leader smiling I think he is also appreciating that yes the two third gender rule must be taken 
into consideration as the ch airperson of women caucus I must mention that every ti me we are 
vetting one a nom inee so I urge my colleagues that we a ccept this nomination from the G overno r 
and the report by the committee so that we can have a chie f officer in the department of finance 
to act on what we expect her to act.  Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Majority Leader are you on a point of 
information.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ndio Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kutaarifu 
ya kwamba kama se rikali na bunge hili tunajitahidi kufikia thuluthi mbi li ya kijinsia lakini pia 
Mheshimiwa Spika katika ripoti nyingi ambazo tumekuwa tukipitia tumeona nafa si hizi 
tunapatia dada zetu na mama zetu inapokuja katika swa la la maswala ya hisani inaonesha wazi 
hakuna kitu wanawajaibika na yo. Pia nimuombe Mwenyekiti awahimize  hawa dada zetu kwa 
sababu kama huyu Mheshimiwa Spika, Kamati tulimhidhinisha ndio kwa utajiri wa million 25 
tukiangalia katika maswala ya hisani Mheshimiwa Spika, hakuna hata jambo moja ana lofanya. 
Pia Mama zetu dada zetu regesheni mkono k wa j amii munapopata hizi nafasi. A hsante 
Mheshimwia Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Juma Manuari from 
Bofu Ward pleas e make your contributions.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nitakuwa mchache wa maneno ; 
kwanz a nimuunge mkono ndugu yangu mkuu , mzee , kiongozi , Senior  wa Bunge hili ndugu 
yangu Bwana K ibwana mwenyekiti wa kutengeza maswala yetu yale yanayo  tuweka mjini kwa 
kutuletea Ripoti hii ya  dada yetu Bi Gloria Mwandoe kama Katibu mkuu katika m aswala ya 
kifedha na mipangilio ya kiuchumi katika Kaunti yetu hii ya Mombasa na nimpe kongole  kubwa 
kwa sababu huko tunakokwenda hii katika nchi yetu ama katika e neo letu tunakumbwa na shid a 
nyingi sana za kiuchumi. Kwa hivyo Mheshimi wa S pika ningemuomba ndugu yetu  Bwana  
Mwenyekiti akae kwa makini na dada yetu huyu yale matatizo ama yale maneno 
yaliozungumzwa na ndugu yangu Kiongozi wa Wengi baada ya mda fulani iwe dada zetu 
tunawaunga mkono. Mheshimiw a Spika sisi tunachuku a nafasi hi i kuwapa madada zetu  nafasi 
kuu ili twawajua kwanza wao wana imani na watu wao , pili wanaposimama hus imama kidete 
bila kutingishika , tatu hakuna mama ambae ni muongo siku zote ni wa kwe li. Kwa hivyo 
tunaamini kuwa pesa hizi tutaziweka katika  mikono salama  ili na sisi pia tukiwa na mahitaji 
katik a maeneo yetu yawe yatakuwa salama  na kiongozi wetu wa Kaunti yetu ndugu yetu 
Abdulswamad Shariff Nasser awe na yeye atakuwa anatembea bila wasiwasi , bila kuulizwa 
maswali pesa hii imefu jwa vipi hii imekwenda vipi kwa ushirikiano wa dada y etu Bi Gloria na 
ndugu yetu Bwana Kibwana . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 23 Nina hakika Kaunti yetu kimaswala ya kifedha tutakuwa vizuri , kwa hayo mengi machache 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga mkono  ndugu yangu huyu.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes, Honourable  Leila.  
 
Hon. Nyache: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipatia nafasi hii tena mara ya 
pili kuweza kuchangia.  Kwanza nachuku a fursa hii kumpongeza Mwenyekiti wa hii Kamati ya 
Fedha p amoja na watu wake. Wamefanya kazi nzuri sana ku piga msasa huyu Bi. Gloria Wandoe 
Mwasi. Mheshimiwa Spika pia nachuku a fursa hii kumpongeza Gavana kwa kuweza kuona ya 
kwamba anaweza kufanya kazi na Gloria Wandoe ambae lazima awe anam jua vizuri na 
anaonekana ni mwaminifu. Kivyangu nataka niseme ya kwamba  uongozi wa kina mama ni 
uongozi wami nifu sana. Kama vile Mheshimiwa amesema hapa kina mama sio waongo na kweli 
kweli sio waongo kina mama ni waminifu  na tunaamini huyu Bi. Gloria atatenda kazi vizuri sana 
na kulingana n a mishahara yetu vile amesema mimi imenifurahisha sana  hapa na pia nataka 
nisem e ya kwamba mimi ni Mtaita na huyu dada nam uona ana jina la Wandoe Mwasi ambae 
mdog o wangu wa tatu anaitwa Wandoe . Kwa hi vyo nimefurahi sana naona kama ambae ni 
dadangu na kweli ni dadangu kwa sababu hii Wandoe labda imeshirikiana  kwenye uko o. Kwa 
hivyo mimi nashukuru sana na  nampongeza n a nawambia Wataita ni wa aminifu, w anawake wa 
Kitaita ni waaminifu sana. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kuunga hoja hii . Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very  much . Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swa leh 
please reply to the Motion. Yes, Hon ourable  Katan a please make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Katana: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I also stand to  support the name of this nominee 
but again Mr.  Speaker I do  not want to  speak  much but also would like to as k the Chair maybe to 
advice me or the nominee because what am seeing here is the nominee was asked a question and 
the answer to that question was , ‘we received 7.1 Billion from the nationa l government , that is 
very true but again she said that  for the equalization fund we received is  Ksh. 1 Billion . I stand to 
be guided Hon ourable  Speaker because I understa nd the little level of my understanding is the 
equalizati on fund is only given to the marginalized Counties and by so saying I am not so sure 
whether Mombasa County is receiving so I stand to be guided Chair though I truly support the 
nominee.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Kibwana please 
reply to the Motion?  
 
Hon. Kibwa na Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Once again because of  time; one, I want 
to appreciate your office, the office of the Clerk not forgetting my Vice Chair who have been 
working very closely with the team and Members of th e Finance Committee . I want to appreciate 
the Members for supporting t he Motion and I seek again the House to approve the Nominee and 
Honourable  Speaker you know very well this is not the end of our work , we still have a duty and 
obligation towards implementing the budget but on an oversight role. I think what I have raised 
with my colle agues we will debate later because our position here is only the approval and the 
other issue s that may arise then the vetting will be tackled after . So Hon ourable  Speaker thank 
you once again  and I want to thank the Hon ourable  House for the support that they have gi ven 
me. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 24 Honourable  Members , thank you for contributing to the Motion. Hon ourable Members , I 
now put a question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Kibwana Swaleh Baya on Adoption of the 
Report on the v etting of Ms. Gloria Mwasi , nominee for the position of  Chief Officer of Finance 
and Economic Planning be considered by the House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
The Motion by Hon ourable  Kibwana S waleh on vetting of the nominee position of Finance 
and Economic P lanning Ms. Gloria Mwasi is adopted b y this Hon ourable  House. Yes , Clerk next 
Order please . 
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF MR . ANWAR SAID , THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION 
OF CHIEF OFFICER , DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg to move the following Motion;  
THAT, this House adopts the Report on the vetting of Mr. Anwar Said, the Nom inee for the 
position of Chief Officer, Digital Transformation as  laid on the Table on Tuesday 25th July, 
2023.   
I thank you Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Seconder?  
 
Hon. Katana:  I so wish to ask Hon ourable  Leader of Majority to second . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Mwamwiri?   
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mheshimiw a Spika , nasimama 
kuunga mkono.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Member. I now propose a 
question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Allen Katana on Adoptio n of Report of Vetting of Mr. 
Anwar Said Nominee for the pos ition of Chief Officer of Digital Tra nsformation be considered 
by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana, Chairperson Committee on Education and Digital 
Transformation ple ase make your contribution to the Motion . 
 
Hon. Katana: Mheshimiwa Spika nakushuru sana kwa kunipa nafasi hii na niwaombe kwa 
sababu jina hili ama mtu huyu yuko mbele yetu kwa ajili ya kumjadili tayari amefanya k azi na 
Serikali hii yetu na kazi zake zimeonekana . Kwa sababu ya muda na njaa nashukuru ndio maana 
hata Mwenyezi Mungu ameongoza katika Order Paper  yetu amewekwa wa mwisho kwa sababu 
huyu mtu hana tashwishi yoyote sasa ! Mheshimiwa Spika , sitaki kukufundisha kazi yako 
nikuelekeze l akini ingekuwa ombi langu ya kwamba ikiwe zekana tuuli ze tayari kama sote 
tunamkubali  ili tuendelee . Ahsante.  
 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 25 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Fadhili Makarani, Deputy Speaker please 
make your cont ribution?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Makarani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunip a 
fursa hii kuchangia katika Hoja hii muhimu sana katika Bunge letu la Mombasa. Mheshimiwa 
Spika japo wakati wa nyuma, wakati wa historia Shimo la Tewa High School ilikuwa na 
uhasama na watu wa Khamisi Secondary School, Shimo la Tewa ikiwa High School, Khamisi 
ikiwa Secondary School na tumeona hapa kwamba nominee  alikuwa yuko Khamisi High School 
hiyo haileti kuwa tut akuwa ni w enye kuwa na tashwishi yoyote na nominee  huyu  ambaye 
ameletwa mbe le yetu ! Ule uhasama ilikuwa ni uhasama wa shule lakini Mheshimiwa Spika 
tukiangalia Ripoti hii inatuonyesha ya kwamba huyu ambaye tunamjadili ndiye the current Chief 
Officer wa ICT . Huyu  ambaye tunamjadili Mheshimiwa Spika angalia zile  tuzo alizo nazo ; yuko 
na First Class Honours Degree in Business Information and Technology , he was the best student 
in ICT Technical University of M ombasa  na ni mtu ambaye yuko na tajriba ya kutosha 
kuendesha  kitengo hiki  amba cho anapatiwa . Mheshimiwa Spika , tukizidi kuangalia Ripoti 
ambayo iko mbele yetu pia nachukua fursa kupongeza Kamati ambayo pia mimi ni mmoja wa 
Kamati ambayo imetengene za Ripoti hii inaonyesha wazi yale ambayo tumeyaweka mbele ya 
Kamati hii ni kuwa yale ambayo tumeleta mbele ya Kamati hii ni dhihirisho wazi kuwa huyu 
nominee  Anwar anawe za hii kazi . Mheshimiwa Spika hata ukian galia hiyo net worth  yake ni mtu 
amba ye hatutakuwa na tashwishi, ni mtu ambaye anajiweza kifedha na tunajua kuwa atazidi 
kupeleka Kaunti yetu mbele. Mheshimiwa Spika Mombasa ilikuwa Kaunti ya kwanza kuweza na 
kuanza na zile robotic lesson s...! 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Hizi zimekuja kupi tia kwa ndugu yetu Anwar ! Mheshimiwa Spika yeye ndio alikuwa 
muasisi wa kwanza na tuna imani atakapokuwa anaendelea basi hata kule chini mashinani 
zitaweza kufika, watoto kutoka kule Wadi ya Port Reitz na wao  pia wataweza kuja kujifunza 
masomo yale . Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi nawaomba ndugu zangu , Wabunge w enzangu tuweze 
kumuendeleza huyu ndugu yetu aweze kuendelea na kazi hii maana yeye anaielewa vizuri hii 
kazi. Mimi nawaomba w enzangu tushikane pamoja tumpitishe ndugu yangu Anwar. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable Jacktone Madialo 
from Mikind ani Ward?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Ahsante sana Mheshimi wa Spika . Mimi pengine simjui huyu Bwa na, 
sijawahi kumuona lakini naunga mkono Hoja hii kwa sababu moja ya kwamba kama wengine 
wamekuwa na sapoti lakini huyu naona kama ni yatima na amenigusa kwa sababu hiyo 
namuunga mkono.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Patrick Mbelle from Bamburi 
Ward?  
 
Hon. Mbelle: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika .  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 26 Kuna msemo ambao unasema chema chajiuza kibaya chajitembeza na hilo nalisema kwa 
sababu ya ndugu y angu Jacktone Madialo alivyosema kwamba hana mtu w a kumsapoti nafikiri 
kazi yake inamuu za yeye mwenyewe. Wakati tulipokuwa na janga la korona Mheshimiwa Spika 
kulikuwa na system  ambayo ilitengeneza ya kuweza kusambaza  chakula na misaada tofauti 
tofauti kwa watu ambao hawajiwezi katika Kaunti ya Mombasa . Aliyeweza kufanya system  hiyo 
wakati huo niki kumbuka fika ni huy u ambaye tunamuongelelea leo Chief Officer wa ICT  ndugu 
yetu Anwar na vile vile kama alivyosema Mheshimiwa Naibu Spika ya kwamba Robo tics class  
ya kwanza Kenya nzima imeanza hapa Mombasa . Kwa hiv yo huyu ni mtu ambaye ana tajriba 
nzuri ya kutekeleza hii kazi na tukimpa sapoti sisi kama Wabunge wa Bunge hili la Mombasa 
basi nafikiri kila alichofanya anaweza kuzidisha zaidi na zaidi. Kwa hivyo naomba tumpitishe na 
mimi binafsi nimeidhinish a uchaguzi wake. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Frankline?  
 
Hon. Makanga: Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand to support the Motion. I want to say the 
Committee on Education has done a wond erful job...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mr. Speaker , the sus tainability of any system is to be ab le to trace its history , know it s 
presence to plan for the future  having him right now at the helm  of the very same department 
which has been able to transform the digital space in Mombasa and considering the Report that is  
before us . Mr. Speaker , further I will n ot say he is an orphan because he has God , he who does 
not have man he has God , the Father and therefore I wish to wish him well knowing this 
Honourable  House we will giv e him the needed support ... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
And even as he continues to serve in th e same department that if this House will adopt this 
Report, we are asking him that he will continue with the good work so  that even as we even 
lobby for more ECDEs, for more inst itutions to be built in the 30 War ds that we have in 
Mombasa he will not be compl acent, he will not be tired and he will not be used to the job that is 
currently occupying but rather continue giving his best to see as transformation in this Blue City  
of the Republic of Kenya. Thank you , Mr. Spe aker, I stand to support.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Juma Manuari please 
make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari: Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kumuunga mkono ndugu yangu 
Rodgers kwa suala hili aliloleta mbele yetu . Mheshimi wa Rodgers Allen Katana mshazoea 
Mheshimiwa Allen Kata na anaitwa Rodgers Allen Katana...  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kumuunga mkono.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Leila please make 
your contribution . 
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 27 Hon. Nyache: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama 
kuunga mkono Hoja hii na kuwapa pongezi Kamati wakiongozwa na Mwenyekiti ambaye 
nimesikia leo ni Rodgers , kumbe anaitwa Rodgers. Mheshimiwa Spika , ni juzi tu nilikuwa na  
inter -debate  ya watoto  wa shule na mambo na te knolojia hata nilikualika Mhe shimiwa Spika ; 
nataka niseme huyu Bwana anafaa na mimi pia nitaweza kumhitaji kwa hiyo debate  ya wale 
watoto wangu wa shule pale Wadi  ya Kipevu . Kwa h ivyo nimesimama kumuunga  mkono huyu 
Bwana awe Chief Officer  department of Education  Digital Transformation.  Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Hamisi Mbaya?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa  hii ili nami pia 
niweze ku changia kuweza kuwakilisha watu ambao ni wa Kata Ndogo  ya Timbwani ambayo ni 
kubwa kwa mipaka na idadi ya jamii.  Mheshimiwa Spika , kutokana na Hoja ambayo imeletwa 
na ndugu yangu Rodgers ambaye kwa saa hii Mheshimiwa R odgers pamoja na kuwa h anifiki 
kiumri  ambao  ni watu wazima ni mimi na Mhes himiwa Kibwana katika Bunge hili lakini yeye 
pale anapoelekea anastahili kuwa nae awe anaitwa mtu mzima ndiposa tutaweza kuwa na sababu 
zaidi ya kuweza kuunga mkono kwa sababu watu wazima ndio  ambao  wana ushauri mzuri 
kutokana na maisha ya leo.  Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa sababu hi yo akiwa yeye amekuwa wa 
kwanza kuileta Hoja hii na kuiunga mkono sina budi kuiunga mkono Hoja hii kwa asilimia 94 
kwa 100.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Honourable  Member. Yes , Honourable  
Nusura Mwinyi p lease make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Nusura Mwinyi: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii. Mimi pia 
nimesimama kuunga mkono . Nikiangalia Ripoti ya huyu Bwana Anwar Said Ahmed naona 
Ripoti yake ni nzuri, nikianga lia kwanza hana kashfa, hana deni  na mtu, hadaiwi mahal i popote 
kwa hivyo kulingana na Ripoti hii na Kamati yake iliyompiga msasa hatuna budi kuiunga 
mkono...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Halafu pia nataka nimrekebishe Bwana Hamisi S alim Mbaya amesema yeye na 
Mheshi miwa Kibwana ndio watu wazima lakini pia tuko na mtu mzima wetu ambaye pia ni 
Mheshimiwa Mwaka ambaye anastahili heshima ndani ya Bunge hili. Kwa hivyo nimesimama 
kuunga mkono Hoja hii mia fil mia.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Hamisi?  
 
Hon. Hami si Mbaya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . 
Nimesimama kuweka wazi kwamba kule kusema mimi ni mtu mzima na mwenzangu 
Mheshimiwa Kibwana sijamaanisha kwamba si mheshimu Mheshimiwa Mwaka Bakari 
Mwal undonda , nampenda  sana na ni ji rani yangu ambaye tunaishi naye Timbw ani.  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 28 Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Fatuma please make 
your contribution?  
 
Hon. Fat ma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii. 
Mheshimiwa Spika men gi yameongelelewa mazuri , mimi n ataka tu kuwaambia Wahe shimiwa 
wenzangu ya kwamba tumeweza kufanya kazi na Bwana Anwar kwa miaka mitano  iliopita ; 
Bwana Anwar alikuwa ni mtu ambaye ni mnyenyekevu, ni mtu ambaye ha na dharau na m tu, ni 
mtu ambaye ni mnyonge na msikili vu Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo naomba Bunge hili Bwana 
Anwar aweze kuendelea na kazi yake ili tuweze kuendelea mbele Mheshimiwa Spika . Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Arwa pl ease make 
your contribution . 
 
Hon. Arwa: Thank y ou Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity again to make my 
contribution to this Motion. Mr. Speaker , I stand to support this Motion ; as you are aware th at 
history s peaks itself , having  gone through this Report  i am convinced that Mr. Anwar Said 
Ahmed is qualified for this position and I do not see any reasons why we should deny him this 
position . Mr. Speaker , I stand to support . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Hami da Noor please 
make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Noor: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand to support the Motion for Mr. Anwar Said 
Ahmed. Mr. Speaker , we have worked w ith him in  the previous government in the ICT 
department and he has brought many changes  within the  ICT department , for now that h is Report 
has come in front of us. As my colle agues have said there are so many good report s about him 
that have  been brought in front of us and we do con cur with the rest of the Members of the 
County Assembly that th ey have passed the Motion and I do supp ort the Motion. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Hussein Abdirahman 
please make your cont ribution . 
 
Hon. Abdirah man Abdulkadir : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand to support the Report.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Hamisi Nyota please make your 
contribution . 
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota: Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity . First of all , I 
would like to say sorry to Ho nourable  Hamisi Mbaya of Timbwani whom we got some 
communica tion that somebody who is so much close related to him just passed away the other 
day, Honourable  Member so sorry.  Honourable  Speaker having going through the report it is 
much  convin cing that the nominee is fit for this position , so without much adou  Mr. Speaker it is 
high time that Mombasa as a County we should get started as time is running out and we are late 
for passing out this Chief Officers so having gone through the report am very much convinced 
that the nom inee is suitable for the job and I do support his appr oval. Thank you so much.  
August 2, 2023                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 29 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much. Yes , Honourable  Allen Katana please 
reply to the Motion?  
 
Hon. Katana: Mheshimiwa Spika kwan za ni kushukuru wewe , kisha tena niwashu kuru 
hawa wapendwa ambao tunafanya kazi sote . Kwa hakika ninashukuru kwa kuwa mumekubali 
kazi ya Kamati ya Elimu iliofanya na kusema ule ukweli jazaa yenu kwa Mwenyezi Mungu 
mwenyewe atawalipa kwa sababu mtu huyu atakaposaidia watu wetu wa Mombasa  kwa ujumla 
ile kazi yetu ambayo ni kubwa sana tu takuw a pia sisi tumesaidika na kwa sababu Mheshimiwa 
Spika Waheshimiwa wamekaa sana muda mrefu mimi sitaki kuzidi kuzungumza hap o lakini 
ninacho waombea Waheshimiwa ni kwamb a pia Mwenyezi  Mungu akutane na haja za mioyo 
yenu kwa kazi nzuri mlioifanya. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Members and Hon ourable  
Allen Katana, the Chairperson for that Committee. Hon ourable  Members , I now put the question 
that the Motion by Hon ourable  Allen K atana on Adoption of Report on the vetting of Mr. 
Anwa r, nominee for the position of Chief Officer Digital Transformation be considered by this 
House as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
And the Motion by Honourable  Allen Ka tana on the vetting of the nominee fo r the position 
of Chief Officer of Digital Transformat ion Mr. Anwar Said is adopted by this Hon ourable  
House.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 8th August, 2023 at 
10:00am.  
 
The House rose at 4:58p .m. 
                                                             
      