May 10, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 10th May, 2016  
The House met at 2: 30p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Kindly M embers have your seats , yes Hon.  Ndan da? 
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , nimesimama kwa kifungu cha 
sheria za Bunge yaani ‘Standing order ’ nambari 49; huu ni m swada amba o hau hitaji noti si 
Mheshimiwa Spika , leo ikiwa ni siku y a kufungua Bunge nataka nieleze … 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Ndanda allow Hon . Mswabah?  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid ): Ahsante B wana Spika , kama tunavyojua siku ya 
kwanza kazi ni kufungua Bunge  na kusikiza hotuba  yako , sidhani kama kuna kazi ingine 
itafanyi ka siku ya leo ni siku yako pekee yako hivyo ndio tunajua … 
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mwidani?  
       Hon.  Mwidani:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I think the Member has mentioned the Standing 
order so it is the C hair to rule according to what the Member has requested … 
(Applause)  
       …No member can rule over a de cision when you are there, so  Mr. Speaker  I request we 
proceed on what has been mentioned by Hon.  Ndanda and even if he  has not mentioned  the 
Motion but  I reall y second it… 
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mswabah . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah  Rashid ): Mheshimiwa tunajua kuna jambo linaloitwa 
sheria na k atika sheria za Bunge ambazo tunafuata tunaanza na maombi, kisha  tunaenda kwa 
kuapishwa yaani ‘Administration of oath s’, tena tunaenda kwa taarifa kutoka kwa M wenyekiti 
wa Bunge yaani, ‘Communicati on from the C hair’ na karatasi ya utaratibu  huu umewekwa uko 
mbele yetu lazima u heshimiwe ; huu ndio utaratibu wa Bunge . Mheshimiwa Spika  mpaka sasa 
Bunge  halijaanza kwa nini mtu anasema ana mswada  wakati Bunge  halijaanza ?! Tunategemea  
taratibu ya kila siku yaani  ‘order paper ’ ifuatwe na sheria za Bunge zifu atwe ... 
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mohamed . 
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Mr. Speaker  I would also like to inform this H ouse we have made 
a lot of benchmarking . I remember one day we were in the Senate House and before the S peaker 
went to the business of the day, a S enator stood up and cleared the air where there was a crucial 
matter …  
(Applause)  
(Loud consultations ) 
May 10, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order!  Order!  Order! O rder M embers!  Let me just remind 
you of one thing;  Order!  Order M embers!  Hon.  Member’s,  ladies and gentlemen you  know very 
well you are really exercising your democratic righ ts… 
(Applause ) 
(Loud consultations)  
       That particular democratic right must not make you to invite the wrath of the S peaker and 
more so when the S peaker is on his feet you know the conseque nces you must not rise when the 
Speaker is on his feet . So it is important for us ladies and gentlemen we know we are all mature , 
you know why we are here  so let us debate this matter with decorum that it deserves . Hon.  
Ndanda is still on th e floor but remember Hon.  Amur had requested to inform the H ouse, so Hon.  
Amur is given an opportunity to inform this House.  
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, today being an opening day there are only two 
business es that are supposed to take pla ce in this chamber ; one, the address by  the S peaker 
himself , two if the Governor is in the H ouse he will address the H ouse and those are the only two 
issues which are allowed in this A ssembly other than that  any issue should be brought the day 
after tomorr ow. 
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you Hon.  Amur  Murfad. Yes  Hon.  Ndanda .  
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Hon.  Speaker during the holidays, there  are some activities which 
were done and today we cannot know if it’s an A ssem bly, Members of this H ouse went on to 
remove the portrait of the Speaker…  
(Interruption)  
(Loud consultations ) 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now allow me to give this direction, have your seats.  Hon.  
Ndanda you have put it very well that you borrowed t hat practice and it is not anywhere in law 
that is a practice but i t is important that if you wanted to bring that as a ma tter of concern and as 
a Motion we  have the S tanding order and I think the issue  that you want to raise i s of very much 
concern in thi s House … 
(Applause)  
       But remember whether you want to raise it as a message , a communication , paper , Notice of 
Motion or a S tatement wait until then you will have you chance , I think that is the best way to 
handle this matter … 
(Applause)  
(Loud consul tations)  
       I want  you to calm down ladies and gentlemen , just relax ! This C ounty is ours and this 
government is also ours and the people of Mombasa are one as you are one , so let us not get 
divide d by small issue s that we know we can be guided with al l relevant legislations that we 
have to make us come to a timely conclusion.  
(Interruption)  
        Yes Hon.  Kibwan a? 
       Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker for your guidance on this issue but the 
motive  of Hon.  Ndanda who has been away all the  way telling us that we have been going to 
Senate and learning something that we have never…  
(Loud consultations)  
May 10, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3        Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Kibwan a you are out of order! Can you resume your 
seat! Once the directive has been given you do not c omment on it , let’s proceed . Now ladies and 
gentlemen I have the following communication to make,  I’m confirming that the  Bill that was 
passed by this Hon.  House already we have an Act of the C ounty Assembly of Mombasa to 
provide for the legal and institutional  framework of provision  of water and sewerage  system and 
for the connected purposes , his Excellency the G overnor of Mombasa actually has assented  to 
the Bill… 
(Applause)  
       That is an A ct and we have to abide by that ; in the next communicat ion that is before me 
ladies and gentlemen i s an invitation,  partnership for transformational devolution and the subject 
is capacity building of representatives of C ounty government on key areas relevant to their roles 
and functions with specific focus on mechanisms of citizen participation and it reads ; 
           “Thank you for your continued partnership and support to our work. The European Union 
(EU) co -funded project,  “Strengthening the capacities of state and non -state actors for effective 
devolved go vernance” seeks to enhance the c apacity of citizens as well as C ounty governance 
institutions to effectively execute their democratic mandates in the Rift Valley, Eastern and Coast 
Regions.  In Mombasa County, the project is implemented by Konrad  Adenauar  Stiftung and its 
local partners Catholic Justice and Peace Commission (CJPC).  We hereby write to invite 
Members of the Budget and Appropriation Committee, the Implementation Committee and the 
Justice, Labor  and Legal Affairs Committee  for a one day training workshop scheduled to take 
place on Friday 13th May, 2016 at the Sunrise Resort, Nyali, behind Nakumatt Nyali.  The main 
objective of the training is to strengthen the capacity of representatives of County government on 
key areas relevant to their roles and functions with a specific focus on mechanisms for citizen 
participation in County Governance ”. 
       Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to go to the speech by the Hon. Speaker.  
OFFICIAL OPENING OF ASSEMBLY  PROCEEDINGS  
 (Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi)  read his opening remarks)  
       Hon. Members,  
       Good afternoon ladies and g entlemen,  
       It gives me great honor  and pleasure to be with you on the resumption of the County 
Assembly from recess on this Tuesday,  the 1 0th of May 2016.  It is yet another au spicious 
occasion in the life of this great A ssembly as we are gathered here for the opening of the second 
round in the annual calendar of the First Assembly of the Mombasa County Assembly.  Our 
hands ; ladies and gentlemen are burdened by the great responsib ility bestowed upon us by the 
constitution of our country and the mandate of the people to deliver on the promises and fruits of 
devolution by legislating,  over sighting  over the affairs of the county government and 
representation of the people.  Neverthele ss, we  agreed to bear this burden solemnly, graciously 
and with gusto and we shall ably serve the citizens and people of this great County successfully.  
We look in hindsight to the many achievements by the County Assembly in previous sessions 
and particula rly to the previous round of this session. We note with a sense of  pride the passage 
of numerous M otions and Bills particularly the passage and assent of the fo llowing Bills into 
Acts of the A ssembly:  
1. The Mombasa County Advertising Bill, 2014.  
2. The Mombasa County Corporations Bill , 2014 . 
3. The Mombasa Child Care Bill,  2014.  
4. The Mombasa Port Health Bill,  2014.  
May 10, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 5. The Mombasa County Roads Bill,  2014.  
6. The Mombasa County Consolidated Revolving Fund Bill,  2014.  
       At the same time,  our County Assembly achi eved a great milestone when it received its first 
installment  of funds directly from the National Treasury in recognition of its autonomous status 
as an arm of the C ounty government , yet the disbursements come in bits and very late hence 
slowing down our o perations and it is our hope that the National Treasury would make 
tremendous improvements in the pace of disbursements.  The County Assembly was also well  
represented together with the C ounty executive arm at the third  devolution conference in Meru 
County.  Hon Members,  ladies and g entlemen,  despite these and many other achievements, the 
County Assembly is set to do more as we are nearing the end of our five year term as the First 
County Assembly of Mombasa and pioneer members of the same.  Let me reiterate our solemn 
desire and commitment to the ideals of our constitution and aspiration of the people towards 
devoluti on. We and our partners in the C ounty executive will work together under the 
stewardship of our beloved Governor,  His Excellency H on. Hassan Ali Joho.  Indeed since the 
election of the C ounty government under our beloved Governor,  the C ounty has achieved 
tremendous growth and development and undergone great transformation which we are all proud 
of. Let us congratulate ourselves and th e administration of His Excellency the Governor for all 
achievements to date.  
       Hon. Members,  ladies and g entlemen,  during the second round we are set to conduct a 
number of useful businesses in this A ssembly key of which is the passage of the annual budget 
and the launch of the five years County Assembly Strategic Plan soon . The first five years 
strategic plan once implemented fully will completely tran sform our County A ssembl y to be 
among the front runners and forbearers  of devolution and legi slation in the country.  Hon. 
Members,  ladies and g entlemen,  finally, I  wish to thank all M embers for the great efforts you 
have put towards making the work of the County Assembly successful and to our able staff for  
their diligence in support ing M embers in their work. And that brings me to the eve nt which 
occurred and I want to believe that this was what Hon.  Ndanda was raising a concern . It is indeed 
unethical for any Hon.  Member  to feel above the law and start harassing staff  
(Applau se) 
       …and by locking up offices of  various H on. Members . 
(Applause)  
        It is uncalled for Hon.  Members , unbelievable  and unthinkable that in this century one can 
think of such acts that are out of the constitutional guidelines . It is important t hat I stop at that 
particular point to emphasize  that if you do not want yourself to be called Hon.  Members do not 
bring it here , if you want to go home yourself do not go with others , and  if you fail to perform at 
your W ard levels do not bring it here , you go and fail alone there are others who want to come 
back here…  
(Applause ) 
       And on that note the Hon.  Speaker is not going to take very kindly ; we have Hon.  Members 
who have been adver sely mentioned in that and the Hansard is very clear the M embers 
mention ed themselves yesterday in the House Business C ommittee and I want to say that matter 
is raised immediately  and the Speaker i s going to take action and the M embers are going to be 
expelled forthwith from the A ssembly…  
(Applause ) 
       Ladies and ge ntlemen, we  also appreciate the assistance given by our development partners 
towards County Assembly activities including USAID AHADI  Kenya, the  World Vision,  Kenya 
May 10, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 Alliance for the Advancement of Children  (KAARC) , Mombasa Urban Forum and various 
departmen ts of the county executive.  Ladies and gentlemen allow the C hair to w elcome you back 
to the Mombasa County Assembly!  
       Thank you very much and God bless y ou all…! 
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
       Yes Clerk?  Yes Hon.  Amur Murfad?  
       Hon.  Amu r: Mr. S peaker sir I think so far the A ssembly is i n order you have addressed the 
Assembly and we have heard the speech and I believe  after the speech the H ouse is adjourned 
until tomorrow…  
(Loud consultations ) 
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajw ayi): Order Hon. M embers! Yes Hon.  Jabess?  
(Loud consultations)  
       Hon. Oduor:  Mr. Speaker I wanted to say the same thing he has said but its ok, thank you 
Mr. Speaker.   
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : You know first of all ladies and gentlemen I kn ow we are 
learning this ; nobody is perfect , the Clerk has to read all the businesses that’s the procedure so do 
not come up with other procedures .  
(Interruption)  
       Yes, what is it Leader of M ajority?  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Kasangamba ): Ahsan te sana Mheshimiwa Spika , nafikiri 
umepeana nafasi kwa Mheshimiwa Ndanda kwamba ile mada anataka kuleta ama mswada aulete 
wakati ukifika ambapo ni wakati wa mswada  namba nane,  kwa hivyo twaomba kusis itiza uamuzi 
wako kama vile  vile Mheshimiwa Spika.. . 
(App lause)  
(Loud consultations)  
MOTION  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order number eight , Motion … 
(Interruption)  
       Yes Hon.  Mohamed?  
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Mheshimiwa Spika  kama nilivyotangulia k usema ya kwamba 
nimesimama kwa sheria za Bunge yaani  ‘Standing order ’ nambari  49, kwamba wakati…  
(Interruption)  
(Loud consultations)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you allow Hon.  Hatimy.  
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika  naona twenda ndivyo sivyo, leo  kwa mara ya 
kwanza kwenye historia ya  Bunge  twaona watu wachangia katika hotuba ya kufungua vikao vya 
Bunge. .. 
(Interruption ) 
(Scuffle between Hon. Mohamed Hatimy and Hon. Oduor ) 
(Loud consultations)  
       Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Hatimy can you resume your seat! Hon.  Jabess can you 
resume your seat! Hon.  Hatimy and Hon.  Jabess can you resume your seats ! Can you both 
resume your seats..!  I have given out my speech and first of all it is important that is his freedom 
of expres sion, express yourself and the S peaker will rule appropriate ly and it is a s simple as 
that… Order…! Order Honorable s! Can you allow Hon… 
May 10, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            53 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 (Interruption)  
 (Loud consultations)  
       Order!  Order ! Order ! Now Hon.  Amur! Hon.  Saad!  Both Hon.  Hatimy and Hon.  Jabess 
Oduor  you ar e forthwith expelled from this A ssembly until you will be communicated 
otherwise ….! 
(Applause)  
(Loud consultations)  
       Sergeant At A rms take them out …! 
(Sergeant At A rms and Commissionaires  approached the Members to execute Hon. Speaker’s 
order ) 
       How do you fight in the A ssembly!  What  are you showing me …! 
(Loud consultations ) 
(Hon.  Faraj grab bed the M ace) 
(Loud consultations ) 
(The Mace is taken out of the H ouse)  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen!  Hon.  Amur!  Order ! Ladies and gentlemen! Hon.  Members !  
 (Interruption)  
(Loud consultatio ns) 
       Now that the M ace is not before us, this H ouse stands adjour ned until such a time that the 
Speaker will communicate.  
(Applause)  
The House rose at 3:00p.m. 
 
 