July 19, 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            54 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only.  A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday,  19th July, 2018  
The House met at 2:46 p.m.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats . Yes Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE  CHAIR  
Good afternoon Members , the Office of the Speaker received a letter of notification  
from one Hon. Member, Hon . Tobias Samba;  notification on leave of absence by the said 
Hon. Member.  Hon. Members before we begin kindly allow me to notify this House on a 
letter dated 17th of July, 2018 from Hon. Samba  due to the passing away of his late wife he 
shall not be able to attend any of the sitting between 17th of July, 2018 to 1st of August, 2018, 
may her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.  Hon. Members a m just notifying you of the 
letter so the Member s hould not appear in any of the C ommittee sittings, any of the Assembly 
plenary register just because of his letter and Hon. Members please take note of the 
importance of coming to the plenary, attending ple nary sessions because the O ffice of the 
Speaker ha s noted absenteeism  so Hon. Members please take note and take charge and 
always avail yourselves in the plenary and the Committee meetings that you organize. Thank 
you. Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
RESHUFFLI NG OF CHAIRPERSONS AND MEMBERS OF CERTAIN COMMITEES  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes the Leader of Majority?  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I would like to 
give a Notice of Motion;  
(The Leader of Majority ( Hon. Mwida ni) gave  notice of Motion ) 
That Pursuant to Standing Order 154 (1) and not withstanding Standing Orders 155, 
156, 157 and 174 this House grants leave and approves the appointments of the 
following to the docket a nd membership of the mentioned C ommittees:  

July 19, 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            54 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only.  A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 1. Hon. Fahad Kassim Abda llah to be a M ember and Chairperson of the Committee 
on Water, Sanitation and Natural Resources to  replace Hon. Prischillah Mumba;  
2. Hon. Prischillah Mumba to be the new Chairperson Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public  Works to rep lace Hon. Fahad Kassim Abdallah;  
3. Hon. Milka Moraa to be a M ember of Committee on Health Services;  
4. Hon. Hamida Noor to be a M ember of Committee on Health Services  
5. Hon. Robert Nyiro to be a Member of Committee on Transport,  Infrastructu re and 
Public Work;  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
STATUS OF DRUGS , PERSONNEL AND INFRAS TRUCTURE AT JOMVU KUU , JOMVU , MIKINDANI 
AND MIRITINI HEALTH CENTR ES 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Shebe Athuman,  yes Hon. Shomari?  
Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama hapa kwa niaba ya 
Mheshimiwa Shebe Athuman (Mukono)  kwa sababu hayuko karibu.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Health on 
whether  he is aware of shortages and deficiencies of drugs and personnel and 
congestion in the above named health centers and what plans are in place to rectify 
the situation.  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Chairperson Health , any respon se? 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . I would like to reply back to my 
colle ague Hon. Shebe who is the Ward representative of Jomvu Kuu . Hon. Speaker the 
deficiencies or the shortage of nurses and work force in the Health Department is not only in 
Jomvu but in all the facilities . Hon. Speaker just to give you what we are doing, we are about 
to employ more nurses in this financial budget so I would ask my colle ague to be patient 
enough as we start embarking on this financial year that the budget w e did last time that we 
will be able to employ more nurses to minimize the shortage that is in Jomvu Kuu 
Dispensary . Thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Chairman Health. Yes Clerk?  
STATUS OF MOMBASA YOU TH FISH FARMING PROJ ECT 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
July 19, 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            54 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only.  A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 (Interruption)  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Use your microphone . 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I seek to know 
from the Chairperson  Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries, Livestock and Co -operatives the 
status of the Mombasa Youth Fish Farming project launched by the County g overnment. 
Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Chairperson Agriculture  or any Member, I 
think the Vice Chairman is around. Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you Hon. Speaker for granting me this opportunity  I would request 
my fellow Hon. Member to give us about a week to respond on this...  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : You are requesting t he House or the Hon. 
Member?  
Hon. Nzai:  The House , sorry Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay noted. Yes Clerk?  
MOGOKAA MENACE IN THE  COUNTY  
Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh?  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker during the House Business 
Comm ittee I had ask ed my colle ague to give a statement on my behalf but I think it was 
rejected , I was directed to answer.  Hon. Speaker this issue is very touching to the people of 
Mombasa County  and it is touching the teenagers around so I had requested for m ore time  so 
that we are going to have a consultation  and if you remember through your directions that we 
were not using the right procedure so we were doing some consultation s both from the 
Department of Health and the Youth Department to see what polic ies and regulation s they are 
going to bring that will ban this Mogok aa menace. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Thoya, you want to react on the 
response or what?  
Hon. Thoya:   I am happy with the response from the Chairman bu t I want to seek 
leave there's an emergency statement that I wanted to put here Mr. Speaker and because it is 
not here I was requesting to seek leave from your end.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes proceed . 
Hon. Thoya:  I wanted to seek a statement fr om the House Business Com mittee if I 
think I will be in  order according to the Standing Order kuna watu wangu walileta 
malalamishi kwa k izungu ni Petition  na ni takriban mwezi umeisha kuna vumbi ya clinker  
imetanda sehemu ya Mikindani na iko na athari kiaf ya na kimazingira lakini nasikitika 
imepita mwezi mmoja na n usu toka ifike katika ofisi ya Karani mkuu  lakini sijaipata hapa, 
nasikitika kwamba watu wangu kufikia saa hii wanaendelea kuteseka wanatumia pesa 
kwenda kufanya matibabu kila uchao kwa hivyo muta nipatia muongozo kamili Bwana Spika. 
Ahsante.   
July 19, 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            54 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only.  A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Information from the Clerk is that they 
received the petition today and it will be taken to the House Business next week and it will be 
communicated by the Speaker and the Co mmittee responsible will take charge.  
Hon.  Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker that they have received it today but according 
to my information it is one month old , I think there's a problem you need to look on it.  Thank 
you. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is okay  Hon. Member even if it is a whole 
month but it has not been committed to the Hon orable  House and the Petition takes 60  days 
so I think we are still in the timelines , it takes 60 days for the Assembly or the Committee to 
respond on it so next week hopefully after the House Business it will be communicated to the 
House. Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
Yes Hon. Ramla what is it before we proceed?  
Hon. (Ms.) Ramla Said:  Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa S pika,  samahani nimekumbuka 
kuhusu taarifa  yangu kabla hatujaenda mapumzikoni  nilileta taarifa  hapa kuhusu walemavu 
walioshikwa wakapelekwa Mtwapa na tulipoingia Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  
alipewa jukumu ku jibu na tulipokwenda recess long time  kungoja majibu  nikaenda 
mwenyewe nikawaona na nikafaulu kuwasaidia ambao walishikwa n a wakawachiliwa ; wale 
ambao wamekubali kukaa hapo Mtwapa wamebaki nyuma ijapokuwa bado hili tatizo 
hatujapata mwelekeo m wafaka lakini angalau  hao ambao wameshikwa wachache 
wamewachiliwa. Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So Majority Le ader please make  proper 
follow up and bring the response not la ter than next week Thursday.  
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
RESHUFFLING OF CHAIRP ERSONS AND MEMBERS O F CERTAIN COMMITTEE S 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwidani?  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you m ay I take this opportunity again to 
move a Motion;  
(Leader of Majority ( Hon.  Mwidani ) moved the Motion ) 
That Pursuant to Standing Order 154 (1) and not wit hstanding Standing Orders 155, 
156, 157 and 174 this House grants leave and approves the appointments of the 
following to the docket and membership of the  mentioned C ommittees:   
Mr. Speaker Sir;  
1. Hon.  Fahad Kassim Abdallah to be a M ember and Chairperson of the Committee 
on Water, Sanitation and Natural Resources to  replace Hon. Prischillah Mumba;  
July 19, 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            54 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only.  A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 (Applause)  
2. Hon. Prischillah Mumba to be the new Chairperson Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works to rep lace Hon. Fahad Kassim Abdallah;  
(Applause)  
3. Hon. Milka Moraa to be a M ember of Committee on Health Services;  
(Applause)  
4. Hon. Hamida Noor to be a M ember of Committee on Health Services;  
(Applause)  
5. Hon. Robert Nyiro to be a M ember of Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and 
Public W orks; 
(Applause)  
Thank you Mr. Speaker  I would like to give that information to the House for the 
following Motion. Now I would like to call my colle ague Hon. Hatimy to second . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I, Mohamed Hatimy do hereby second the Motion. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now propose  a question that the Motion on 
reshuffling of Chairpersons and Members to certain C ommittees by Leader of Majority Hon. 
Hamisi Musa Mwidani be debated in this Honorable House . 
(Questio n proposed ) 
Hon. Members I now stand to put a question and our own Standing Order 157 (2) and 
156 (2)  show that we do  not have any debates to make so I now put a question that …  
(Loud c onsultations)  
I now put a question that the Motion on reshuffling of Chairpersons and Members of 
certain Committees by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani , the Leader of Majority be approved in 
this Honorable House?  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
The House stands adjourned until Tuesday 24th July, 2018 at  2:30pm.  
The House rose at 3 :11p.m.     