October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 13th October , 2020  
The House met at 3:35p.m.  
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. M embers you may be seated.  
 
[Silence] 
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
MOTIONS  
 
 Yes Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
 
AMENDMENTS OF STANDI NG ORDERS TO INCORPO RATE EMERGENCY OCCURRENCES  AND 
UNFOR ESEEN SITUATIONS  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Thank you Mr. Speake r. I beg to move the following M otion ; 
 
THAT AWARE that S ectio n 14 of the County Government Act , 2012 provides t hat a 
County Assembly may make S tanding orders for regulating the procedures of the County 
Assembly and for  the due conduct of proceedings;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that S tanding Order 236 of the Mombasa County Assem bly 
Standing Orders contemplates situations when they can be amended whenever necessary 
to do so;  
 
NOTING that since adoption of the County Assembly Standing  Orders in  the year , 2013 
much has happened and unforeseen  situations have occurred  which necessita te 
amendments of the same;  
 
CONCERNED that the COVID  -19 pandemic has seen the adjournment of the County 
Assembly Sine D ie and other measures that have adversely affected and disrupted  the 
smooth operations of the County Assembly and if not addressed would  in future impair 
its operations;  

October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE;  
 
THAT pursuant to Standing Order 236 of th e County Assembly to amend its S tanding 
orders to take in consideration emerging, emergency and unforeseen  issues and events, 
incorporate s use of  information and Communications Technologies and any other 
necessary amendments.   
 
 May I ask Hon . Moses Aran to second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Just a minute...  
  
[Silence ] 
 
 Yes, who is your seconder?  
 
[Hon. Aran s econd ed by bowing ] 
  
 Hon. Members , I now propose a question that the M otion by Hon. Mwamwiri on 
amendments of Standing O rders to incorporate  emergency occurrences  and unforeseen s ituations 
be discussed in this House?  
 
(Question proposed and a greed  to ) 
 
 Yes Hon . Athman Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N i bayana kwamba sasa hivi 
Bunge hili liko katika mchakato wa ku fanya baadhi ya marekebisho ya Kanuni za B unge hili 
Mheshimiwa Spika na ndani yake tumepitia changamoto za mkurupuko wa COVID a mbayo 
Mheshimiwa mengi yalishindwa kutekelezeka kwa sababu ha yapo ama hayakuangaziwa katika 
Kanuni za B unge letu .  
 Kwa hivyo ni mapendekezo yangu ya kwamba sasa hivi tupo kwa wakati mwafaka  
tukiendelea na marekebisho ya Kanuni za B unge kuzingatia na kuwek a katika mpangilio huo 
maswala yanahusiana na majanga Mheshimiwa Spika ya kwamba litokeapo janga ni vipi B unge 
hili na waheshimiwa watatekeleza majukumu yao tukizingatia ya kwamba tupo kwa minajili ya 
kuwakilisha wananchi wetu . Lakini kwa kipindi hiki tuli kaa zaidi ya miezi mitano nyumbani pasi 
kukutana kutekeleza majukumu yetu kama wa wakilishi wakati watu wetu walikua na haja na 
matatizo makuu na sisi hatukuwa na kanuni ya kuweza kutekeleza hayo Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Hivyo basi  ni wakati mwafaka lizingatiwe hi li ili mbeleni likitokea kutokea ambalo litakuwa la 
kuzuia ama kutuweka mbalimbali iwe kuna mikakati ambayo ime wekwa ma khsusi ili  tuweze 
kutekeleza majukumu yetu kwa mustakbal ya jamaa zetu tunawakilisha . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika kwa mantiki hii niombe tu B unge h ili kwa unyenyekevu wa moyo 
mkunjufu ya kwamba tuunge mkono hoja h ii ili iweze kufikishwa katika K amati husika 
waendelee na marekebisho ya kanuni wakizingatia ya kwamba kutakapotokea majanga na 
matatizo sawia na tulio nayo sasa hivi ni hali gani itaweza ku tuweka sisi na kue ndelea kutekeleza 
majukumu yetu.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you . Yes Hon. Mary Osongo?  
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  Hon. Osongo: Thank you Mr. Speaker for recognising me . I support the M otion that is in  
front of us ; 'Amendments of the Standing O rders to incorporate emergency occurrences and 
unforeseen situations '. Mr. Speaker Sir I support because the Standing O rders should be amended 
in that like now we  have th e COVID -19 and in the S tanding  Orders there is no order t hat support 
that. So if it can be changed and the requirement s that are in this Motion be included in the 
Standing order s I think it will be better for the C ommitt ee that will be processing the S tanding 
order s. Thank you Mr. Speaker. I support.  
 
 The Deput y Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Leila Nyache?  
 
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi kwa kuweza kunipa nafasi hii 
kuweza kuchangia. Nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri ; 
nataka nimpongeze kw anza kipindi hichi cha COVID -19 amefikiria sana kuja na hii hoja, 
nampongeza sana kuhusiana na h aya maswala ya COVID -19. Serikali Kuu  wako na Kamati na 
wameweka katika Standing O rder zao na sisi pia tunatakikana tuiweke katika Standing O rder na 
iweze kuta mbulikana sisi tuonekane kama serikali Gatuzi  tumef uata hiyo sheria na tumefanya 
kazi kupitia hiyo COVID – 19. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , naunga mkono.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . I now call the mover of the 
Motion to respon d, Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. Ath man  Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nipongeze 
to W aheshimiwa wenza kwa kuweza kuchangia, hususan kuunga mkono ya kwamba tujiandae 
wale wanasheria ama wasomi wa masu ala ya sheria wanasema, sheria ni futuristi c, inaangazia 
yatakayo jiri mbeleni Kwa hiyo K anuni za Bunge kadhalika yatakiwa ichukue  mkondo huo wa 
futuristic  ya kwamba iwe na tahadhari ya yatakayo tendeka mbeleni .  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika hili lilitupata  na likatupiga kofi la fahamu chambilecho 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy ya kwamba hatukuwa na maandalizi ya haya na ikatupelekea kukaa 
nyumbani kwa miezi mitano na ilikuwa na haja na dharura yetu sisi kukutana ili  kuweza 
kuchangia na kusaidia yale yaliyokuwa yakijiri katika maeneo yetu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Kwa h ili litatusaidia na kutuwezesha kwamba mbeleni hatalikitokea janga lingine na 
Mwenyezi  Mungu  In Shaa Allah aepushilie mbali majanga lakini tutakuwa tumeweka tahadhari 
na maandalizi ya  kukabiliana nayo. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na shukran kwa waheshimiwa.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now stand to put a 
question that the M otion by  Hon. Mwamwiri on amendment of S tanding Order to incorporate 
emergency occurrences and unforeseen si tuation be approved in this Honourable  House . 
 
[Question  put and agreed to]  
 
NOMINATION OF MEMBER S TO THE AD HOC COMM ITTEE TO OVERSIGHT C OUNTY GOVE RNMENT 
INITIATIVES ON THE C OVID -19 PANDEMIC IN THE COUN TY 
 
 Yes Hon. Athman  Mwamwiri , MCA Likoni  Ward. 
 
 Hon. Athman  Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Sp eaker Sir, I beg t o move 
the following notice of M otion;  
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 THAT AWARE that  the County Assembly passed the Motion on the formation of Ad-
Hoc Committee  to oversight County government initiatives on COVID -19 pandemic in 
the County on Wednesday, 7th October, 202 0 during the 51st Sitting;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that it is necessary to stipulate the mandate, scope and membership 
to the Ad -Hoc C ommittee on COVID -19; 
 
CONCERNED THAT the  Ad-Hoc Committee is yet to be properly constituted with its 
mandate, scope and membership ; 
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that;  
 
It appoints the following M embers of the County Assembly to the Ad-Hoc Committee; - 
 
1. Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri  - Chairperson  
2. Hon. Mary Naliaka  - Vice Chairperson  
3. Hon. Francis Nzai  - Member  
4. Hon. Renson Thoya  - Member  
5. Hon. Kibwana Swale h - Member  
6. Hon. Rosemary Mukavi  - Member  
7. Hon. Tobias Samba  - Member  
 
And that the C ommittee tables a progress report within seven  days and thereafter tables a 
progress report on a monthly basis and subsequently tables a final report  within  six months. May 
I ask Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai to second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Kombe:  I second.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Members . I now 
propose a question  that the M otion on nomination of Members to the Ad-Hoc Committee to 
oversight County g overnment initiative in the Covid -19 pandemic in the County be debated in 
this Hon ourable  House . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Hon. Athman Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. A thman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nadhani 
nyeti katika hili ilikuwa ni  kupatikana kwa W anachama kwa sababu hoja yenyewe juma lililopita 
iliweza kuwa katika Bunge hili na W aheshimiwa waliweza kuchangia na wakaungama ya 
kwamba  ipo ha ja na dharura ya  kuwa na K amati maalum  itakayofanya kazi sambamba na 
Kamati ya masu ala ya COVID -19 kwa upande wa Executive . Majukumu ya K amati hii 
yaliangazi wa, hayagongani na majukumu ya Kamati ya A fya, hayagongani na majukumu ya 
Kamati ya masuala ya F edha, hayagongani na majukumu ya Kamati ya U hasibu.  
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika wanachama hawa naona tumezingatia  uwakilishi inavyo 
stahiki na ni  ombi langu tu kwa Bunge hili kwa sab abu iko bayana na hawa wote ni 
Waheshimiwa ngangari  wachapa kazi wawajibikaji  tuweze kupewa fursa na Bunge hili 
kutekeleza majukumu haya ili iwe  tukipata taarifa ya yanayojiri kwa upande wa pili kuhusiana 
na janga hili . Hii ni kwa sababu sasa hivi tunaju a kun a athari ya mkurupuko huu kurudi  tena 
lakini Mheshimiwa Spika kama Bunge t ukiwa sambamba na vitego husika na kupewa taarifa y a 
yale yanayo jiri tutasaidiana kuchachawiza na kuchangia kila tahadhari na kila hatua ambayo 
inapata kuchukuliwa  kuweka mji wetu wa Mombasa na G atuzi letu la Mombasa katika hali 
salama. Kwa hivyo Mhe. Spik a ni kuomba tu Waheshimiwa Wenza kuw eza kuungana na 
wanachama hawa na kusonga mbele katika utekelezaji , ahsante Mhe.  Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Robert Nyiro . 
  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante Mhe. Spika,  ni bayana kwamba ni muhimu wa  Kamati hii kama 
ulivyoangazia katika mjadala uliopita ni kwamba ni wa muhimu  ila tu niko na wazo ikiwa 
utaniruhusu n a ipendeze Bunge hili ya kwamba katika K amati hii dukuduku langu ni kwamba 
Membership ya Kamati hii haijazingatia uwakilishi wa eneo kubwa zaidi katika nda ni ya 
Mombasa Kaunti ya Kisauni  ambapo sisi wajumbe wa Kisauni wajumbe saba tunawakilisha 
watu zaidi ya laki tatu na katika K amati hii ni masikitiko kwamba hakuna mwakilishi hata 
mmoja ambayo anatoka eneo la Kisa uni, angalau tuweze kuzungum za mambo ya wale watu laki 
tatu wa eneo la Kisauni .  
Mhe. Spika hilo ndilo dukuduku langu ya kwamba  ingekua bora kama K amati hii 
ingekuwa na wakilishi kutoka kila Sub-County , ili mambo ya Sub-County  yaweze kuzungumzwa 
na Waheshimiwa ambao wanatoka katika m aeneo yale. Kwa hivyo Mhe. Spika dukuduku langu 
ni kwamba tu s isi kama Waw akilishi wa Kisauni, ambao tunawakilisha watu laki tatu katika 
Bunge hili la Mombasa Kaunti, ni kwamba hatujapewa nafasi hata moja kana kw amba mmoja 
wetu angalau anakaa K amati hii, n i kwamba mamb o ya Kisauni mtu aweze kuzungumza.  
Ahsante Mhe. Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Mwaka 
Mwalundonda?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Mhe. Spika na mimi pia naunga mkono jambo hili 
kwa sababu  zangu ; kwa kitengo hichi kilichochaguliwa ni kitengo ambacho cha kuendelea, kwa 
sababu maradhi ni yetu leo hii tuko na C OVID -19 kesho yake pi a kuna maradhi mengine 
hatuombi  lakini kutokezea jambo lolote lile la kiafya . Kwa uchunguzi maendeleo yetu ya 
Momb asa Kaunti, jinsi ambavyo kwamba twa weza tukapata zile huduma za C OVID -19 ama vile 
zilivyo tumika  kwa kuweza kusaidia jamii kwa hii C OVID -19. Hivi sasa hususan sh ule 
zinafunguliwa, pia ni sisi K amati na sisi pia viongozi ambao tuko katika zile Wodi  kujua p ia 
shule zetu  zinaangaliwa vizuri na wanafunzi wanapata huduma nzur i, ikiwezakana kwa upande 
wa maji na hizo barakoa ambazo kwamba wanavaa. K wa hivyo mimi naunga mkono hii K amati 
iweze kuf anya juhudi ya kuweza kuangalia  matakwa yake ambayo kwamba amepatiwa , ahsante 
Mhe. Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Maimuna?  
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Mhe. Spika  nashukuru kwa kunipa fursa hii. M imi yangu 
nitas ema ni masikitiko kulingana na K amati ilivyo  tengenezwa  kwa sababu  sisi kama wa tu wa 
Kisauni Sub -County  ni kuma anisha  sisi tuko Kilifi ama tuko wapi! K wa sababu tuna imani ya 
kwamba ni kil a Sub -County  wakuwe represented . Si vile ambavyo tunafikiria ya kwamba kuna 
Sub-County  kama ni ny ingine wameingia kama ni wawili  lakini Kisauni hai jawakilishwa na hio 
Corrona iko ni janga la ulimwengu mzima. Kwa hivyo maombi  yangu ni kwamba watu wa 
Kisauni pia ni watu wa Mombasa waangaliwe na kuna Waheshimiwa hapa katika Bunge 
wanaw awakilisha. Kwa hivyo ninaomba kufanyiwe marekebisho  ya kwamba Kisaun i itambulike 
iko ndani ya Mombasa na wahusishwe  Corrona iko kila mahali … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mhe. Spika.  Mhe. Spika nasimama hapa kwa huzuni 
juu ya mambo haya ya Corona; ambapo nimeweza kuomba watu wa kitengo cha Afya  kwenda 
kupima nyumba moja ambayo ni ya mwenzetu juzi ndugu yake alifariki na ndani ya hio nyumba  
kwenye watu 21, watu 19 wamepatikana na Corona. Kuna na nyumba ya pili Mhe. Spika nayo 
wamekwenda kufa nya kwenye watu kumi, watu wanane wamepata ugonjwa wa Corona.  
 Mhe. Spika kubadilisha K amati kuna mpangilio , huwa kusema kuwa ni lazima mtu aje na 
marekebisho  ya kusema kuwa mimi nataka ku rekebisha  hii badili  ya jina hili liingie jina hili  
lakini kuna umu himu  kwa haraka vile inavyowezekana hii K amati i ingie i anze kufanya . Kwa 
sababu Mhe. Spik a wakati huu iliokuja hivi sasa  inachukua watu , watu wengi wamekuwa 
wanafariki kwa ugonjwa huu,  hivyo basi  nauliza wenzangu ni kuwa hii hoja tuipitishe, baadaye 
kama t wataka kuja kufanya kitu tutafanya  lakini kwa hivi sasa ipitishwe ili ianze kufanya kazi na 
mambo yapate kuwa yako kisawasawa. Ahsante sana Mhe. Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes, Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir  for the opportunity. Mr. Speaker I would like 
to support the appointment of the Members to this Ad Hoc Committee but I have the following to 
say. F irst of all Mr. Speaker I just want to give an advice , moving forward as I s upport this 
Motion just as the C hair for the matters on finance has stated through it is true that this pandemic 
is really eating up our people and we need to be very serious when we make decisions which are 
in line with the pandemic as we are making today.  
Hon. Speaker, I wanted to advi ce that the C ommittees or the Members that have been in 
this particular  Committee  they would have considered one ; the follow ing factors like in our 
County g overnment we know tha t we have departments, we have C ommittees which have been 
mandated maybe taking  care of a group in our County for example I want to mention educati on it 
could very important the Chair of E ducation is supposed to  be a Member bearing in mind that we 
are talking matters of pandemic and you know very well the schools will be opening soon  and it 
was very important for Chair for E ducation to be  considered to this particular C ommittee . 
I also want to support that we could have also look ed at the Sub C ounties like the Kisauni 
Sub County Mr. Speaker would have maybe also taken one person in th at particular side but all 
said and done let us leave that aside . I want to support Chair as I has said let us move forward , 
we have seen the names have already been avail ed Mr. Speaker and this is very important for us . 
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 When we have this particular Ad Hoc Committee;  one is that you know the country or t he 
nation is s truggling ; there are lot of issues surrounding this pandemic in terms of one ; finance, 
management of finance s that are involved, they are a lot of questions here and there Mr. Speaker 
and am very optimistic has having this particular Ad Hoc Committee  will make some matters 
clear. Also Mr. Speaker the Chair of Finance ha s said this is not the end of the pandemic, the 
pandemic is still going on and we need to have some mitigat ion measures or try to mitigate for 
further infections . Finally,  Mr. Speaker I just stand to support then I sit. Thank you.  
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) exited the Chair]  
[The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. Bwire ) in the Chair] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim. Yes, now allow me to 
involve the Motion Mover to respond. Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman  Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa niaba 
ya mapendeleo ya Waheshimiwa wenza ip o haja kupitia Kiti chako kuomba ridhaa ya Bunge hili 
ya kwamba leo usiulize swali mpaka kesho tukijaaliwa ture geshe tena hoja hii ikiwa 
tumet athmini mapendekezo yao katika suala nzima la uwakilishaji . Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
sababu hata kati ka hoja ya kwanza ilikuwa bayana tulinukuu na kukubaliana na Bunge hili kuwe 
na uwakili shi wa kila Gatuzi dogo katika Gatuzi za Mombasa na hapa kwa bahati mbaya kweli 
Kisauni imesahaulika kwa baha ti mbaya pia m wakilishi wa  ndugu zetu wanaois hi na ulemavu 
pia amesah aulika. Kwa hivyo M heshimiwa Spika naomba kupitia Kiti chako na ridhaa ya Bunge 
hili wanikubalie ya kwamba majina haya yarudi kesho kabla ya kuuliza swali. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. B wire) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I r ise to support.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. I think that is noted. Yes, Clerk?  
 
[Question on the M otion deferred pending further consultation on the m embership of the Ad Hoc 
Committee ] 
 
ADOPTION OF  THE REPORT ON THE PROPOS ED KWA BULO PLOT NO .MN/1/397  SQUATTER 
REGULARIZATION SETTL EMENT SCHEME IN MOMB ASA COUNTY  
 
 Yes, Chairperson Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing, Hon. Ahmed Salam a? 
Yes Hon. Aran? Are y ou a Member of that Committee?  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Yes. 
  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Okay ? 
 
 Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
 Mr. Speaker Sir , I will go straight to the observations and findings, I hope each and every 
Member has a copy of the report so  we go t o observations and findings.  
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Member ! I think you are moving a 
Motion ?  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Yeah. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Not reading a report . 
 
 Hon. Aran:  Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to move the followi ng Motion;  
 
THAT this House adopts the report by the Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing 
on the Proposed Kwa Bulo Plot No. M N/1/397 Squatter Regularization Settlement 
Scheme  in Mombasa County laid on the Table on Tuesday, 13th October, 2020.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire): Who is  your Seconder?  
 
 Hon. Aran:  I humbly request Hon. Ko mbe Nzai to second the Motion.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise to second the M otion.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members allow me now to propose a 
question that Adoption of Repo rt on the Proposed Kwa Bulo Plot No; MN/I/397, Squatter 
Regularization Settlement Scheme in Mombasa County, mo ved by Aran Moses be debated on 
the same term s as moved . 
 
[Question p roposed and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Aran?  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Than k you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Spe aker S ir the plan was brought about by a 
Court order based on Land Act , 2019, this pla n was prepared over the County Department of 
Land s with other stake holders involved and I want to assure you that all the stake holders were 
involved and they m ade their contribution s, therefor e the plan was subjected to Public 
Participatio n. So I humbly request t his Hon ourable  House  to pass this Motion without hesitation, 
it is something that will be of good help to our people who have been suffering for quite a long 
time. Thank you.   
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante Mhe. Spika . Mimi nasimama kuunga mkono ripoti hii , ikiwa mimi 
mwenyewe ni mmoja wa Kwa Bulo, hivyo basi ni fur aha na nderemo tele tele kwamba  Kwa 
Bulo sas a tumepata vyeti … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is it Hon. Moham ed Hatimy?  
 
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9  Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mhe. Spika, Mheshimiwa aliyesimama hapa amesema yeye ni 
mmoja wa kwenye waliopata, kwa hivyo twataka a declare interest  kabla hajaen delea.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes, Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Sijapata swali la Mhe. Hatimy . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You first declare your interest as a beneficiary.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Ooh, mimi langu ni shukrani t u kwa sababu  tumelia  siku nyingi na sa a hii 
serikali zote mbili ya G atuzi na Serikali kuu  imeonelea ni vyema na sisi pia tuwe tukicheka kama 
wengine . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Nzai, are you a beneficiary of the said 
plot? Are you one of the beneficiaries?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Mama yangu ni mmoja wao, mimi siishi kwa hii plot i lakini mama yangu ni 
mmoja wao. Hivyo kama mama amepata nafikiri ni sawa na kwamba mimi nimepata.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You may continue.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Hivyo basi Mhe. Spika nataka  niseme  ripoti hii inajieleza vyema iko sawa 
kama vile ambavyo tulipoenda kule . Hivyo basi naona hii hapa isichukue mda Mhe. Spika, 
Bunge h ili iweze kulipitisha mara moja  ili mambo mengine kule yakaweze kuendelea mara moja, 
ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes, Hon. Wambua Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. N asimama kuunga 
mkono hoja hii  kwa sababu mimi nikiwa mmoja wa Kamati ya Ardhi  tuliweza k ukutana na wale 
wakaaji wa hap o na tukaony eshwa kile kinachoendelea hapo na vile watu wata  benefit katika 
hiyo sehemu. Kwa hivyo yetu ni furaha kama Mombasa tukiona sehem u kama hio watu 
wananufaika tun asema ni ahsante  kwa sababu pia sehemu tunawakilisha tuna  watu kama hao 
ambao wanateseka . Kwa hi vyo sina mengi yangu ni kuunga mkono, ahsante.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker we all know that matters th at are connected with la nd 
are very sensitive  and I was pleased  when  the Member who was moving the Motion  because we 
may not know actually  a lot about this issue of the land. Mr. Speaker as we are passing this 
particular Motion, but again I was happy and  pleased when the mover of the Motion tried to clear  
my doubts  when he said that this ma tter was actually subjected to public participation . 
 Mr. Speaker , he also  said the y involved the relevant  stakeholders  in that  particular issue 
and also the Committee on Planning, Land s and Housing  also it ha s been confirmed by one of 
the Member s that indeed  they were fully involved in this particular process . 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, and therefore I think its fully  for us to do just in this pa rticular M otion 
and therefore I support , thank you.  
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10  The Temporar y Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you, now allow me to invite the M otion  
mover . Hon. Hatimy , are you up?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker , I will support this so long as this report is no t 
contradicting a Court order t hen I support.  Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary S peaker (Hon. Bwire ): Was there a Court order? The M otion mover , 
can you testify to that?  
  
[Loud consultations ] 
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua ): Haina Court Order  Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa sababu 
tulikuwa kwa Kamati ya Ardhi  na tukaizungumzia na tukaambiw a iko salama . Tulikuwa na 
Chief Officer  na kila mtu alikuwek o Mheshimiwa N zai nafikiri pia alikuwa katika Kamati ya 
Ardhi ... 
 
[Power interruption ] 
[Technical Hitch ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire ): Hon. Memb ers let us not create confusion , Hon. 
Hatimy are y ou a Member of the said Committee?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes? 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire ): Were you in that meeting?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : No! I was not there Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): So yes Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Mr. Speaker let m e shed light on the same issue ; as we are talking now the 
Director for Settlement Mr. Nyaik irimu is on the ground waiting for our approval to continue 
with this work , so I can assure t his House that there is no  Court order at Kwa Bulo plot. Tha nk 
you. 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you . Yes Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Wambua ): Mheshimiwa Spika hata wakati Gavana alikuwa hapa 
alikuwa anaiulizia kwa nini hatujaweza kupitisha katika Bunge. Juzi tulikuwa na Chief officer  
hapa katika mkutano na Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  Hatimy alikuja, juzi wakati tulikuwa tumeita 
Chief Officer … 
[Loud consultations ] 
  
 Naam  labda unai  confuse   na ile ya Bu xton!  
  
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11  Lakini kule iko safi kwa sababu pale hata Chief Officer  alikuwa anataka tumsaidie hii 
ipite katika Bu nge na ali kaa sana pale akiturai  Chief Officer  wa Idara ya Ard hi Dr. June  na 
hakuna mahali ambapo alituelezea kama iko na utata wowot e. Hii ambayo tunazungumzia ya 
Kwa Bulo. ..  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: I am not disputing , this is a report which the Committee I sit I 
have no problem b ut the problem is Mr. Speaker if you go to page number three you see bullet 
number two , ‘Mr. Speaker Sir the plan relates to the land si tuated within Mombasa mainland 
North Nyali Sub County Kadzandani Ward. This land was protracted ownership dispute between  
the registered owners… ’ 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Which paragraph?  
  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Number Two.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Okay. 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  There was a dispute. It is in the report...  
 
[Loud consultation s] 
[Power interruption ] 
 
 Anyway Mr. Speaker I do  not have any problem to pass this report but just for 
information that we must be ready if anything comes up we know how to do. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Mr. Speaker last paragraph says , ‘The parcel of land was settled on by the 
area locals and this led to a protracted battle upon which the registered owners agreed to 
regul arize the settlers stay on the Court settlement ’, yes it was resolved.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire ): What do you und erstand by those words?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  ''Regularize '', the owners acc epted to regularize it to be a Scheme , that is why 
today the Director of Settlement is in my Ward waiting for our approval.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Okay point is taken , in ca se there will be 
anything else you will notify my office and  now let  me invite the Motion mover to respond.  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. Mine is just to thank Committee Members for a 
job well done and also Honourable Members of this H ouse for su pporting the Motion and this 
will go on record  that this House has done a tremendous work that will have great benefit to our 
people . Thank you so much Hon. Members … 
 
[Power interruption ] 
October 1 3, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           54 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified ver sion of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Thank you Hon. Members , allow me to put  a 
quest ion that this House adopts the Motion moved by Hon. Aran Moses on behalf of Hon. 
Ahmed Salama on adoption of the report on the proposed Kwa Bulo plot number MN/1/397 
squatter regularization settlement scheme in Mombasa County in the same term s as mo ved. 
  
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members having being no any other business , this House stands adjourn ed until 
Wednesday 14th of October , 2020 at 10 :00a.m. 
 
The House  rose at 4:15 p.m. 