May 16 , 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              55 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 16th May, 201 7 
The House  met at 2:35p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Members  you may sit , yes Clerk. 
PETITION  
            Hon.  Members  there is a petition here , pursuant to Standing  order 195 of the 
Mombasa County  Assembly Standing orders I wish to present to the Assembly the following 
petition from  Mombasa County  former Councillor Forum  to Clerk, Mombasa County  
Assembly . 
(Deputy Speaker Hon. Mswabah Rashid read the Petition)  
 
            Re: pe tition made by former Councillors who served in the defunct Mombasa 
Municipal Council pursuant to Standing order 195 of the Mombasa County  Assembly in terim 
Standing order s. 
            The Mombasa County  former Councillor’s forum consisting  of Members  who served 
under defunct  Municipal Council of Mombasa  (Local autho rities Act in Kenya) wish to 
petition Mombasa County  Assembly on the following;  
            1. THAT, we faithfully  and diligently served the people of Kenya  as Councillors and 
in various capacities under the defunct  Local authorities  prior to 2013 General elections when 
the said local authorities  were dissolved to give  way to the devolved system of government.  
            2. THAT, while former Members  of Parliament and other elective and appointive 
government officials are entitled to a nd indeed enjo y pension and gratuity packages  that 
ensure that they live comfortably once out of office, there exists no similar mechanism to 
compensate or appreciate those who ser ved this country faithfully as Councillors under the 
defunct local authorit ies; 
            3. THAT, m ajority of those who served as Councillors  in the defunct local authorities 
since independence are now living in squalor and are faced with the deteriorating health in 
the absence of health insurance covers;  
            4. THAT we have made the best ef forts to have this issue addressed by the relevant 
organs and  agencies without any positive outcome.  
             (5). THAT, the matters raised in this Memorandum are n ot pending before any court 
of law, constitutional or other legal body.  
            WHEREFORE, your humble Pet itioners pray that the County  Assembly: - 
            1. Investigates the issues raised in this  Memorandum and makes appropriate 
recommendation and legislative interventions thereo n address the plight of former 
Councillors who served in the defunct Mombasa Municipal Cou ncil since independence 
should include: - 
            (a) Making provision for payment of a one off honoraria of Kshs. 2. 0 Million to every 
person who served for a minimum of one term as a Councillor in Mombasa Municipal 
Council since Independence.  
            (b) Making provisio n for payment of a monthly pension of at least Kshs. 50, 000.00.  
            (c) Making provision for state -sponsored health insurance  for all persons who served 
as Councillors in Mombasa Municipal Council since Independence.  
            (d) Making provision for access by former  Councillors to premises and facilities of 
the current County  Assembly of Mombasa including Canteens and Speaker's Galleries in 
Mombasa County  Assembly.  
May 16 , 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              55 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  2             (e) Making provision for former Councillors to be exempted from paying parking fees 
and other rates and  fees while within Mombasa County  where we served.  
            We your petitioners will ever pray to County  Assembly for consideration and action.        
            The petitioner’s  representatives are as follows:  
            Chairman   Cllr. Moha med M. Mwandugu  
            Secretary   Cllr. Manoah Obat  
            Member   Cllr. Abdalla Miraj  
            Membe r  Cllr. Moha med Mwalimu  
            Member   Cllr. Moham ed Abubakar Kibarawa  
            And those are the representatives and their numbers of the  said Councillors who 
served since independence. Thank you.  
            Yes Clerk, sorry Members  I now direct this p etition to the Committee of Finance to 
give a report within 60 days. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir on behalf of Hon.  
Moham ed Hatimy , Nominated Member of County  Assembly I wish to move a Motion on his 
behalf . 
 
(HON. Amur  Moved  the Motion on  behalf of Hon. Mohamed Hatim y) 
Mr. Speaker Sir. I beg to move the following Motion;   
 
GAZETTMENT OF GOVERNOR'S OFFICE PRE CINCTS AS EXCLUSIVE PARKING 
AREA  
THAT AWARE  that the County  government head offices are situated near each other 
including the Betting Control Building, H.E the Governor's office, the Municipal Court 
Building and the County  Assemb ly Building and open space fronting and surrounding thereof 
used as parking space;  
FURTHER AWARE  that there is limited space for parking for County  government 
officials due to outsiders using the parking space for parking private vehicles;  
Mr. Speaker Sir , 
CONCERNED THAT , County  government officials and officials guest are getting 
difficulty in getting parking space to attend official duties;  
Mr. Speaker Sir I therefore urge the Assembly to RESOLVE  that;   
 The County  government through the Department of Plann ing, Lands and Housing to 
gazette  the area fronting and surrounding the Betting Control Building, former Telekom 
offices, H.E the Governor's Office, Municipal Court and County  Assembly Building as 
exclusive parking zone for the County  government.  
Thank yo u Mr. Speaker. I beg to move Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) :  Any seconder? Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  
Hon.  Siminyu:  I second.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Members  I now propose the Motion ; 
gazettement  of Governor's office precincts as exclusive par king area . Yes Hon.  Amur . 
Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir it has become a bad habit , 
Members  of the public avoid parking in the town pretend ing they are going to pay rates or 
payments at the County  government but it ends up somebody  comes to park his vehicle and 
goes to do  his personal work and at the end of the day they come take their car s. Mr. Speaker 
they depend on the County  Assembly parking whereby the parking was issued to the persons 
who have issues at t he Assembly . People are taki ng advantage of the parking Mr. Speaker Sir 
so it is about time we reserve the parking for the entire staff, the MCAs, the Court people and 
other departments  so that outsiders would not be allowed to park their cars unless they are 
May 16 , 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              55 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  3 visitors on off icial duties . Mr. Speaker Sir we are being denied parking fees by so many 
people nowadays by coming to park here, so if it is gazetted official ly if somebody who park s 
intentionally then we can to w his car and the pe rson will be made to pay the parking fee and 
once it  is gazetted it will be good so whoever park s does so  at his own risk or the car will be 
towed at his own risk and the breakdown will be paid by  that person. Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick . 
Hon.  Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker...  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Members  Order ! Can you consult slowly 
please . 
Hon.  Siminyu:  I do support the Motion Mr. Speaker but us as a County  we have to 
put mechanism in place  and for any law to take effect there must be gazettment because any 
one can challenge that decision but if it is gazetted it can be used in the court.  
Mr. Speaker the matter of security of the office of the Governor is a very i mportant 
office even in the Assembly if we allow each and every Dick and Harry to come and park 
their car into our space it causes the security threats both to the Assembly and the Governor's 
office.  
Mr. Speaker if this place is gazetted then we have the authority  to ask why are you 
parking here , but  because it is not gazetted anybody can come even terrorists , we need to 
have this place protected and the only way we can protect this area is by gazetting those 
spaces which are surrounding the office of the Governor so that we can have proper security 
for our Governor plus the Assembly.  
I fully support this Motion because it is going to take care of the security of the 
Assembly and a lso of the security of our Governor. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Amur can you reply to your 
Motion . 
Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker maybe I can just say for the 
security purpose of the Governor ’s office  not only the Governor but even the public some 
cars nowadays we have seen cars  being plant ed bombs . It will be best for our security  to even 
have scanners as it will help this County  to protect its Governor and the entire other building . 
Mr. Speaker that's why we are requesting the identified areas to be gazetted so that no issues 
will be rais ed in future  since  once you gazette a place the area then there's no issue of 
somebody saying I did not know or my car was to wed without my knowledge , once it is 
gazetted then consequences of somebody parking there will be known . Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much Hon.  Amur , 
Members  I now put the question to the Motion it has been proposed that the area or the 
precincts  of the Governor's office to be gazetted as a parking area for County Assembly and 
for the  Governor's office . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Well thank you Hon.  Members  there 
being no other busi ness this House is adjourned until tomorrow morning. Thank you.     
The House rose at 2:51pm . 
      
  