July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
   
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday  24th July, 2018  
The House met at 2:31p.m  
 
(The Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub  Ebrahim  Khat ri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members may you be seated. Yes Clerk.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon. Members my office has received the Mombasa County Public Service Board annual 
report for the year 2017/2018, this report stand committed to the committee on Labour and 
welfare Association for consideration. Yes Clerk.  
PETITION  
Hon. Members pu rsuant to Standing Order 200 2(b), I report to this House the petition on 
the clinker environment pollution in Kikaangoni. The petition read s, 
We the residen ts of Kikaangoni humbly request you to help us cut the air pollution 
caused by the clinkers deposited at Motrex yard which borders the settlement. The 
relocation of the same will help avert a health crisis that has engage d full residents 
residing with in its environment. The hazard caused by the  clinkers is as follow;  
1. Respiratory infection in infants and adult.  
2. Eye problems in infants and adults  
3. Skin problems in children  
4. Contamination of vegetation thus affecting digestive system of the livestock.  
5. The effects are clearly seen out and inside houses where clinker dust is spread 
reducing durability of iron sheet and unnecessary dus t in the rooms. Attached is a li st of 
persons affected.  
Hon. Members you may comment on this petition. Yes Hon. Amur. 

July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the petition has arrived in the  
Committee concerned about environment should do a site visit and before that this Assembly 
should write to N EMA  because if there is anything that  license was given then N EMA  must be 
the one who authorized  that clinker. So we need to get the information whether they were given a 
licence or no t, but it is important for the C ommittee to go and do site visit and gather proper 
information so that the families of the people who are  living there cannot  go through that kind of 
problem Mr. Speaker. Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya.  
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, Kikaangoni is in Mikindani and am happy that the 
petiti on has come through the plenary; it  is my plea  that the concerned Committee of 
Environment and Health do visit that place, I really do  not need to give much more information 
but th e concerned C ommittee, at the moment  those residen ts of Kikaangoni C ambodia are using 
a lot of money taking their infants and other people who were infected to hospita l and it is over 
two months now.  Thank  you. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro.  
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I think I sit in the Environmental Committee and 
Hon. Amur has requested may be we have a site visit so may be if that request is going to be 
granted through my Chair maybe  we can have a consultation may be after this so that we can see 
how we can do the site visit as we also gather information from the NEMA  people so that we can 
make sure we bring a good feedback to this House. O therwise it is very worrying that our people 
are still going through such an era where people put businesses without considering the health 
effect  of the business they are doing;  they are only after making money while killing the 
population around their businesses so  it is something we are going to have a very serious look at 
and then will bring recommendations through our able Chair Mr. Mukono who has new energy 
from Tanzania.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mary Osongo.  
Hon. (Ms.) Osongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, concerning the petition I think the 
Committee s concerned, the E nvironment and Health should be combined together and then they 
go and see what is happening there, I think that one will give us something what to do.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry.  
Hon. (Ms.) Osongo:  Am saying if the Health and  Environment  Committees have  gone 
they will tell us what to do about the area.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Salim Kalume.  
Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ikiwa ni Mwanachama wa K amati ya 
mazingira  ninge muomba Mwenyekiti  wangu na Wanachama  wote tufanye site visit  katika hii 
sehemu kwa sababu hili tatizo hili liko sana haswa katika Mombasa nzima kuna kampuni nyingi 
ambazo wamejiachilia sana inakuwa air pollution , kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwezekana 
tufanye hii site visit  haraka iwezekanavyo. Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes M embers, yes Honorable?  
July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Okay thank you Mr. Speaker . I also have a request that the 
Justice and Legal affair s Committee to join in because when you look at the second schedule of 
the Standing order s is in the Bill of rights are our mandate s and we are keen to protect the social 
and economic rights of our citizen s as regards  to Article 34 . So my C ommittee will be pleased to 
be part and parcel of the probing Committee. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khat ri): Thank you Hon. Member but I think Kikaangoni is in 
Mombasa not outside Mombasa. So you should know that, I think you know where Kikaangoni 
is, I think the C ommitte e will consider that. Yes Hon. Kh amis Nyundo.  
Hon. Ahmed Kh amis:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I think my fellow Members have said so, 
so Comm ittee on E nvironment should go s ite visit and bring us the way forward. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Shebe Athman.  
Hon. Shebe Athman  Salim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, kwanza ningependa 
Waheshimiwa wenza na wenyekiti wenza waniwie radhi kwa sababu sauti yangu kidogo 
imebakia asilimia fulan i kule nchi jirani.. . 
(Applause ) 
Pili Mheshimiwa Spika kuhusu petition  hii ni aula ni busara kwa B unge hili kuweza 
kuzingatia kwa sababu tuko hapa kwa sababu ya vilio vya wananchi kwa hivyo ningependa 
Kamati yangu nikiwa M wenyekiti mu weza vilevile pia ningeomba kuna maswala ya K amati 
zengine zinahusika katika mpango huu kwa swala hili kwa hivyo kama vi le Kamati ya afya pia 
ningependa tuweze kushirikiana nayo na vilevile pia ombi l angu kutia nguvu sio peke yake 
Kikaango ni changamoto hii iko pia pale S hireji nafikiri kidogo nimechelewa lakini kulikuwa na 
lalama ije rasmi Bungeni. K wa hivyo ningeomba ikiwa  ni Kikaangoni kisiwe kikaango peke 
yake cha Mikindani ijum uishwe Shireji pia kuna changamoto za kimazingira pamoja na afya , 
hivyo basi ningeomba B unge hili litupatie nafasi tuweze kutembelea kuzuru na tutakuja na ripoti 
kabambe na nina imani kuwa tutaweza  kufaulisha kazi hiyo Bunge hili litakalotupatia . Ahsante 
sana na vilevile Mheshimiwa S pika utaniwia radhi niko na ripoti kabambe vilevile pia Wenyekiti 
wenza Waheshimiwa wenza nitaileta kwa B unge hili letu la pili nina imani itapiti a kwanza kwa 
mikono yak o alafu B unge vilevile tutapata shu ghuli ya kuweza kulijadi li ambayo italeta natija 
kubwa katika K aunti yetu ya Mombasa, a hsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Maimuna.  
Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ningependa 
kuchangia kuhusu hiyo petition  iliyofika hapa tusiangalie sehemu moja tunajua ya kwamba kuna 
kampuni nyingi ambazo zina madhara zinadhuru watoto wetu zadhuru afya zetu kwa hivyo 
ningeomba zile Kamati husika zikiweza kufu atilizia ziangalie na  sehemu zengine ambazo ziko 
ndani ya Mombasa najua kama Jomvu  ziko, huko mahali zimetajwa Mikindani ziko, kuna 
nyengine ziko huku Shimanzi  na nyengine zote tuziweke kwa pamoja hii petition  imekuja ni 
kama kufungua muongozo ya kwamba tusiangalie  sehemu moja  alafu zikawa zinafu atilizia . Kwa 
hivyo huu ni mw anzo na ningeomba K amati zikienda zikirudi kutuletea ripoti zikifika kwa 
executive  waweze kutimiza k azi kwa sababu kuna mambo mengi , sisi tunayazungumza hapa 
tunayapitisha lakini utenda  kazi wa upande wa executive  ndio umelemea … 
July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 (Applause ) 
Kwa hivyo ningependa kus ema ya kwamba sisi K amati zitafu atilizia na ripoti ikija hapa 
na iwe ya kwamba hii ni jambo ambalo ni sugu tuliangalie na tuhakikishe vile vitengo  amba vyo 
ni hus ika vimeweza kufu atilizia hii kwa sababu hii ni ya dharura kabla watu wengi hawajaweza 
kuathiriwa na hizi sumu na hizi kampuni ambazo zina madhara kwa watu wetu . Kwa hivyo mimi 
ningesema hayo na namshukuru sana alioleta hoja hii na namshukuru Mheshimiwa Spika, 
ahsante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya please give us some 
comments on this petition.  
Hon. Opeya: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I would also want to support what Hon . Maimuna 
has said here that we should not just go around and make the report  but when it comes to 
implementation the executive does not implement it  thereby we will be doing services to our 
people, also there are other areas ; in fact my Ward there are areas where this issue is happening 
so the C ommittee should expand its mandate m aybe and go all over Mombasa and that way 
maybe they should be facilitated more so that they can be faster and bring the report to the House 
and then to mak e sure that the implementation C ommittee led by Hon. Kalume pushes the 
executive to implement whatev er is passed here, thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon Kibwana Swaleh give us some comments please in 
this particular issue.  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh :  Thank you . Mr Speaker am not going to say that you ambushed 
me but am ready  to say something on thi s issue.  Mr Speaker the issue that is before us is a very 
serious issue and I think as a Chair of health Committee I will be happy to see that we condemn 
and also take drastic measures so that we don't pollute the air so it normally cause s a lot of 
diseases and a  lot of sickness so although it may be mentioned in a certain area but I think it's our 
duty as Hon . Members to see that our environment is not polluted so as to prevent our people 
who voted for us or our commu nity to be more infected with di seases which will be not eas y for 
us to treat them . So Mr Speaker I think it is a good idea and you are welcomed and I hope that 
my Committee will be  in the  forefront to see that we condemn and also take drastic measures to 
stop this pollution. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Mwamwiri.  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti kwa fursa hii . Mimi 
nasimama kwa masikitiko kutokana  na ombi hili la ndugu zetu wa Kikaangoni walilofikisha ya 
kwamba wamekuwa wakiishi katika mazingira yasio sahihi . Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti sisi kama 
Kaunti tunahusika pia katika kupeana leseni kwa baadhi ya biashara kuendeshwa kati ka K aunti 
yetu na kwa mujibu wa kanuni haifai ya biashara kuendeshwa pasi kupeana ripoti yao ya 
upembuzi ya kinifu . Kwa faida ya wanasa sauti upembuzi wa kinifu inamaanisha feasibility 
studies  kwa lugha ya kimombo; Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti upembuzi wa kinifu inapasa kuashiria 
na kuon yesha ni madhara gani ambayo kampuni zile zitakuwa zikitekeleza kwa jamii na ni jinsi 
gani wa taweza kukabiliana nazo ku weka maisha ya watu wetu na afya zao katika hali sahihi 
ikiwemo kama ni mazingira ya kupanda miti , kama ua katika maeneo yale ili kuzuilia vumbi na 
upepo kupita kuingia kwenye maeneo ya watu . 
July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 Mengine ni k ama watakuwa wakipeana rid haa gani kwa wakaazi wa maeneo yale kama 
ni kuwajengea hospitali kuwa wekea matibabu ya bure kila mwezi, kupeana madawa na jinsi gani 
jamii inayoishi pale inapata athari na madhara ya uchafuzi wa mazingira wanafaidika kutokana 
na kampuni ile . Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ukizingatia inaweza kuwa hakuna hata asilimia moja 
ama mbili ya wakaazi wa pale waliopata ajira pale tukasema wanaweza kulipia ada za matibabu 
za watu wao, pengine ni kampuni tu ilioko pale lakini waajiriwa wametoka sehemu zengine 
wenyeji wa pale w anateseka wanadho ofika na sisi kama...  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Murfad.  
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker the Hon . Member is addressing you as the C hair he 
should address you as the Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes continue Hon . Member.  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti labda nimfahamishe S pika ni neno 
ambalo tunaliomba tunapokuja katika maneno ya Kiswahili  lakini kiufasaha ni Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti … 
(Applause ) 
Hili likuingie kwa akili na wakati mwengine usipe leke aibu kwengine kumuita 
Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti kwa lugha ya Kiswahili ukamuita S pika utachekwa Mheshimiwa…  
(Laughter ) 
Tukiendelea Mheshimiwa  inasikitisha na kampuni hii sio moja ziko nyingi kama  
ilivyoashiriwa kwa hivyo kama Bunge Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ni hali muhimu kuziongelea 
kampuni hizi kupata ufasaha utenda  kazi wao na ni jinsi gani waka azi wa Mombasa wanafaidika  
pale; wengineo hata wanak wepa kulipa ushuru kwa K aunti yetu, wako hapo kujitenge zea 
mamilioni lakini sisi kama K aunti hatupati lolote na wa tu wetu walio maeneo yale pia hawapati 
lolote;  sio maswala ya kielimu sio ya ajira, sio misaada ya maji sio swala la misaada ya 
kadhalika . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika safari ile itakay o tembelewa kule na ripoti ile kama 
Bunge tutapeana mapendekezo yetu na k uiomba idara husika kuchukuwa hatua muhimu ambazo 
zitakuwa funzo na m anufaa kwa watu wetu wa Mombasa. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa  
Mwenyekiti.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  Mheshimiwa Fahad Kassim.  
Hon. Fahad Kassim : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii . Yangu nitakuwa 
mchache wa maneno, nafikiri wenzangu viongozi wametangulia kusema na tuna imani na 
Kamati yetu ya mazing ira na afya zihusike pamoja na Justice  bila kumsahau Mheshimiwa  
Amriya tuko nae hapa aende awakilishe kama kiongozi wetu wa justice  na nina imani wakati 
wataleta hiyo ripoti tutaweza kuifanyia kazi ipasavyo, ila tu ningeomba Mheshimiwa  Spika utoe 
mwongozo hiyo kitu iweze kufanywa baina ya masaa 48 kwa sababu ni watu w etu wanaumia 
huko, wako na kilio na lazima kitatuliwe haraka iwezekanavyo kwa hivyo tuifanyieni kazi kwa 
haraka, a hsanteni sana.  
July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 (Applause ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Member . Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai: Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika kwa kunipa  nafasi hii. M imi nami kama 
Mwanachama  wa Kamati ya Utekelezaji  nitahakikisha haya yote kupitia kwa Mwenyekiti 
wangu, Wenyekiti wahusika wamefanya kazi hiyo kwa dharura inayotakikana na saa hii naona 
hoja hiyo imekuja kwa wakati mzuri naona ni kazi tu sasa  ripoti zozote zitakazoletwa kwako 
itakuwa sasa ni jukumu lako kutupa nguvu zaidi ili kupambana na haya mambo maana hili basi 
tumeanza ni gurudumu la kupigana , kuna yule mwenye kutoa leseni na kuna yule ambaye 
anafaidi katika kampuni zile.  Kwa hivyo letu k ama Bunge tutazingatia na Kamati husika 
zifuatilizie hili neno ili tujue ukweli wa mambo ni vipi? Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana, yes Hon. Feddis?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza nawapongeza wa lioleta 
petition  hiyo na kama wenzangu walivyosema lazima hizi Kamati ziweze kwenda kule mahali 
husika na wakakae na jamii wapate maoni je wamefaidika  na kama wamefaidika, wamefaidika 
na nini? Kama hawajafaidika ni changamoto gani? Baada ya hapo sasa sisi kama W abunge kama 
wasaidizi wa jamii tuweze kutia mkazo na pia kushughulika katika hiyo hali ili jamii zetu pia 
ziweze kupata huduma katika hizo sehemu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you, yes Hon. Faith?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwende : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker I've got nothing much to say 
because everything is exhausted so the task is in the Committees to bring b ack the feedback. 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much.  Hon. Members the petition is 
committed to the Committee on Environment and Health Committee and the report to be brought 
within 60 days in accordance with the Standing Order 202 (2).  I can read for you Standing Ord er 
202 Hon. Members if you want;  
Committa l of petitions Standing Order 202 (2; w henever a petition is committed to a 
Sectoral Committee, the Committee shall, in not more than 60 calendar days from the 
time of reading the prayer, respond to the petitioner by way of a report addressed to the 
petiti oner or petitioners and laid on the Table of the County Assembly and no debate on 
or in relation to the report shall be allowed, but the Speaker may, in exceptional 
circumstances, allow comments or observations in relation to the petitions for not more 
than 20 Minutes.   
Hon. Members , so we will wait for the report from the Committees , and then we shall 
take it from there. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Member under which Standing Order , you are 
Standing for a statement?  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Standing Order 41 (2c)  
July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay can you tell us what 41 2c says ? Statement hour, yes 
41 2c, do you have the Standing Order with you?  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : No. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  No, you will be given one so that you read for yourself, am 
not here to read for you Hon. Member, you can read for yourself, just read 41 (1) first before you 
jump to (2c)  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Am referring to 41 (2c)...  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But before you can start with 41 (1) before you jump to 41 
(2c) 
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Standing Order 41 (1) Notwithstanding Standing Order 
37 Sequence of proceedings ... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : So should I refer myself to Standing Order 37 or should 
I proceed?  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Just proceed I just want you to understand what 41 (1) is 
saying . 
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : 41 (1) Notwithstanding Standing Order 37 (Sequence of 
proceedings ), there shall be ti me, to be designated Statement h our,  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Which is? Every  Thursday , so today is Tuesday if am not 
wrong . 
Hon.  Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Yeah today is Tuesday but still when you go to 41 (2 c) ; 
 A Member may request for a statement from the Committee C hairpersons  relating to the 
matter under the mandate of the Committee and the Speaker may either appoint a day for 
the statement or direct that the statement be issued on the same day. .. 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Honourable  Member when you start reading Statement 
Hour do you start jumping to 41 (2 c) or you start with 41 (1) . I think first you have to 
understand very clear ly 41 (1) it's very clear there  shall be time designated Statement Hour, 
every Thursday,  commencing not later than 3:00 p.m so Hon ourable  Member you have to 
understand so you can bring that on Thursday.  
July 24, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           55 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni jambo la dharura sana ukiona 
nimesimama ni kuwa ni jambo la dharura ambalo ni lazima Bunge la Kaunti ya Mombasa ijue na 
haraka iwezekanavyo tuwajibike...  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Lakini  Mheshimiwa ninakuelewa vile umesema...  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Naregelelea tena Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la dharura 
halitangoja mpaka Alhamisi  kwa sababu...  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Mheshimiwa litabidi lisubiri mpaka Alhamisi  kwa sababu 
sisi tuko hapa kwa sheria na tunafuata sheria na hili Jumba tun afuata Kanuni za Bunge kwa hio  
hatuwezi kuja na sheria zetu kwa sababu ina ku  favour  wewe ndio ulete  taarifa  yako siku ya 
Jumanne ... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : What I can say Hon. Speaker s ir. 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable  Member first when am talking you should sit so 
please try to understand this Standing Order ; you know it is very clear that today if we start 
amending the Standing Order the way we want then tomorrow we will have the Members bring 
the own issues in  the House without following the Standing Orders . So I agree that you have a 
very important issue and if it will be wise first before you came to this House you should come 
and see me in my office and then we discuss with the Clerks ’ how we can put it in b ut if you 
come here and you start bringing the statement at this time Hon ourable  Member I think you are 
out of order please.  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much, yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House shall stand adjourned until Wednesday 25th July, 2018 at 
9:00a.m. 
The House rose at 3:04p .m. 