July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday , 10th July, 2019  
The House met at 9 :36a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated, yes Clerk.  
 
COMMUNICATI ON FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon. Members I wish to bring to the attention of this Honourable Assembly that we have 
visitors from Tudor Day Secondary School. I recognize the presence of the delegation which 
consists of;  
Student s: 
1. Fedel Omondi  
2. Omar Baya  
3. Hisham Moham ed 
4. Ian Mwangi  
5. Hatib Said  
6. Jaffar Salim  
7. Mohamed Abdulrahman  
8.  Michael Mwasangu  
9. Ahmed Anwar  
10. Asif Abdulaziz  
11. Said Nassor  
12. Shee Abubakar  
13. Samia Peter  
14. Kisavo Moses  
15. Githinji Ngari  
16. Ali Hussein  
17. Shaban Abbas  
18. Abongo Mahmoud  
19. Omar Mbarak  
20. Ngao Juma  

July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 2 21. Francis Kazungu  
22. Khalid Z ulfikar  
23. Nassir Abdalla  
24. Salim Omar  
25. Mohamed Salah  
26. Ivo Rai  
27. Hassan Mohamed  
28. Henry Oduor  
29. Gawawa Salim  
30. Mohamed Salad  
31. James Joshua  
32. Awadh Swabry  
33. Matano Omar  
34. Dzombo Hassan  
35. Abdulfatah Said  
36. Suleiman Nyaga  
37. Vita Hamisi  
38. Mohamed Hussein  
39. Bwanahamadi Fadhili  
40. Shary Abdulrahm an 
41. Ali Osman  
42. Mutengo Benson  
43. Peter Thoya  
44. Hamisi Buna  
45. Julius Mwalimu  
46. Dickson Mwalenga  
47. Abdulmajid Mohamed  
 
(Applause)  
 
(The students bowed before the House ) 
 
 Thank you very much, on behalf of the Assembly; I welcome you all to the County 
Assembly of Mombasa.  Karibuni sana .  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
STATEMENT  
FIRE DISASTER AT MIKINDANI WARD  
 
 Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N asimama k wamba nina hoja ya dharura kwa 
Kamati ya U chukuzi na naomba uweze kuniruhusu niweze kuulizia.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 3  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya you may proceed.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N imesimama kuweza kuulizia mkasa wa 
moto ambao uliweza kutokea kule Wodi ya Mikindani  ambayo nawakilisha  na ningependa kujua 
kutoka katika  Kamati hiyo ni vipi kikosi chetu cha wazima moto kimejitayarisha kupambana na 
mikasa kama hii katika hali ya kimafunzo, katika hali ya  kuitikia mwito  ama jinsi ya kufika pale 
mahali kwa mikasa kwa wakati unaofaa katika hali ya vifaa vya kuzima moto.    
            Namba mbili waweze kufanya uchunguzi wa kina, sababu ya  moto ule ulisababishwa na 
nini, n a ni vipi ambavyo tunajipanga kwamba janga lile lililopata watu wa Mikindani halitaweza 
kutokea katika sehemu nyengine kwa sababu kwa sasa hivi familia nzima imeweza kupoteza 
watu watatu; akiwa mama na watoto wake wawili. Ni janga ambalo limewacha familia hiyo na 
huzuni na gharam a nyingi, kwa hivyo ningependa K amati husika iweze kuleta ripoti mahsusi 
kwa wakati unaofaa. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya.  Chair for T ransport ? I think 
she is not there, we have the Deputy Chair for Transport Hon. Mwaka please if you have a 
response, can you give the response?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante Bwana Spika. N ashukuru kuchukua wakati huu wa 
kuweza kumregeshea Hon. Thoya . Kulingana na K amati yetu ya U chukuzi ilichukua jukumu hili 
kuchunguza kwa  hali ambayo ilitokea lakini kwa upande mwengine pia tusilaumu majukumu ya 
kitengo cha wazima moto  kwa sababu zengine za kwamba njia pia huwa zinasababi sha gari 
kutofika pale na kuweza  kuzima moto kwa haraka lakini Wizara ya U chukuzi inawajibika kwa 
wakati kwa sababu vifaa vipo, maji yapo, wafanyi  kazi wapo.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika naomba 
kumtaarifu Naibu Mwenyekiti ya kwamba Mheshimiwa amesimama kwa huzuni kwa mkasa 
uliotokea na hajalaumu wala kushutumu…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Idara ya wazima moto , isipokuwa ameomba kujua na kufahamu hali kama hii idara 
inachukua hatua gani  ili isitendeke sehemu nyengine na hali kadhalika kama ni swala la barabara 
bado ni uzembe wao kwa kutoweka misingi kabambe…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na kuhifadhi upana wa barabara na hali kadhalika kuzuilia kujengwa kusikokuwa kwa 
kuidhinishwa katika sehemu za barab ara…  
 
(Applause)  
 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 4  Kwa hivyo makosa yote bado ni yao, japo Mheshimiwa hakulaumu lakini Bi Naibu 
Mwenyekiti asilazimishe W aheshimiwa kulaumu idara husika. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Y es Hon. Thoya, are yo u 
standing on point of information or?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mimi nazidi nimfahamishe, nafikiri la msingi ni kwamba hoja hiyo 
nimeileta kwa K amati husika na Jumba hili lijue na nasikitika kwamba hata huyu 
anayezungumza hajui kwamba kuna mkasa uliotokea Mikindani n a wazima moto. Kwa hivyo 
wakati mimi mwenyewe nimekesha kwa hayo matanga ya hao watu wangu asinichubue zaidi 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Thoya. Y es Hon. Mwaka? Yes Hon . 
Mwaka Mwalundonda?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Mimi nataka k utoa pole kwa Mheshimiwa Thoya kwa uchungu 
wa kupoteza ama kuathi rika kwa watu wake wa Mikindani. P ole sana, mimi kama Naibu 
Mwenyekiti tutakaa na Kamati yangu kuweza kujadili suala hili. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwalundonda, ho w long do you need to 
give back the response?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Two weeks.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Two weeks yes, yes Hon. Amur?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker, with all due respect two weeks is a lot of days 
because this is a thing of emergency, the bodies are  lying in the mortuary, there are  burial issues 
so we want at least seven days so that these people can be buried . Mr. Speaker, two weeks is a 
lot of time. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Mwaka?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari : Musinilazimishe kesho, nataka wiki moja, seven days . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed Hatimy.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi. M imi 
mwanzo nataka kupeana pole kwa familia ya wale waliofariki Mhesh imiwa Spika na jambo la 
pili, jambo kama hili ni kuwa ikiwa kuna watu wamefariki na kama Mheshimiwa Thoya asema 
kuwa gharama ni nyingi, naona itakuwa vyema kuwa ikiwa sisi tutaweza kuwasiliana na wale 
wanaohusika, hi i familia kama imekwenda Coast G eneral wapewe  exemption  ya kulipa pesa ili 
wapate kusaidika . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh, the Chair for 
Health?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 5  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  I was just enjoying the debate but 
when it c omes to the issue o f waiver  then as the Chair of Health C ommittee I was worried a bit. 
Hon. Speaker although it  is a procedure and you should know waiver also has some limitations 
so I t hink my colleague from Finance should also know they should put more m oney on the 
hospital on issue of waiver so that certain issues that may  arise such as a disaster, the Department 
of H ealth could have more money to allocate in terms of waiver s. But at the moment the 
Department has got no enough money for the waiver but at  the same time I would say pole sana , 
pole my colleague from Mikindani for losing his voters and this is challenge from all the W ards 
we are having Hon. Speaker, they have a lot of challenges when it comes to fire disaster so I 
think it  is high time…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members please sit down,  let the Hon. Member finish. 
Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I never intended to speak on the same 
issue but the concern from the Chairman on Health has j ust forced me to do. Mr. Speaker we are 
talking of losing lives of the citizen s of this County and I echo the sentiments from the Hon. 
Chairperson on Finance.  
 Mr. Speaker let u s consider  how much we have lost in that D epartment of Health and 
how much are  we talking of waiving to help that family;  we should not politicize things even if 
we are meant to defend our Departments there are some other issues that should be taken with a 
lot of consideration. Thank you, let  us help this family as Chairman on Finan ce has stated , let us 
waive the entire Bill of these people and allow the family to bury their people. Thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you, yes Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes, thank you Hon. Speaker . I have got two issues; number one, I will 
just go stress upon the issue raised by the Hon. Member for Mikindani and prevention is always 
better than cure.  
 The case for Mikindani is just an example on whatever thing that is maybe awaiting in 
the process like if you come to my place Tudor, Moroto ma ybe in case there is a break out I do  
not think whether we can save anything there so I think it is upon the Department to take 
precaution and to do whatever thing that is necessary to be done.  
 I will also react to the Chairman for Health because it is t he Chairman for Finance who 
has raised the issue and so that atleast the victims might be considered for waiver but I fail to 
understand the Chairman for Heal th.  
 The finance has given a nod  even if the procedure is followed still the Department that 
will have a say is the Finance Committee.  Now I think he should just help the process to 
facilitate how fast the process can be so that atleast the victim can be helped. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 The Speaker ( Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Samba. H on. Amur you hav e said you are 
on the point of order?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 6  Hon. Murfad Amur:  We did  not say for every waiver or each waiver but for the specific 
issues such as this one we should consider and give a waiver on such issues in these particular 
issues Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you. Hon. Renson Thoya . I think if I can recall you 
mention ed to me that the Governor has  pledged to clear all the bills, I think there is something 
you mentioned to me before? Yes?  
 Hon. Thoya:  I think Mr. Speaker that was be tween me and you but as far as the House is 
concern ed it has rule s and regulations and I want to say this…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : No! B ut Hon . Renson Thoya you need to know that the 
Governor is the Boss of the Executive so if you have t hat instruction from the Governor that is 
going to pay for those b ills you may even tell this Hono urable House. There is no problem with 
that. 
 Hon. Thoya : Mr. Speaker . 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 Hon. Thoya:  I think my statement was very clear that I have indicated that a lot needs to 
be done by the Committee of T ransport in relation to disaster prepa redness and how we can 
mitigate,  mimi ninataka kuwaambia hivi mbali na  kusema hayo yote…  
(Interruption)  
 Wangoje kwanza ; unajua Mheshimiwa nataka…  
(Interruption)  
 Protect me from all this! Mimi nimekesha pale kwa matanga kwa hivyo nataka you treat 
this with utmost ... Nimekorogeka … 
 Hon. Mwende : Point of Order!  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Member?  
 Hon. Faith Mwende:  I am standing on a Point of O rder 73 (2) ; A M ember should 
proceed with the language which he started the statement with , if it is English  stick with English 
and if it is Kiswahili you stick with Kiswahili. Thank you.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Renson?  
 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 7  Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni  kukorogeka kwa hili tatizo la matanga lakini 
nimeku baliana na Mheshimiwa kutoka Kipevu acha niendeleze na Kiswahili.  Nimesema nataka 
uchunguzi wa kina ufanywe jinsi kikosi cha wazima moto watakavyopambana na tatizo hili. 
Zaidi ya yote ya Gavana niliweza kumfikia lakini habari hizi pia ni vyema iingie  hapa Bungeni 
na ninawashukuru W aheshimiwa vile walivyokuwa wanachangia hata wengine naangalia 
Mheshimiwa Kibwana Mbunge mtarajiwa wa Jomvu huenda hizi kura akazikosa za Mikindan i 
kwa sababu mimi n ina wasiwasi nao lakini zaidi ya yote pia ningependa kuiambia Kamati husika 
na Mheshimiwa Spika kwamba mazishi yatafanyika Mbaraki sik u ya J umatatu.  
 Kwa hivyo kama yako mambo mengine yataendelea tuweze kuwa na mawasiliano kwa 
muda unao faa. Mwisho nitakuwa ninawaalika Mheshimiwa Spika na Bunge zima kwa mazishi 
hayo. Ahsante.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Renson Thoya but you have not m ade it clear in this 
House t he issue of the bills that ..., can you just make it clear if you still ha ve issues with the bills 
concerning the … 
 Hon. Thoya:  Yes I have said we want to mitigate  yaani tuone tunaweza wasaidia kwa 
namna gani? Bil i mukiondoa mutaondoa lakini kuna masanduku, kuna nini hata Mheshimiwa 
Spika ukienda pale na mchango wa elfu hamsini si tutahakikisha mambo yote tunafanya. , si 
ndio? Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kunipatia fursa tena kuongea. 
Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kuambia Bu nge h ili kuwa hili ni Bunge la s heria au ni pahala pa 
sheria nataka tuangalie kusema Nyumba hii tulipitisha sheria  ambayo ni Disaster and Emergency 
ambapo vitu kama hivi vikitokea nafikiri wananchi kidogo wanapatiwa haki, kuna haki ambayo 
inatakikana ambayo wam epatiwa.  
 Kwa hivyo twajua Gavana huwa ni mtu mwenye kusaidia akisikia ; jambo kama hili huwa 
ni mtu mwenye imani huwa an ajitolea hata zake wacha  za kwa K aunti lakini nataka tujue 
Mheshimiwa kuwa hii sheria  ni lazima watu waisome wapate kuijua vizuri ili tu weze jambo 
kama hili likitokea tujue twafanya nini Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante sana.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I also rise to condole and say sorry to 
Hon. Thoya but again I would w ish him to appreciate the fact that when this thing happen ed the 
said D epartment that he is criti cizing now responded quickly…  
(Interruption)  
 I remember ... 
(Interruption)  
 Let me finish , I remember the same week we had a disaster ...  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 8 (Interruption)  
 Mr. S peaker protect  me, I speak as a Member of Committee on Transport…  
(Interruption)  
 I am speaking as a Member of the Committee. Protect me Mr. Speaker!  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Nyiro.  Yes Hon. Amur?  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Hon. Thoya did not condemn a ny department Mr. Speaker, he said 
investigation should be instituted to avoid such incidents; he is not blaming any departmen t. Mr. 
Speaker let it be clear, he  is not blaming any Department he wants the investigation to be carried 
and to avoid such scenar io in future. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro you may proceed . I think the Hon. Member 
has clarified that he did  not condemn anything so you may proceed.  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker I think I am very much conversant with the language of  
Kiswahili and as well as English; he said kuzembe a, If the D epartment imezembea  it means it is 
not active…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I think now we are going over board and the Ho n. Mem ber 
should not put words in my mouth;  I have said there  is this problem but I want the C ommittee in -
charge to investigate the disaster preparedness of that fire brigade that we have it terms of 
training, equipment and tend to empower this team of theirs Mr . Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think Hon. Thoya ..., I think Hon. Mwamwiri you are the 
one who said that thing? It is not Hon. Thoya. So Hon. Nyiro apologize please…  
(Applause)  
 Hon. Nyiro you have to apologize to the Hon. M ember for putting words  in his m outh.  
 Hon. Nyiro : I withdraw Mr. Speaker! I withdraw Mr. Speaker but again ... 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes? 
 Hon. Nyiro:  It is good if the M ember had  started by appreciati ng the little effort that this 
Department did because I remember in the same week that Hon. Thoya had a disast er I also had 
a disaster in my W ard. I had demolitions  and I called the Department and they said the little 
resources that they had were  taken to Mikindani . 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 9  So there was something done however little there wa somethin g that was done and it was 
only good for the member to say that there was something done so that to appreciate the work 
that was done by the Department.  
 Secondly Mr. Speaker I do  not think whether as a County or as a Department we have the 
resources to d o investigations so investigations must be done by the police , the D epartment does 
not do investigations so we will engage the police they do investigation as to the cause of fire but 
again you must understand that disasters are meant to come any other tim e, disasters will always 
be there…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Sp ika naomba 
kumtaarif u Mheshimiwa Mwenza kama akili yake razini...  
(Applause)  
 Afahamu ya kwamba Mheshimiwa Spika katika Bunge hili…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro : Mr. Speaker i  said am good and conversant with the language of Kiswahili 
and English akili razini  mean s that I am mwenda wazimu  so the people of Bam buri did not elect 
a mwenda wazimu  into this A ssembly…  
(Applause)  
 The people of Bamburi did not elect a mwenda  wazimu  into this Assembly. Kindly! 
Kindly!  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mwamwiri please can you repeat  the word , what did 
you say?  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kumfunza M walimu Nyiro 
ambaye ni Mheshimiwa sasa hivi ya kwamba akili razini ni akili timamu na kinyume chake ni 
ndio wenda wazimu. Kwa hivyo yeye kama ni kinyume cha akili razini.. . 
(Laughter)  
 Kama yeye ni kinyume ch a akili razini afahamishe Bunge hili tuweze kumfahamu lakini 
kimimi nimemtukuza nimempa hadhi ya kwamba ana akili zake timamu.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Hon. Nyiro:  Naomba niongee kwa Kiswahili Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri kamwe huwezi 
kunifunza Kiswahili mimi ni gwiji wa Kiswahili...  
(Laughter)  
 Umesema kama mimi nina akil i razini kumaanisha kwamba sina, n aomba uombe 
msamaha la sivyo patachimbika hapa…  
(Laughter and applause)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mwamwiri please can you withdraw that statement?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Namtaka radhi Mheshimiwa Spika. Namtaka radhi 
Mheshimiwa jinsi alivyonifahamu. Mheshimiwa Spika nimku mbushe tu ya kwamba katika 
Bunge hil i sisi hatuna K amati ya polisi isipokuwa tunafahamu Inspectorate  na bado iko chini y a 
idara ya uchukuzi ambapo kama ni uchunguzi na ripoti katika Bunge hili sisi jukumu letu ni 
Kamati husika watumie kitengo walicho nacho hawajatosheka waandikie DCI wamuandike 
kama wanamtaka DPP wamuongeze katika uchunguzi wao lakini haja yetu kama Bunge 
watuletee taarifa ba ada ya kukamilisha uchunguzi wao.  
 Mengineyo Mheshimiwa S pika sisi si  jukumu letu kujibiwa juu juu na isitoshe jukumu la 
kujibu kauli ni jukumu la M wenyekiti na Naibu wake na Naibu M wenyekiti ameshajibu , kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Nyiro kurege lelea kujibu kauli iliyotangulia ni kuhujumu nyadhifa na cheo 
cha Naibu Mwenyekiti wake ambaye ameshatangulia kusema katika Bunge hili. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Y es Hon . Ahmed Salama from 
Bofu Ward?  
 Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi langu lilikuwa ni kutaka 
kusema pole kwa Mheshimiwa wa Mikindani lakini swala kub wa la Mheshimiwa wa Mikindani 
anatapatapa lakini kuna ajenda moja anahitaji msaada wa Bunge hili apate kusaidika.  Ikiwa 
wewe um ezungumza na Spika mambo ya Gavana mambo ya michango lakini kwa njia moja ama 
mbili Mheshimiwa alikuwa anataka Bunge hili na W aheshim iwa wafanye michango wamsaidie 
ili kusudi kumudu yale yal iotokea. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(The S peaker (Hon. Khatri ) exited the Chair)  
(The Deputy S peaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa wa Bofu aliyetoka kwa 
mazungumzo haya kabla akae angepaswa kujenga hoja ili ik ipita kama hoja iwe ni amri na 
jukumu letu sote lakini yeye ametoa kama pendekezo, haiwezi letwa amri ikubaliwe isipokuwa 
mpaka ajenge hoja. Kwa Mheshimiwa kwa ruhsa yako umruhusu asimame ajenge hoja kwa hilo.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri Mheshimiwa Nyiro amejua kuna kitu 
nataka kuongea ndio anatoka lakini kabla niingie hapa ku wa Mwakilishi Wo di wa Mikindani 
nilikuwa afisa  mzima moto katika kitengo cha Station officer. K wa hivyo sioni haja ya yeye 
aweze kudanganya Bunge hili ; katika upande wa wazima moto kuna kitengo cha operation , 
training fire prevention na investigation  ambayo ni uchunguzi kwa hivyo mimi najua 
Mheshimiwa Nyiro alikuwa mwanajeshi, ukawa mwalimu kama kazi si yako  zungumzia kuhusu 
mabunduki, mambo ya kuzima moto uwaachie wazima moto. Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Thoya for raising this concern . 
Hon. Members, I think the Vice Chair C ommittee on Transport clearly saying she will bring t he 
response on issues raised by Hon. Renson Thoya from Mikindani Ward in a weeks’ time so as an 
Assembly we shall wait for that report and deliberate further . I want the C ommittee to bring to 
this House, so next order please?  
 
MOTION  
AMENDMENT OF SITTING DAYS AND HOURS FOR AS SEMBLY PLENARY SITTI NGS 
 
 Yes the Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Let me move a 
Motion on amendment of sitting days and hours for Assembly plenary s ittings. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
(The Leader of M ajority (Hon. Mwidani ) move d the Motion)  
 
Standing O rder 24 (1) provides for the sitting days for plenary sittings of the County 
Assembly to be from Tuesday to Thursday of every week from second week of February 
to first  week of December o f every year;  
 
Mr. Speaker , Standing O rder 27 (1) further provides for th e hours of meeting to be from 
9:00a.m on Wednesday’s and from 2: 30p.m on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 
afternoons whe n the Assembly is not on recess;  
 
Mr. Speaker , Standing O rder 23 4 provides for amendment of the Standing O rders at any 
time by the County Assembly Procedure and Rules Committee ; 
 
Mr. Speaker , now therefore this Assembly do hereby resolve as follows:  
 
THAT  pursuant to Standing O rder 234 the Committee on Appointments/Rul es and 
Procedures recommend to the Assembly that S tandi ng O rders 24 (1) and 27 (1) be 
amended to provide for the County Assembly Plenary Sittings to be held henceforth 
every Tuesdays and Wed nesdays in the mornings from 10: 00a.m and in the afternoons 
from 2 :30p.m and that the annual A ssembly calendar for the year , 2019 be deemed to be 
altered accordingly.  
And as we resolve this and even  put it in order that we will si t on Tuesday 16th July, 2019 
because tomorrow we have another sitting on Thursday so I was r equesting this House 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
12 also to make some amendments that it take effect  from 16th July Tuesday, 2019 next 
week.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker and now I request Hon. Kibwana to second my Motion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 
(Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh second ed the M otion by bowing)  
  
 And now I  propose the question that the M otion by the Leader of Majority as read be 
discussed in this House . 
 
 (Question proposed)  
 
 Yes the Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker,  amendment  of sitting days and 
hours for A ssembly plenary sittings.  
 
Whereas Standing O rder 24 (1) provides for the sitting days for plenary sittings of the 
County Assembly to be from Tuesday to Thursday of every week from second week of 
February to first week of December of every year.  
 
Mr. Speaker , Standing O rder 27 (1) further provides for th e hours of meeting to be from 
9:00a.m on Wednesday’s and from 2: 30p.m on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 
afternoons when the Assembly is not on recess;  
 
 Mr. Speaker , Standing O rder 234  provides for amendment of the S tanding orders at any 
time by the County Assembly Procedure and Rules Committee ; 
 
Mr. Speaker now therefore this Assembly do hereby resolve as follows:  
 
THAT  pursuant to Standing O rder 234 , the Committee on Appointments/Rules and 
Procedures recommend to the Assembly that Standing O rders 24 (1) and 27 (1) be 
amended to p rovide for the County Assembly plenary S ittings to be held henceforth every 
Tuesdays and Wednesdays in the mornings from 10 :00a.m and in th e afternoons from 
2:30p.m and that the annual A ssembly calendar for the year 2019 be deemed to be altered 
accordingly.  
 
 And when it is passed Mr. Speaker Sir I will request also to make another amendment 
that it starts from 16th July Tuesday, 2019 next we ek. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Leader of Majority I think you have 
convinced the House as to why you have brought the M otion. Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Hon. Murfad Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I stand to  oppose the 
amendment with one fact…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Are you opposing the M otion or the 
amendment?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  The M otion requesting the amendment of the sitting Mr. Speaker ; 
with facts. We are the County A ssemb ly of Mombasa Mr. Speaker but we are also learning from 
our National Assembly which is the main player of the politics in this country. Mr. Speaker since 
independence we have been having this National Assembly and the timings and dates of the 
meetings has been that, Tuesday afternoon, Wednesday morning, af ternoon and Thursdays 
afternoon. T oday Mr. Speaker if we keep on changing  what precedence are we keeping,  
tomorrow someone else will come and say let us have it on Friday ! We are giving room for 
changes bu t yes how soon are we changing this thing Mr. Speaker, tomorrow someone will come 
with his own ideas…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There  is someone who is up on a point of 
information. Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speak er I wanted to inform that the C ounty government is not a small 
government, it  is a government on its own and in the  near future we want for other C ounties to 
come and learn from Mombasa County so he should not tell us we are learning from the Nat ional 
Asse mbly. I t is an independe nt government according to the C onstitu tion of Kenya so very soon 
the P arliament of the national government might be coming to Mombasa to learn the same.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you, proceed . 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker the sittings that are being attended by the Hon . 
Members in the National Assembly are the same sitting s that the Senate meet on the same 
calendar . For us we do  not say no Mr. Speaker , my fear is tomorrow somebody else will come 
and bring other c hanges shall we be doing changes every time , every now and then? It will be 
too costly for this Assembly to publish Mr. Speaker. Thank you Mr. Speaker. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hamida?  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speak er. I think we are an independent County Mr. 
Speaker…  
 
(Applause)  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
14  And we can have changes on our own, we sho uld be an example to the other C ounties 
that we are becoming independent, devolution is here my brother Hon. Amur you should wake 
up and embrace de volution…  
 
(Applause)  
  
 And  think since independence as you said it  is a long time; it is 50 something plus years , 
let us get out of the cocoons that we are in and embrace ourselves. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Tobias  Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand to support the M otion . I would like to 
inform Hon . Amur that we do  not act on his fear or what he likes but we have to look at things 
that are best for the House and Members have unanimously resolve d that, majority…  
 
(Consultations)  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur: Let the Hon. Member not be clear because the que stion has not 
been put nor the M otion been adopted ... 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay t hank you. Y es Hon . Samba we are yet to 
put a question so it h as not been unanimously decided, let Hon. Samba proceed . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker from the look of the things you can see I do  not know 
whatever Hon. Amur took for breakfast…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 But as you can see Mr. Speaker he is the person who is anxious ab out this but you can see 
the mood of this House we are in support of this Motion at least provided we have four sittings in 
a week we can choose to do whatever thing we would wish to do provided we are serving the 
electorate  well. W e make laws, we represen t them well Mr. Speaker I do  not see the reason as to 
why we should be confined to do our business within Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
and Hon. Speaker as per that it is going to give us more allowance s, more time at least for us to 
participate fully . I think you can see o f late the House has been full and that is what we want and  
I stand to support my colle agues and the Motion Mover that amendment is as good today as of 
yesterday. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri kidogo nimechanganyikiwa kwa 
sababu Mswada u mesomwa na aka weka marekebisho . Sipingi mimi Mswada  lakini nataka sheria 
ifuatiliwe marekebisho  imesoma na hakuna mtu ame unga mkono  hayo mare kebisho  
Mheshimiwa Spika. Can we second first?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : It was seconded by Hon . Kibwana . 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nafikiri Mheshimiwa Kibwana ame unga mkono Mswada  kwa 
sababu  Mswada  ukiangalia  Kanuni za Bunge nambari  52 inasema , it must be in writing;  any 
amendment must be in writing . Haya marekebisho  sisi tuna own huu Mswada  sasa kwa sababu 
swali  ushaweka kwa hivyo kishe ria Mheshimiwa Spika hata kama u le Mswada umeunga mkono 
lakini marekebisho  hayakuwa seconded  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
     
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Renson Thoya? I think you have 
already talked on this issue . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  No it is a point of information and am giving out another point of 
information Mr. Sp eaker.  I think the seat you are sitting  on is so supreme you are the top person 
in this House and I want to bring to your attention that Hon . Amur is robbing the independence 
of some speakers here ; before he goes on air you must have given him a green light he cannot 
stand and go ahead neck to neck with the Hono urable from Tudor , it is a House of order, it  is an 
observation that we noted and I want to bring it to your attention Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 
nataka uisikie hii … 
 
(Consultations)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. I would just like to answer to…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  There  is something I need your C hair to be respected…  
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  And it is a House of order and law, nobody can just stand while somebody 
is on air, so Mr. Amur, i n fact you should make him apologise for the same. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Renson Th oya. Hon. Members 
it is in our Standing O rders that when an Hon. Member is up, let h im proceed with whatever he  
is deliberating on no t unless you a re up on a point of order or point of information . 
 Yes Hon. Bwire? And before Hon. Bwire proceed s, Hon. Hatimy what I was clarifying 
from the C lerk is that it was not an amendment but the Hon. Member said that he  wants the 
Motion to start from next week on Tuesday, the M otion is at it is but he wants the M otion to start 
by next week on Tuesday.  
 
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Kwa hivyo wiki ijayo itakuwa imeanza kazi? Kwa hivyo we 
do not have to come up with amendment  Mheshimiwa Spika? Leo tukipitisha  Mswada  saa hii 
itaanza kazi saa hii unless  yeye aseme huu Mswada  anataka u je baada ya miezi sita . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is as per the H on. Member who has brought 
the M otion, he has requested that he wants hi s Motion to take effect from next week Tuesday, so 
Hon. Members I think we are in order. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
16           Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker we were consulting with Hon. Hatimy 
and I do  not know which ruling you had already given because I saw some signals from Ho n. 
Mwamwiri otherwise I would also first wish to inform Hon. Amur that the County Assemblies 
are as a result of the product of devolution and all County Assemblies have powers to do 
amendments on anything that deal or touches the people of any County withi n the Counties of 
the representation and therefore since we are legislatures here, we are entitled to do any 
amendment because we  have done so many amendment s on our S tanding orders and I have 
never heard anybody objecting it. S o Mr. Speaker I think the M otion brought by Hon. Majority 
Leader will give us a room to have some other engagements on different days like on Monday, 
Thursday and Fridays;  so with us having sessions o n these  two consecutive days , Wednesday 
and Thursday is actually a very nice move an d I wish to second that.  
           Two Mr. Speaker so many Counties do have sittings on Tuesdays and Wednesdays so we 
are not going to be the first County to be having sitting on Tuesdays and Wednesdays , so I wish 
to second and I also had the mind that th e issue that has already been raised by Hon. Hatimy that 
there is no need of the am endment of course when we pass the M otion automatically it start s to 
operate, so maybe the Hon. Member just went out of  his way already we passed the M otion here 
today autom aticall y either today or next week it will be effective , otherwise I second the M otion. 
Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Bwire.  Hon. Bwire if we c ould 
have passed the M otion today on a Wednesday then it will mean that tomorrow  we are not 
having our sitting, that  is why I thi nk the Vice Chair of Rules and Procedure C ommitt ee 
requested that he wants the M otion to take effect from next week Tuesday.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Noted Sir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Milka Mora a? 
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this chan ce to also put in my 
sentiments. I stand to support the M otion br ought in by the Majority Leader because S tanding 
Orders are rules used to manage the work of the County Assembly and we have a mandate to 
amend them in order to suit th e way we carry out our business . 
 Standing Orders  are not c ast on stone;  it is our mandate and we have the powers to amend 
in order for us to run our businesses the way we deem best and I think having sittings on 
Tuesdays and Wednesdays according to the time that the Majority Leader has brought to the 
House would give these  hardworking Hon . Members time to mingle with the electorate and carry 
out their duties as per their representation and other duties that th ey best know.  
 So I stand to sup port so that we agree with the M otion that has been broug ht, I support it 
fully and ask  my colleagues to also support it so that we start the business and timing as per what 
the Leader of Majority has introduced in the House. Th ank you Mr. Speaker.  
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama 
kwa heshima na taadhima kuipinga hoja hii.  
 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
17  Mheshimiwa Spika naipinga hoja hii kwanza K iongozi wa W engi aliyeleta hoja hii 
hajabashiria Bunge hili dharura ya yeye kutaka kuleta mabadiliko haya;  ni kipi kinachosibu ama 
kinacho  tusibu kama Bung e ambacho ni lazima kitekelezeke  ndani ya siku mbili za wiki? Hapo 
Mheshimiwa Spika aliyeleta hoja hii hajabaini k uonyesha dharura ya yeye kutaka kuleta 
mabadiliko.  
 Pili Mheshimiwa Spika katika n ukuu alizoweka kwenye ibara ya K anuni za Bunge 
alisahau kuweka maanani ibara ya 41 (1) . Mheshimiwa Spika, kwa ruhusa yako nitaisoma 
angalau itamfaidi siku nyingine ; ‘Notwith standing Standing Order 37 (Sequence of 
Proceedings), there sh all be time to be a designated S tatement hour every Thursday’ . 
Mhesh imiwa Spika atakuwa amehujumu ib ara hii ama kipengele hiki kwa kuzingatia tu 
vipengele viwili alivyoviweka hapa na kile cha wa saa wa maswali katika kila siku ya alhamisi 
tutakipata wapi? Vyenginevyo  hizi siku mbili zitakuwa na h ali kadhalika itatulazimu kila 
Alhamisi tuje hapa kupata wasaa wetu wa kuuliza maswali.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika si tu kuchelea gharama ya nauli ya kuvuka ama ku ja katika shughuli 
za Bunge siku tatu kwa wiki, kama wanachelea hilo awe bayana aliseme lakini kama ni 
uwakilishi na kuwatendea kazi wananchi wa Mombasa yapo yanayojiri ndani ya siku ya 
Jumanne na ya k uulizwa maswali ya kidharura na kutarajia majibu angala u kufikia Alhamisi iwe 
tumeweza kupata majibu kuregesha kule tunapowakilisha laki ni tukilikwepa hili na siku ya 
Alhamisi itatulazimu kila linalokuja tusiweze kupata jibu la kidharura mpaka livuke juma 
linalokuja hali ya kwamba itakuwa si uwakilishi sahihi,  sio haki kwa wale tunaowakilisha.  
 Mheshimiwa S pika pesa ya mlipa kodi inaghara mia shughuli zetu na maisha yetu ya 
kuwepo sisi hapa , vyenginevyo hata angesema badala ya kufanya kikao kimoja siku ya 
Jumatano , angevigawanya tukawa na kikao chengine Ijumaa  angalau tuwe na siku zaidi za 
kuweza kuwakilis ha watu wetu katika maeneo haya.  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hili bila sababu 
mwafaka kimimi ni kwamba Mheshimiwa alichelea gharama za kuja ka tika B unge hili siku tatu 
kwa wiki...  
  
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwamwiri the Motion came from 
Committee on Appointment, Rules and Procedures, it did not come from Leader of Majority.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Mheshimiwa pamoja na hayo yuko aliyelipendekeza ndio 
likafanywa mjadala  na yeye aliyependeke za katika K amati husika, ndio namwashiria ya kwamba 
huenda alichelea gharama za kuja katika kikao hichi, kwengineko Mheshimiwa Spika sioni 
dharura kwa sababu mengine hayajazingatiwa katika swala hilo...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: I think Hon. Speaker my colleague from Likoni is diminishing 
the name of the Leader of Majority . When it comes to the issue of transport coming to the 
Assembly, Hon. Speaker this is a senior person who was once a Ma yor of this County so I think 
he should give him respect when he talks a bout transport I think that is a n on-issue, so I think he 
should stick to the issue he intends to raise.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
18  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri, you are on the floor?  
  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimkumbushe Mheshimiwa aliyesimama ya kwamba nina uhuru wa kujieleza na kama mtu 
limemsibu anao uhuru wa kujitetea, lakini mtazamo wangu kwa hoja hii ni watu kuchelea 
gharama ya nauli kuja k atika vikao hivi Mheshimiwa Spika, v yenginevyo sioni dharura ya 
kulazimisha mshombo wa vikao ndani ya juma lililo na siku saba tukashindwa kutekeleza siku 
tatu tukalazimi sha mshombo ndani ya siku mbili.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika pia kuna ibara nimesoma 41 itakuwa tumehujumu wasaa ule wa 
maswali na hali kadhalika kuna maswala ya kutekelezeka kidharura hatutapata wasaa wa kupata 
majibu haya ndani ya Bunge hili  kwa sababu itatulazimu kila linalojiri lin alokuja livuke jumaa 
linalokuja.  
 Kwa mtazamo huu Mheshimiwa Spik a na heshima ya Bunge hili na wenye mtazamo na 
wenye m aono na mapenzi kwa wakaazi wa K aunti ya Mombasa sioni sababu ya mabadiliko 
haya. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias Samba f rom Tudor Ward and I 
understand th at Tudor Secondary is up on the gallery.  
  
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you so much Hon. Speaker . Hon. Speaker I would wish to comment 
on what Hon. Mwamwiri has said;  Hon.  Mwamwiri should not bully the Members in this House.  
Hon. Mwamwiri is a bully Hon. Spea ker, and as much as we have our Standing O rders in fact we 
are the ones who are supposed to make them  because we are the ones who feel the pitch and 
understand them f or they are for our own benefit.  
 If we can feel  that we can do  away with our S tatement s to be schedule d on Th ursday yes 
we can as well do it  Hon. Speaker , these Standing O rders are not greater or bigger that the 
Constitution and  we amend C onstitution where we feel it  deemed good.  
 So Hon. Speaker provided we will be having four sittin gs we can even  reschedule that 
Statement hours be on Tuesday morning, the only thing I would advise him to do, we would 
advise the Majority Leader who brought the issue to at least consider in as much we are 
amending the sitting hours and sitting days we should also ame nd... 
  
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : He is up on a point of information, yes Hon. 
Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Mheshimiwa Spika, namt aarifu Mheshimiwa aliyekuweko 
katika nafasi hii ya kwamba Bunge hili ni Bunge la sharia  chambil echo Mhes himiwa mwenza 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy.  
 Hali kadhalika kila Mheshimiwa ana haki ya kusimam a kuchangia na kutoa maoni yake  
na hata siku moja maoni ya Mheshimiwa katika Bunge hili hayajawa shuruti ama kwa lugha 
aliyotumia kwamba ni bully .  
 Sina nia wala  uwezo wa ku  bully yeyote kwa sababu sote tuna nafasi sawa katika Bunge 
hili na mawazo yetu yana haki ya kusikizwa na hiari ya kuunga ama kupinga.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
19  Hali kadhalika Mheshimiwa Spika hatua ambayo anasema ningetoa ushauri kwa 
Mheshimiwa mimi sikai katika Kama ti hiyo na jambo hili nimelipata hapa na kwa uelewa wangu 
nimelipata na kasoro ya kwamba kuna hujuma ya wasaa wa maswali katika kanuni zetu 
hautakuwepo  kwa hio  pendekezo lake washauriane na Kamati husika watoe hoja hii katika 
Bunge hili siku ya leo wakajad ili waweke hayo mapendekezo waregeshe labda nitazingatia hilo. 
Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Samba , proceed.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker, Hon. Mwamwiri is taking a lot of t ime in this House. A s I 
was saying before he interrupted me with very  a long statement and have not even tapped a ny 
point of why he was up on a P oint of order.  Hon. Speaker as I was saying earlier in as much as 
we can amend the Constitution of the Republic of Kenya I do  not see any reason as to why we 
cannot amend this and as I support the Motion…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes what do you want to inform the House?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker you cannot amend the Constitution unless there  is a 
referendum , that should be very clear. Than k you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 Hon. Samba: Hon. Speaker , the issue is amendment ; I think the Hon. Member has got a 
problem with  this amendment  thing. T he whole issue here is amendment whether there i s 
referendum or not, the whole issue is that amendment is possible.   Hon. Speaker protect me 
because the more you give them time to attack me, am loosing so many points ! Yes Hon. 
Speaker so as I was saying before so many points of information I do  not want to be informed…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Thoya he has said that he does not want to 
be informed .  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Am not talking about the speaker on the air , there are people who you are 
noting in this House they are always on the neck of the other speakers, we are not talking on the 
amend ment of the Constitution of Kenya but we are talking about the amendment of th ese 
Standing Order s of the House so please Hon. Amur you are just confusing the Hon. Member 
from Tudor . Please with due respect…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalim u): Just let Hon. Samba to proceed . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker as I was responding to those who were opposing the 
Motio n and as I said before that I do not mean that we can amend the Constitution now but I was 
just giving an example that there  is room for amendment of the Constitution.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
20  If we can amend the Constitution why can’t we do the same here ? I think with their right 
senses Ho n. Members who sat in the said Committee had genuine reasons that have been given ; 
maybe the one which Hon. Mwamwiri has said is part of his own problem,  the transport maybe 
he is encountering problems as far as the transport is concern ed but that might be one of the 
problem s. 
 And also there are some of the issue s that we have seen at least if we adjust the 
participation of all Members we will always be strong , I stand to support and I will support the 
Motion. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athman Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Kwanza kidogo naona 
maumbil e yangu ya twiga kidogo yananihujumu...  ningependa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti...  Naam 
ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kunipatia fursa hii . Kwanza kabisa nitangulie 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti niko chini ya himaya yako nilinde na alama kiamrishi katika Bunge 
hili, vile vile pia nilinde na alama kielimishi Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.   
 Nina bashasha mpitwo mpwito Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza kuona shule yangu ya zamani 
manake najivunia mimi ni mwana  Tudor, leo wamekuja kushuhudia Bunge hili vile 
linavyoendesha biashara zak e kwa hivyo nawapongeza na nina  tumai kesho na kesho kutwa 
watakuwa viongozi kama sisi na bora kama sisi.  
 Pili Mheshimiwa Spika japo kwa kuchelewa ningependa kutoa rambi rambi zangu kwa 
jirani yangu Mheshimiwa Thoya (BMW) kwa yale yaliyomkumba sikupata wa saa wa  kuweza 
kutoa rambi rambi zangu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Tatu vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kutia uhai hoja hii ilioletwa na Kiongozi 
wa Wengi katika Bunge hili sioni ni nini kimebadilika Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti bali mabadiliko 
aliyoleta Mheshimiwa K iongozi wa Walio W engi bali amezingatia vipi Bunge hili litaweza 
kuboresha utenda  kazi wake , ni vipi Bunge hili litapata wasaa kwa waheshimiwa wenza kule 
mashinani kupata wasaa na wakati wa kuweza kuwahudumia mwananchi.  
 Kwa hivyo ningependa k uunga mkono kwamba Kiongozi wa Walio W engi Bungeni 
amezingatia yale masaa na akaangalia vipi sisi viongozi tutaweza kupata wasaa na kujumuika na 
wananchi wetu kule mashinani. H ivyo basi  suala la tikiti hapo halipo, suala la nini hapo halipo, 
sote tuna mahaba ya kuwaji bika, sote tuna mahaba ya watu wetu mashinani , kwa hivyo 
ningependa kumwambia Mheshimiwa Mwenza mwanafalsafa mwenza Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri 
kuwa kila kitu kinachofanywa katika Bunge hili ni katika harakati ya mpango mzima wa 
kuboresha huduma Mheshimiwa Mwenyek iti. 
 Kwa hivyo mimi yangu ni machache nimetia uhai hoja hii , hivyo basi  Mungu akijaalia 
huduma na utenda  kazi wa Bunge hili nina imani utazidi kuboreka badala ya kudorora. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. M walimu Mgwisho?  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Nimesimama hapa kwa 
ajili ya kuunga mkon o hoja hii; k wanza nata ka nimshukuru sana Kiongozi wa Walio W engi 
Bungeni kwa k uleta hii hoja kwa sababu sisi W aheshimiwa twaonana hapa lakini ha tujui 
wengine wanaishi wapi? Kuna mwengine mpaka amke saa kumi na mbili awe steji ili aweze 
kufika hapa Bungeni saa tatu…  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
21 (Applause)  
 
 Kwa hilo naunga mkono hoja hii kwa h aya masaa ambayo yamewekwa ili W aheshimiwa 
sote tutaweza kuhudhuria kwa wakati na pia  hakuna mabadiliko mengi ambayo yameletwa kwa 
Bunge hili tukufu isipokuwa vikao vyetu ni vile vile vinne, isipokuwa imeletwa siku ya Jumanne  
na Jumatano  kwa hivyo sioni haja kwamba sisi tuongee mengi sana.  
 Nawaomba Wabunge wenza tuweze kuun ga mkono Hoja hii kwa moyo wetu msafi ili 
Waheshimiwa waweze kuhudhuria kwa wakati, wale wavivu ambao hawawezi kurauka waweze 
kufika hapa saa nne kamili. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Rose mary Mukavi?  
 
 Hon. Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me time to contribute to this Motion . 
To me I think it was long overdue , I want to support it Mr. Speaker  as it is going to giv e me a lot 
of time to go to my Ward and try to see t he projects which have been implemented and having 
two days am quite happy because my people have not been seeing me on the ground enough and 
I support…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Rosemary Mukavi for the purpose of 
the Hansard recor ds we would like to know which Ward to be precise . 
  
 Hon. Mukavi:  My Ward is Kongowea . 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . 
 
 Hon. Mukavi:  And having these two days is actually going  to give me a boost, I really 
appreciate and I want to support this Motion Mr. Speaker after all  it is not taking away our four 
days t hey still remain the three days . I support it fully and we do  not really need ... and everybody 
has supported this. Th ank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Francis Kombe Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to air my 
views , before…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Be audible Ho n. Nzai . 
 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
22  Hon. Nzai:  Before I hacker the hackeritization  let me first condole with my colle ague 
Hon. BMW for the loss that he has incurred…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So who is BMW? Is there any Hon. Member by 
the name BMW?  
 
 Hon. Kombe Nzai:  Hon. Thoy a for the loss incurred in his Ward, also let me say hi to 
the Tudor Students for being with us in this Assembly and also not to forget the Hon. Members 
who call themselves the Old Tudor Boys…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir I stand to oppose the Mo tion with the following reasons ; nobody hates 
changes , changes are as good as anything but there must be good reasons for changes. Now I can 
see here there  is a very good Motion written in black and white but the reasons; no reasons which  
have been depicted in this Motion, there are just suggestions on this date, this time, that that day 
that hour but no specific reasons why it should be done so…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 It is true Mr. Speaker that this is a House of Procedures and laws but why do we ha ve to 
amend these Standing Orders, what can be the really reasons which can make the Members to 
amend these sittings arrangements? I would urge or rather request the Mover of this Motion to at 
least state or rather give us one or two reasons as to why we h ave to amend our Standing Orders. 
Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Feddis Mbura from Mwakirunge?  
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Kwanza 
ningependa kupean a pole zangu kwa Mheshimiwa Thoya ambaye sasa ni jirani yangu ; 
Mikindani na Mwakirunge ukivuka tu na kivukoni nitakuwa na wewe.  Mimi naunga mkono 
Mswada huu pia kumpongeza Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi kwa sababu ameniona zile shida 
ninazopata na wale wote wanaop inga kusema kweli hawanihurumii hiyo ndio nimeiona, kwanza 
kabisa ninapotoka ni mbali na hu wa najitahidi kufika mapema na Mswada huu ulioletwa ni ili 
mimi niweze kupata afueni…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa sababu ukilinganisha tikiti mimi napeana tikiti, ukilinganisha wakati mimi huwa 
najitahidi. Kwa hivyo mim i nauunga mkono huu Mswada kwamba tukutane Jumanne asubuhi, 
Jumanne jioni na Jumatano asubuhi, Jumatano jioni.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
23  Ile siku ya Alhamisi itakua ni siku ya vikao vya Kamati na kuona jamii mashinani. Kwa 
hivyo nauunga mkono  mia kwa mia huu Mswada. Ahsanteni sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me an opportunity . The only 
disadvantage in speaking last time you can be tempted to repe at but I will try as much as possible 
to avoid repetition Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish to comment on Hon. Nzai’s concerns that 
you need to give reason for the Motion and I think in my respective opinion, Standing Order No. 
234 and 235  are q uiet clear on the role of the Rules and Procedures Committee on the 
amendments of the Standing Order  and it surphases that following the Standing Orders  it is in 
order for the Motion to come as it  is and there is no requirement  since the a mendments are 
pursuant to Standing Order No. 24  which outlines the dates and time  and it does not give reason 
why the dates and time are so.  
 So when you amend you cannot give reasons on the same where reasons are not provided 
for Mr. Speaker. So I think it is a natural justice that now that the law has been followed and we 
are all in full support that there is no need of any reasons to be provided Mr. Speaker, I support 
the Motion . Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Thank you Hon. Amriya. I now call upon the 
Mover of the Motion to respond.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Kwanza 
ningesema nawashukuru Wabunge wote walio unga mkono  na pia wale waliopinga , nawashukuru 
ijapokua sio wengi. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na tumefanya  haya kwa sababu nzuri sana. Kwa sababu tumejaribu kwa muda huu wote 
tulioko hapa Bunge haswa wakati wa vikao vya saa tatu imekua ngumu kwa sisi Waheshimiwa 
kuweza kufika mapema…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa hivyo nimeona badala ya Waheshimiwa waonekane wanachelewa t uwaweke muda 
ambao pia wanaweza ingia Bungeni kwa wakati muafaka ambao ni saa nne ; na Mheshimiwa 
Spika kusema kweli ni lazima tukubali tusikimbie kule tulikochaguliwa tukawa twang 'ang'ania tu 
kuwa kwa Bunge, lazima tuwe na siku nyingi za kuona wananchi wetu  kule mitaani…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na Mheshimiwa Spika si o kwamba nimebadilisha kwamba vikao vitakua siku tofauti, 
vikao ni vile vile vinne, ni vizuri ukutane na mwananchi wako Jumatatu , Alhamisi na Ijumaa 
kwa sababu wao ni zaidi wanakutaka kule mtaani kuliko ati u we Bunge.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
24  Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika nimefanya haya kwa kuweza kumsaidia Mheshimiwa aweze 
kuja Bunge kwa wakati muafaka na pia aweze kuwakilisha watu wake kule mashinani kwa 
wakati muafaka. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika ningeomba pia ku seek leave  katika Standing Order  
No. 41 , ni kweli ame raise  lakini hiyo hiyo pia ningeomba kwa ruhusa yako so that  hiyo 
Standing Order No. 41  tuibadilishe badala ya Alhamisi iwe tutakutana Jumatano saa nane kwa 
mambo ya Statement … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa hivyo nashukuru sana Waheshimiwa wote wal ioweza kui unga mkono  hata wale 
walioipinga ni demokrasia , hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika nimeshukuru sana na nataka utoe 
muongozo wako. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mohamed Hatimy I think the Mover has 
responded unless you are up o n a burning issue and as the Hon. Speaker I will give you half a 
minute.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think I have a right under Standing 
Order No. 91 . Mr. Speaker through the Chair, even if the Mover has responded I can request to 
be given  a chance to speak , it is under Standing Order No. 91  but I stand to second the 
amendment because I see there  is a Notice of amendment under Standing Order No. 54…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mohamed Hatimy I think Hon. Amriya 
was clear enough when she raised Standing Order No. 234 and 235 of which any Member at 
anytime can propose the amendments and the Rules and Procedure Committee may take from 
that point. So to me I think we are in order because I have seen  the concern, it was about 
Standing Order No.41, so by this even tomorrow or in the afternoon any Member can raise that 
issue for the Assembly to adopt the amendments. So it is not an urgent issue that will let this 
House to be working unprocedurally.  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy: Agreed Mr. Speaker, but to say any Member I think it will take 
time because any Member that application must go to the Committee, then Committee will have 
to bring a report. But for the Committee itself they can amend directly Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes, I understand and from your sentiments on 
Hon. Hatimy it is upon the Committee to take that issue of amendments and bring back the 
amendments to this Honourable House. That is why I am saying as the amendments have 
reached the Table of the House, let the Vice Chairperson of that Committee to go back and s it 
with his Committee if possible they can bring the report or the amendments today in the 
afternoon or tomorrow for the House to adopt the amendments and proceed wi th our sittings.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : So you are not going to give us ... to come up with a question? ! 
Because you cannot make a n amend ment to another Motion Mr. Speaker . 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
25  And Hon. Mwidani ha s requested to be given a chance , there is a Notice of Amendment 
already w ith you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy we gave the Hon. Member to reply 
but in his own he did not  raise the issues of amendments , so it is who are talking on his behalf 
but the Hon. Member just gave us the Notice of which I sai d it is on the Table of this Honourable 
House but the Hon. Member has not raised to state that he has got the amendments for the 
Hansard record and for the Hon. Members to know that there is an amendment. Hon. Leader of 
Majority, did you seek for this amen dment for us to proceed?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Yes I said about Standing Order No.  41 which 
I have already written to be amended now, instead of having Statements on Thursday, let them 
be taken to Wednesday afternoon. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon. Members, and who is your seconder to this 
amendment?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I second the amendment Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok, thank you. Hon. Members I now put a 
question to amendment on the  Motion as earlier read by the Majority Leader and the Notice of 
Amendment to be included in this Motion to read, the Standing Order No. No.41 (1) to read 
Wednesday instead of Thursday . 
 
(Question put and agreed to) 
 
 So Hon. Members the floor is yours you can proceed to debate the Motion with the said 
amendment. Yes Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante kwa fursa nyengine adhimu 
labda nisiwe mnafiki jumba bovu likaniangukia, kwa hesh ima ya Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa 
Wengi kuzingatia Kanuni ya 41 (1) ya kwamba katika Hoja yake ya awali aliisahau na kwamba 
hakua ameitendea haki ibara hiyo na kwa kuijumlisha katika Hoja yake inafunga lile pengo la 
kwamba kungekuwa na walakini . Kwa hivyo nimpo ngeze kwa ubinadamu huo na fursa hiyo. 
Hali kadhalika Mheshimiwa Spika wasi wasi wangu uko katika zile sababu zingine za kutaka 
mapendekezo hayo vinginevyo kwa kujumlisha hili kisheria tuko nae sambamba, lakini ki 
binafsi yangu sababu zingine sijaridhika nazo. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) :  I can see the Assembly has fully exhausted on 
this Motion and the Leader who is the Mover of this Motion has also replied, so I now take this 
opportunity to stand and put a question that t he Motion on A mendment of Sitting days and hours 
for Assembly Plenary  by the Leader of Majority Hon. Hamisi Musa with the amended version on 
Standing Order No.41 (1)  be passed in this Honourable House . 
 
(Quest ion put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from  the Hansard Editor Page 
26  Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Having there been no any other b usiness the House stands adjourned until today 10th July, 
2019 at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11:01 a.m. 
 
 
       
              
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 