October 14, 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 14th October , 2020  
The House met at 2:36 p.m. 
 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  Yes, 
Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
 Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya, Chairperson C ommittee on Trade, Tourism and Inv estments. 
Any M ember from that C ommittee? Yes Hon. Tobias Samba . 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I would like to stand on behalf of my Chair who is not 
around , so I would a sk if the House can give us some seven days.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Okay the issue will be taken back to the 
next House Business Committee a nd they will allot a day of when the Hon. Member will come to 
respond. Yes, Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON WATER , SANITATION AND NATUR AL 
RESOURCES HON . HAMIDA NOOR ON ACUTE WATER SHORT AGE IN MWAGOSI WARD  
 Yes, Chairperson  Committee o n Water, Sanitation and Natural Resources Hon. Hamida 
Noor.  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speak er Sir . I stand on response to statement on a cute water 
shortage in Mwagozi  Ward.  Mr. Speaker Sir ...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M walimu ):  Yes there is a M ember who is u p. What 
is it Hon. Benard Ogutu?  

October 14, 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Ogutu: Mr. Speaker I ju st want to inform the Hon. Member who is on the floor that 
we do  not have Mwagozi  Ward but in this Paper it is written Mwagosi W ard.  
 
 Hon.  Noor:  [Off mic rophone] . 
  
 Hon. Thoya: Mr. Speaker I think Hon. Ogutu  is just confusing the Hon. Member , he 
should let her go on because i t is not again written Mwagosi W ard it is even written Mwagosi 
Award , therefore just protect the Chairperson of W ater. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M walimu ): Okay , thank you . I think as the Hon. 
Member has said it is a typing e rror so proceed Hon. Hamida.  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Mr. Speaker Sir, t he Committee  of Water and Natural Resources wrote to the 
Chief Officer Department of W ater whom acknowledged that there has been no any other 
services in the area , and  that the residents have been  receiving water through vendors.  Hon. 
Members the response solution  has been made to put up four lines fr om the Constituency 
Development Fund ( CDF ) office at Bokole to M wagosi village , which is  approximately 3km .  
The department ’s main challenge has been for finance s to fund the p roposed  project ; Mr. 
Speaker the budgetary support has been sought from  the County to fund the project and serve the 
residents of Mwagosi in Changamwe.  Please find attached  document from th e Chief O fficer for 
information.  Thank yo u Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M walimu ): Thank you Hon . Hamida for the 
response . Yes C lerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO  STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ROADS , INFRASTRUCTURE AND  PUBLIC 
WORKS AND HON . SHEILAH MUMBA  ON POOR STATEMENT OF  BOMU CA THOLIC ROAD MWIDANI , 
BOKOLE NURSERY ROAD AND BOKOLE DISPENSAR Y ROAD  
 
 Yes Hon. Mwaka Mwaludonda ? 
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakar : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir , in the morning I said that I will 
respond  after the recess but by good luck  our Committee  of Transport is very a ctive . Here is the 
report.  Mr. Speaker I wish to give the statement on a reque st by Hon. Ibrahim Omondi, MCA 
Airport Ward, w hom on Wednesday 19th February , 2020 sought to know whether the 
Chairperson was aware on a s tatement  on state of the above road s and what plans  the County 
government has in  repair ing the  road.  Mr. Speaker Sir , the Committee wrote to the Department 
of Transport , Infrastructure and Public Works which delivered their respon se vide their letter 
dated on 2nd October, 2020 ; the c ontents of w hich are as follows. Mr. Speaker Sir , those roads 
are repaired and the y are  planni ng for maintenance during this financial y ear, the contract is at 
evaluation stage and  will be repaired by section s during the second  quarter of 2020/2021.  Thank 
you Mr. Spe aker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Vice Chair. Yes, Clerk?  
 
October 14, 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 STATEMENT  SOUGHT BY TUDOR MEMBER OF COUNTY ASSE MBLY (MCA) HON. TOBIAS SAMBA FROM 
THE DEPARTMENT OF EN VIRONMENT PURSUANT TO STANDING  ORDER 41(2c) REGARDING GA RBAGE 
COLLECT IONS IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker , I seek to get a Statement from the Department of 
Environment. Pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2c) I wish to request for a Statement from the 
Chairperson Committee on Environme nt, Waste Management and Energy regarding ga rbage 
collections in the County. Hon. Speaker Kazi M taani  is an initiative of the g overnment to clean 
up th e community by unemployed youth.  Hon. Speaker the exercise being conducted by the said 
youth has led to garbage heaps pile ups along the street across the estate s. Hon. Speaker , these 
heaps of garbage  are now causing a health hazard to the residents of Mombasa County. Hon. 
Speaker therefore in the Statement the  Chairperson should inquire and  report on the fo llowing;  
what plans  the County g overnment has as a matter of ur gency to ensure that the waste collected 
is properly disposed and the designated dumping site to avert the outbreak of the disease. Thank 
you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mw alimu) : Yes Chairperson  Environment?  
 
[Silence]  
 
 Any Member from Environment Committee? Yes Hon. Leila?  
 
 Hon. Nyache: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, ningeomba Jumba hili waweze 
kutupatia wiki mbili kulingana na ripoti ya Mheshimiwa Samba aliyeleta tuwez e kujadiliana 
kama Kamati tuweze kuja na jibu mwafaka. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes, Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  SOUGHT BY CHANGAMWE  MEMBER OF COUNTY ASSE MBLY (MCA) HON. BENARD 
OGUTU  FROM THE COMMITTEE O N YOUT H, GENDER , SPORTS AND CULTURE A ND THE COMMITTEE ON 
LANDS AND PLANNING C ONCERNING THE CHANGA MWE VOLLEYBALL GROUN DS 
 
 Yes Hon. Benard Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker first I want to declare the interest that 
am a Member of Youth, Gend er and Sports Committee.  Mr. Speaker I seek a Statement from the 
Committee on Yo uth, Gender, Sports and Culture and the Committee on Lands and Planning 
concerning the Changamwe Volleyball grounds Mr. Speaker;  
1. The Committee should tell u s the measures th at the County g overnment has to curb the 
ongoing grabbing of the above mentioned g round;  
 
2. The plans that the County g overnment has to identify clear boundaries of that particular 
ground ;  
 
3. The plans that the County g overnment has to  upgrade the groun d. 
October 14, 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Mr. Speaker I also request the two named Committees to do a site visit on that particular 
ground.  Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  So as you have declare d the interest as a 
Member of that Committee I think you have spoken  on beh alf of your Committee and you will 
plan as to when you are going to bring back this report but on Lands Committee, any Member 
from Lands Committee? Yes, Vice Chair Hon. Aran?  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  I kindly request that you give us two wee ks so 
that we can have a concrete report.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Aran Moses. Yes, 
Clerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE C OUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
 Yes Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker let me 
move a Procedural Motion;  
THAT, pursuant to Standing Order Number 25 (3) and the County Assembly Calendar 
which was adopted by the House on Tuesday, 18th August, 2020 this Assembly adjourns 
for recess from today 14th Octo ber, 2020 and to resume regular sittings on Tuesday, 27th 
October, 2020. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your Seconder?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : I would like to call Hon. Tobias Samba to 
second the  Motion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias?  
  
 Hon. Samba: I stand to second Hon. Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members , I now propose a 
question that the Procedural Motion on Adjournment of the Count y Assembly by Hon. Hamisi 
Musa Mwidani as moved be debated and approved in this Hon ourable  House . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
 
 Yes the Leader of the Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir .  
 I hope this is a ro utine because as I have mentioned we have already pass ed the Calendar 
for the whole year on Tuesday 18th August, 2020 so Mr. Speaker this is just a reminder to the 
Members for the day of going to the recess.  
October 14, 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Mr. Speaker this will be a very short recess a nd it give chances to the Members at least to 
have some time to deal with their voters on the ground . So Mr. Speaker mine is to say that let us 
have this recess so that we can even have time with our electorates. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , nimesimama kumuunga mkono Kiongozi wa 
Wengi wa Bunge hili kwa sababu imefika wakati tumetumia muda mwingi katika Bunge na 
inabidi sasa kuweza kukutana na wananchi wetu kuweza kukaa nao, kuweza kufanya miradi 
tofau ti tofauti. Mt u kama mimi wiki iliopita niliweza kukutana na Kiongozi wa pili wa nchi hii 
na niko na miradi chungu nzima ambayo nastahili kuwapelekea wananchi wangu Mheshimiwa 
Spika…  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Kwa hivyo sina budi kuweza kuwakabidhi na zile ambazo ziko njiani zinakuja na 
itakuwa nafasi yangu mwafaka manake ilikuwa natat izika muda wa Bunge na muda wa kupeana 
vile vitu. Kwa hivyo nashuku ru Mheshimiwa Spika kilio changu  kimesikika. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya: Mr. Speaker I think I need to be informed , I understood that this is a 
Procedural Motion and I do  not think if it is out for debate . It is supposed to be close down…  
 
[Interrupt ion] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : It is… 
 
 Hon. Thoya: It is a P rocedural Motion and therefore we have less to discuss about it, we 
bring it to a close Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias Sam ba? 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I stand to support the Motion brought by the Leader of the 
Majority and it is a routine and it is a formality that whenever we are planning for our calendar 
of events we have a period or duration there which we go for a reces s. Hon. Speaker this is the 
time there are Members who are coming as far as from Mwakirunge, others also have to cross 
the Likoni Channel every day  and others they do  not even come completely and this is the right 
time for us also to have time with our con stituent s directly and like some of us we are going to 
have good times with those whom we love because even when we have been given a break for 
one week  we have been given time to even make our minds , relax and duri ng some past sittings 
my colleagues  when we were doing the debate here when it came to issue of stress, frustrations 
and depressions this is the only time we going to relax our mind and we are going to come back 
when we are full of energy when our brains are fresh and when we are fully refresh ed.  
 Hon. Speaker as my friend Hon. Kitula every now and then I think there  is a day that is 
coming  when every  time hustler nation it will just expire and I hope this will also retire. Thank 
you Hon. Speaker.  
October 14, 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes H on. Ath mani Shebe?  
 
 Hon. Athmani Shebe:  Mheshimiwa maumbile yangu ya twiga naona yananisaliti , 
ningependa niweze kupata kipaza sauti, kinasa sauti tafadhali…  
   
[Commissionaire handed the microphone to Hon. Athman Shebe]  
 
 Ahsante sana Mhe. Mwenyekiti kwa  kunipatia fursa hii ya kuweza kuchangia. Bila 
kupoteza waka ti ningependa kuunga mkono hoja  ambayo imeletwa na Kiongozi wa Wengi 
katika Bunge hili letu la Mombasa. Nikitangulia kusema kuwa kila kitu huwa kinahitaji 
mapumziko Mhe. Spika  kwa sababu kufanya k azi kwa Bung e hasa kwa mda mrefu  na akili 
inachoka na watu wetu pia wanatuhitaji kule mashinani, familia zetu pia wanatuhi taji.  
 Kwa hivyo naunga mkono hoja hii il iyoletwa na Kiongozi wa Wengi; ha ta mimi pia Mhe. 
Mwenyekiti nilikuwa nimetatizika, nimetati zika mithili ya kuchakurwa kwa sababu mashinani 
nimeanda a mipangilio kabambe ya kuhakikisha kuwa Jomvu Kuu... Nafikiri Mheshimiwa 
kumbukumbu ya Bunge hii itaweza kumbuka kauli yangu  niliposema kuwa usihofu Mungu 
akikufungia mlango mmoja, Mungu huyo huyo ana kufungulia mlango mwingine.  
 Hivyo basi  nafikiri ni wasaa mwafaka wa kuhakikisha kwamba Waheshimiwa Wenza 
hata kama hali hali ya jamvi ya mkeka n afuu nzuri ya kuingia mashinani  kuhakikisha kwamba 
watu wetu wanatuona na tunaweza kuwasaidia pale mahali pana stahiki . Hii ni  kwa sababu mda 
wangu ilikuwa nashindwa Mheshimiwa  nitagawanya mda gani  kwa sababu mipangilio na ratiba 
nafikiri na angalia orodha yangu mia ni kidogo.  
 Kwa hivyo nashukuru kwa saa hii nitapata wasaa mzuri  wa kuhakikisha kuwa Jomvu 
Kuu Mhes himiwa na wewe jirani yan gu ndugu yangu  tutakuwa pamoja kati ka mikakati ya 
kuhakikisha kuwa  ndugu zetu tunawatembelea na wanapata natija . Ahsante sana Mhe. 
Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Aran Moses.  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Ahsante sana Mhe. Spika . Mimi pia ningependa kuunga mkono hoja 
iliyoletwa na Kiongozi wa Wengi  na wakati umefika kwamba sisi viongozi twende mas hinani, 
tuhudumie wananchi wetu  na pia v yenye Mhe. Samba amesema tuwe na wakati wa kukaa na 
familia zetu pia. Ya pili Mhe. Sp ika sisi kama chama yenye inatawala Afrika ... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Chama cha ODM unajua tuko  na By-election  tatu, tuko na Msambweni tuko na Taita na 
tuko na Kilifi n a hapa ndani sisi ndio tuko wengi hata wenye wameenda Tanga T anga, lakini  
kwamba wajue kwamba ODM ndio b ado chama itazidi kutawala, na ni wakati sisi kama 
viongozi pia tutoke twende zetu, ili tuhakikishe kwamba tumeambia wananchi kwamba, 
ingekuwa leo marehemu Tom Mboya, ama marehemu Jaramogi Oginga Odinga anapatia watu 
wheelbarrow, hatungekuwa na wenye  wamefanikiwa kimaisha Mhe. Spik a, lakini hao viongoz i 
waliamua kujua maana ya elimu. .. 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Charles?  
 
October 14, 2020                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        56 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  Hon. Kitula:  Mhe. Spika ningependa kumpatia taarifa ndugu yangu Mhe. Aran kwamba, 
hakuna  apartment iliyokamilika bila uwepo wa wheelbarrow . Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Aran? Let us stick to the 
Motion.  
 
 Hon. Aran:  Kwa hivyo Mhe. Spika mimi ni ngependa kushukuru na ni kwamba  nilikuwa 
nazidi kuongea kwamba ni  lazima viongozi wetu pia tuangalie na tushukuru yale wametufanyia, 
na sisi pia tunaenda mas hinani  na hili ni Jumba la siasa Mheshimiwa tunaenda mash inani 
kuambia wananchi wetu pia. T ukiwafanyia kazi kwamba wheelbarrow  zitakuja na hizo 
wheelbarrow  zilikuja na zile pesa zimeibiwa  na wazipokee na wazikule vizuri  lakini ikifika 
wakati tutajua kwamba sisi ndio bado tuna  nguvu na  wala tapie tape mwishowe wa tarudi  na 
wazikule lakini waju e kuna siku watazitapika . Ahsante sana Mhe. Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes, C lerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House stand adjourn ed until Tuesday 27th October , 2020 at 10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:02 p.m. 
 