June 15, 201 6                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         57 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 1 5th June, 2016  
The House  met at 9:27a.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you Hon.  Members, have your seats.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Hon.  Members  of this Assembly,  good m orning.  I take this opportunity to thank you all for 
fully embarking on your duties and passing the S upplementary Budget during yesterday’s sitting. 
I urge us to continue with the same spirit and commitment in ca rrying out the business of the 
House . Hon.  Members, I would once again wish to draw your attention to Chapter Six of the 
Constitution and the Standing Orders which prescribe the conduct expected of leaders. We must 
at all times behave honorably and respect  the various institutions created by Constitution. It is 
indeed sad when Hon.  Members of your caliber  act in a manner which brings disrepute to  
themselves and the Assembly at large. I take great concern in the manner in which three Hon.  
Members ; that is Hon. Fadhili Makarani , Hon. Kibwana Swaleh  and Hon. Saad Faraj conducted 
themselves between  the dates of 28th April, 2016 and 29th April 2016. The said Hon.  Members 
removed the  portrait of the Hon.  Speaker from the Speaker’s Walk and replaced it wit h the 
portrait of former M ayor who currently is n ot the Speaker of this Assembly . The three M embers 
further went ahead and closed offices of the Leader of Majority party, L eader of Minority party 
and the Office of the Speaker without any reasons given or s erved to the aforeme ntioned leaders 
of the Assembly . The three were also engaged in physical fight in the Assembly on or about 11th 
May, 2016 ;  I being the Speaker, I find that such acts are unbe coming and unethical of leaders . 
Institutions such as  the Ethics and Anti corruption  and Integrity also condemn such acts and I am 
in receipt of a letter  dated 17th May 2016 to the effect which I now read… The letter is from the 
Ethics and Anti Corruption Commission which was written to the Speaker of the Cou nty 
Assembly himself Hon. Thadius Rajwayi, the s ubject is...   
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi)  read communication ) 
CONDUCT OF SOME MEMBERS OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY IN CHAMBERS 
DURING THE ASSEMBLY SESSION ON 10th AND 11th MAY , 2016.  
       The Commission’s attentio n has been drawn to the conduct of some Members of the County 
Assembly during the Assembly session on 10th and 11th May 2016 respectively . The said 
Members were engaged in name calling, insults and physical confrontations which actions led to 
physical inju ries and total disruption of the proceedings of the Assembly.  The Commission notes 
that whereas the M embers of the Assembly may have differences due to  divergent views, the 
views should be expressed in a courteous manner and the affairs of the Assembly sho uld be 
conducted with decorum and in a responsible manner.  The Commission notes that the conduct by 
some Members of the Assembly during  the Assembly session was  inconsistent with the 
responsibilities of leadership as spelt out under Chapter  Six of t he Constitution and the 
Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012 . The Commission wishes  to bring to your attention the 
provisions of Article 73 and Article 75 of the Constitution.   
June 15, 201 6                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         57 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Article 73 (1)(a) of the Constitution requires State Officers  to conduct th emselves in a 
manner that shows respect for the people, promotes public confidence and brings honor to the 
Nation and dignity to the office.  Under Article 75 (1)(C), a state officer is required to behave 
whether in public and official life, in private life or in association with other persons, in a manner 
that avoids demeaning the office, the officer holds similar provisions is also provided for in 
section 11 (a) and section 32 of The Leadership and Integrity Act, 2012 . The Commission notes 
that the c onducts were exhibited within the precincts of the Assembly and is actionable under the 
Assembly Standing Orders, and the Powers and  Privileges Committee.  The Commission 
pursuant to its oversight mandate provided  in Section 4 (2) and Section 4 (4) of the Lea dership 
and Integrity Act advises that the Powers and Privileges Committee being the responsible body 
for M embers of the Assembly should investigate the matter and share with the Commission its 
findings  for necessary action.  
(End of EACC Communication)  
       It has been signed by one  Michael K . Mubea , Deputy  Secretary/CEO -Technical Services for 
Chief Executive Officer . In light of the above issues and the issues having been raised in this 
Assembly during the 53rd sitting , I direct that Hon.  Fadhi li Makarani , Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh and 
Hon.  Saad  Faraj are hereby suspended from this Assembly precincts and should  not attend ; 
remember i said they should not attend  Plenary and Committee  sittings during the suspension . 
The Committee on P ower and Privilege s should investigate and avail its report within 14 days  
from this date to de termine and finalize the matter , and I’ m reminding the Clerk of the Assembly 
and Sergeant at Arms please take note of the suspensions and act accordingly . Hon.  Members  
let’s continue with the business of the day.  
(Applause ) 
STATEMENT  
ACUTE WATER SHORTAGE IN THE COUNTY  
       Yes Hon. Ndanda you are going to  stand o n behalf of Hon.  Caroline . 
(Silence)  
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  nilikuwa na 
jambo la dharura ambalo ningependa kuzungumzia leo hii. Mheshimiwa Spika  kuna shida ya 
maji ambayo ina onekana kila mahali  na shida hii inaleta na kunyang’anywa meters  za 
wananchi  na hizi meter wananchi  wamenyang’anywa huwa wanajaribu kujitafutia m aji na 
mpaka sa a hii dalili ya maji hatuzioni. Mheshimiwa Spika  tayari inatuletea shida kwa sababu 
wakati meter  hizo zinachukuliwa wananchi  hao hao ikifika usiku wanaiba maji ambayo hii  pesa 
ingekuwa inaingia katika K aunti. Mheshimiwa Spika  ningeweza kusih i Waziri wa maji aweze 
kurudisha hizi meter  kwa kila m wananchi  anayeuza maji ili wananchi  waweze kupata maji ; 
kama bado wana shughulikia mipango ya kurudisha hayo maji  kwa sababu wananchi  
wanateseka, imefika mahali wananchi wana iba maji usiku , ikifika usiku  maji yanaibwa , pesa 
Kaunti hatupati na mchana watu wanateseka hivyo hivyo. Sasa mimi ningependa Waziri wa 
maji aweze kurudisha zile meter  na wananchi  waendelee na vile vile walikuwa wana weza 
kupata maji mpaka wakati watakuwa wako tayari watakuwa  wamefanya  mambo yao 
yamekuwa tayari ndio waweze kufungia watu maji . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes the relevant Committee in Charge of the matter that has 
been raised by Hon.  Caroline Owino make sure that the particular inform ation is addressed  and 
as you know water is life and therefore we should not take more than one week to respond to 
June 15, 201 6                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         57 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 this particular matter ; for that reason therefore the Committee on Water, Environment and 
Natural Resources so ensure  that they bring their report o n that particular matter address ed next 
week Thursday 23rd June, 2016 at exactly 2: 30p.m.  
 
STATEMENT  
 
ENFORCEMENT OF A NO PARKING ZONE IN AND AR OUND THE COAST 
GENERAL HOSPITAL  
       Enforcement of no parking zone in and around Coast General Hospit al, Hon. Nyamvula … 
Yes Hon. Zainab  Darwesh . 
(Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab Said moved  the S tatement on behalf of Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula)  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab  Said : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika  kwa kunipa hii nafasi;  nilikuwa 
nazungumza kwa niaba ya Mheshimiwa Nyamvula kuhusu hii  sehemu ya kuegesha magari ya 
hospitali ya Mkoa  ya Coast General. Pale Coast General kwa upande  huu wa pili kuna Godown  
ya malori, s asa yale malori ya park mpaka pale  nje na pale nje ni pahali  watu wanapita  kwenda  
kwa sehemu ya dharura yaan i emergency , kwenda  sehemu ya kuzalia wanawake yaani maternity  
sasa yale malori yakiwa pale inabidi watu wa tembe e kwa barabara na kuna ma  tuk tuk na kuna 
wenye  magari pale , kwa hi vyo yanaleta  hatari.  Yule ambaye nafasi yake alikodisha na yale 
malori yak e ayaweke  kule ndani na p ale pia kulikuwa ni pahali pa kuegesha magari ya teksi . 
Sasa pale kumekuwa na shida yale ma lori yake makubwa ya naegeshwa  pale na yanakaa kama 
wiki, wiki mbili alafu ndio yanao ndolewa  na ni magari ya safari . Ahsante.   
       Mr. Speake r (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim d o you  want to say something  with regards 
to that ? 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Bwana Spika , mimi pia ningependa kuongezea ya kwamba 
jana kwa G avana na  ilikuwa Gavana ametuita na aligusia swala hili la malori ku egeshwa katika 
barabara zetu za m ji. K wa hivyo kuna hatua ambayo hivi karibuni tutachuku a kupitia kwa 
kitengo cha  inspectorate  kuhakikisha magari yote makubwa  makubwa ambayo yana egeshwa  
katika sehemu zetu za mji yanaondolewa . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Mwidani . 
       Hon.  Mwidani : Bwana  Spika  ahsante, na fikiri pia namuunga mkono Mheshimiwa  Mama ... 
(Laughter)  
       Mama Kaunti ni kweli Bwana Spika  hata mimi kuna wakati nimekuja kukuta  lori kubwa 
sana ime egeshwa  pale k atika hospitali, s asa nafikiri  jambo zuri la kuepuka lile ni sisi 
kutengeneza mjini sehemu za kuegesha zi le gari ndogo ndio tuweze ku epuka  yale malori 
yasiweze ku egeshwa . Kusema ukweli unakuta lori moja imechukuwa nafasi moja kubwa sana na 
ukiangalia pale hospitali, wakati lori linaingia ni k elele wakati linatoka ni kelele, k wa hivyo 
mimi naunga mkono  hii taarifa  isichukuliwe tu kirahisi ; Bwana  Spika  ningependa utupatie 
muongozo na hili jambo lifanyike kwa sababu hata mimi  nimeona mwenyewe  nishawahi kwenda  
nikakosa sehemu ya kuegesha  kwa sababu ya malori matatu yalikuwa yamepakiwa ile sehemu  
ambayo ni ya ku egesha magari. A hsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon. Mary . 
June 15, 201 6                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         57 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4        Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi: Mheshimiwa Spika , ningeomba jambo hili la hizi lori  zinaegeshwa pale 
karibu na  hospitali  kuu ya Mombasa  lifanyik e haraka yaond olewe kwa haraka kwa sababu pale 
hizi gari zimeegeshwa ndio watu wamepata mahali pa kwenda haja ndogo  hata haja kubwa.        
Kwa hio pale gari zimeegeshwa ndio watapita pale pale kwa sa babu kuna pamezibwa  na  zile lori 
sasa wawe wanaenda haja ndogo  hapo  nyuma ya hizo lori  hata kulala pia wanalala hapo nyuma 
ya hizo lori. Hivyo basi ni mambo makubwa sana yanatendeka pale katika eneo ambapo hayo 
malori yanaegeshwa, k wa h ivyo ningeomba ile idara inayo husika ifanye haraka iwezekanavyo 
juu ya hayo maneno . Ahsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon . Moham ed Chiro Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  hata mimi pia niko katika msururu 
wa kuunga mkono japo  nataka kuongezea jambo lengine; k una wakati tulizungumzia kuhusu 
haya mambo yote ya kuwa mji wetu unakuwa mdogo na kuna haja kusema ukweli ya kuwa yale 
magari pale hospitali, imefanya hata sasa ambul ensi wakati mwengine inasimama ka ndo dereva  
akikutwa kwa sababu ameegesha gari pale ambapo gari nyingine haiwezi kupita. Wakati 
mwengine nilikuwa niko pale k ulikuwa kunaletwa madawa, mnaju a madawa yanaletwa na gari 
kubwa, s asa ilipofika pale kuna lori aina ya  trela imesimama huku upande wa dharura  na hizo 
dawa pi a huwa  zinakuja na upande huo kwa hio  wakati mwengine pia zinafanya kazi zetu 
haziendelei vizuri pale hospitalini . Shida hii naweza iambatanisha pia na ile ya pale Mwembe 
Tayari Mheshimiwa Spika ; hizi bas i makampuni ya basi yanaweza kuwa magari yan ataka kupita, 
amefungua ule mlango wa kuweke a mizigo ni mkubwa sasa matatu inabidi wakati mwengine  
zinagongana, kunakuwa na shida. K wa hio ni lazima idara hii ya Mheshimiwa  Amir Thoya 
akiwa na yule mama Caro sis hurutishi maanake sio kazi yangu lakini kuwatambua tu ya kw amba 
wao wa naidara kubwa, ninawatambua pek e yake.... 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon.  Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante sana, ningeomba Mheshimiwa ambaye alikuwa yuko alikuwa 
anaongea arekebishe maneno yake ya kuwa na huyu ma ma, hakuna huyu mama hapa kuna 
Mheshimiwa hata kama ata ita mama lakini aseme Mheshi miwa mama,  aanze na Mheshimiwa 
mama si huyu mama . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  I want to believe t hat se ed actually was brought in the House  
by Hon.  Mwidani, can you resume your seat Hon.  Ndanda ; you know Hon.  Mwidani was the one 
who brought that seed in the House  I think we must make sure that it is uprooted and it must not 
grow so Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda make sure that you make that  correction as we continue to give  
your submission.  
       Yes Hon.  Ndanda, Hon.  Leader of Majority is on his feet …   
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Kasangamba ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika  mimi  nashangaa sana kwamba Waheshimiwa kina mama hawataki kuitwa mama, m imi 
kwa nia ba y a W aheshimiwa kin a baba sisi tuiteni baba tumeto a idhini kama ni hatia sisi 
twakubali kuitwa Waheshimiwa kina baba …                     
(Laughter)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Leader o f Majority you are out of order…   
(Laughter ) 
June 15, 201 6                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         57 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5        Yes Hon . Moha med Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  Mheshimiwa Spika , Mheshimiwa Caro wakati mwingi huwa 
naye na aliniambia wakati namu ita nimuite mama na anasema itakuwa ni  madharau mimi 
nikimuita bila kumuita mama n a yeye  mwenyewe pia anaweza ku thibitisha…   
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon.  Ndanda those are your private affairs …  
(Laughter ) 
       This House  is guided by Standing Orders so we first appreciate and follow the Standing 
Orders … 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Ahsante k wa hivyo Mhesh imiwa Spika  nilikuwa nazungumzia 
kuna  haja ya hizi idara zetu ziweze kutembea na kuangalia kuna shida na ni vile ambavyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika  gari yako haishikwi na  msongamano wa magari, g ari yako yapasua mahali 
popote na inaenda lakini wale watu wengine wa ka waida Mheshimiwa Spika  ikifika jioni  mtu 
anatoka kazi pale F ontanella anaenda zake Changamwe  anafika saa mbili usiku kwa sababu ya 
shida  nyingi kama hizi.  Kwa hivyo isiwe ni pale Makadara ninaomba hata pale Kibarani, p ale 
Kibarani  Mheshimiwa Spika  wakati m agari yanatembea wewe nenda uangalie vizuri kuna 
kampuni siku  hizi zimeletwa pale  wam ejaza ile bahari mpaka imekuwa nchi kavu maanake 
wanataka kujenga pale, lakin i sasa wameleta magari yao pale.  Kwa hivyo huduma zetu k wa 
jumla Mombasa Kaunti n ingem uomba aliyeleta  taarifa  hii iweze kurekebishwa na iweze 
kupitishwa na kurekebishwa kuwa iangalie aina sheria yoyote ambayo inapeana huduma ya 
kuwa magari makubwa yote yaweze kupewa, kushurutishwa yasiwekwe ovyo ovyo mjini. 
Ahsante .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajway i): Yes Hon . Caro line. 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi kama  Naibu Mwenye Kiti wa Uchukuzi  na 
Mwenyekiti wangu Mheshimiwa  Amir Thoya huu Mswada u shawahi kuletwa kwa hii N yumba 
si mara ya kwanza, na sisi wenyewe tu liwacha kukaa shida ambayo iko  Mheshimiwa Spika ni 
kuhusu kutekelezwa kwa Miswada . Mheshimiwa Spika  kutekelezwa kwa miswada ndio shida 
katika Bunge letu la Kaunti kwa sababu taarifa hio hio Mheshimiwa Mary anazungumzia ndio 
hio ilioletwa katika Mswada wetu , ya kuna kuna wanawake ambao hujificha chini ya malori 
hayo…  
(Laughter ) 
       Ambao pia hunajisiwa chini ya malori hayo, ni hivyo pia katika taarifa.  Kwa hio 
Mheshimiwa Spika jambo linalobakia ni kutekelezwa kwa uharaka Miswada tunayopitisha kwa 
sababu kama Kamati ya Uchukuzi tulisha fanya wajibu wetu  na tunahimiza kutekelezwa kwa 
maamuzi ya Kamati za Bunge. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Well, y our su bmissions are loud and clear but I would want 
to remind us what Hon. Ibrahim Ko ndo has just raised, that is something as similar to that the 
government is doing something and from that i want to believe that it was triggered by the same 
motion that we pass ed as the House , may be the speed may not be fast but at least there's 
something that is being done in te rms of implementation and Hon.  Caroline Owino and by next 
week Wednesday the Leader of Majority should bring a report on the issue of Implementation.        
Again the Hon.  has accused the Speaker for having a car that is never caught in the jam actually 
Hon. Amir Thoya will tell you that yes that i have a car that is moving swiftly and that car is a 
June 15, 201 6                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         57 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 very nice bicycle and i never caught up in that traffic for those who are coming from Nyali will 
tell you i cross the bridge with my bicycle so if you don't wan t to be caught up in that traffic jam 
try my style of crossing the bridge ; that was on a light note but the g overnment is working on 
that in mak ing sure that we decongest the c ity, both the human and the car traffics. Thank you so 
much Hon.  Zainab Darwesh for standing in for Hon.  Serah Nyamvula , thank you so much.  
BILLS  
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda : Yes Mr. Speaker … 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  You have Bills?  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  I have a Statement . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Raj wayi) : Actually that was supposed to be order 8 and we are on 10 
now.  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  Maybe the Clerk has forgotten my Statement . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Okay now that you have forgotten we will remind ourselves 
in the next possible  sitting , so don't worry.  
  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen this House  stands adjourned till afternoon of today at exactly 2:30 
p.m. 
The House rose at 9:56a .m. 
 
 