July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday , 10th July, 2019  
The House met at 2 :43p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Y es Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FRO M THE CHAIR  
 Hon. Members.  I wish to bring to the attention of this Hono urable House  that we have 
visitors from Tudor Day Secondary School and I hereby take this opportunity to recognize the 
delegation which consists of students . When you he ar your name st and up and bow;  Hashim 
Swaleh, Jaid Salim, Faraj Mbarak, Abdallah Feisal, Abud Mohamed Abdul, Levickson Gonzi, 
Njei Suleiman, Ibrahim Mzungu, Abubakar Abdulmauk, Alex Emmanuel, Mwinyihajj Rajam, 
Abdulkarim Fazalai, Khalid Salim, Hassan Brary, Omondi Stephe n, Urudi John Elijah, Musa 
Yahya, Ali Suleiman Mandela, Otieno Isaac Abunda,  Haggai Mze Lenjo, Saleem Lumumba, 
Clinton Arata, Abdalla Barari, Abdalla Ahmed, Omar Masoud, Eston Mulwa, Francis Chandugu,  
Jaffar Khalifa, Daniel Kiilu, Aggrey Okoth, Richard Lew is, Dennis Mudaki, Antony Mwau, 
Salim Adnan, Ali Athman, Athman Kazungu,  Abdikadir M oham ed, Nassor Omar, Ramadhan 
Changawa, Abdalla Saad, Samuel Gitonga, Jacob Kola, Festus Maganga, Mzee Sudesi, Mwidani 
Swaleh, Derrick Akwiri, Christopher Webuye, Merei Jam al, Kinaga Yusuf, Clinton Odongo,  
Shee Masoud, Abdalla Peter, Nassir Kassim, Billy Wandera, Bwana Mandi Mo hamed, Kevin 
Kiptee, James Lucky, Aluine Ojiambo, Brian Oduor, Vincent Odiambo,  Moha med Abdulnassir, 
Kelum Jumbale, Omar Juma and they are accompanie d by their teachers; Mr. Mwiti and Madam 
Mbelenga.  On behalf of the Assembly, I welcome you all to the County Assembly of Mombasa.  
Karibuni s ana…. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 And I wish the area Member from Tudor Ward to give just a word. Yes Hon. Tobias?  
 Hon. Samba:  Yes, thank you Hon. Speaker . At least let me take this opportunity to 
welcome students from Tudor W ard, from Tudor Secondary School . 

July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Just feel free and enjoy the debate and hopefully I know that you are form threes by the 
year 2022 you will be voters, so I  pray that you may vote for me again, thank you so much.  
(Applause)  
(The Deputy S peak er (Hon. Fadhili M walimu) exit ed the Chair)  
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Raphael B wire) in the Chair ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes, thank you Hon. Samba . Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY  A MEMBER OF COMMITTEE ON LANDS , HOUSING AND PLANNING  HON. 
MGWISHO MWALIMU  ON STATUS OF DRAINAG E REHABILITATION WOR KS AT TUDOR ESTATE  
 Yes Chairperson on C ommittee  on Lands, Housing and Planning, do  you have a 
response ? Yes  Hon. Mwalimu?  
 Hon. Mgwisho Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to give 
a response on status for Drainage Rehabilitation Works at Tudor estate. Mr. Speaker S ir I wish to 
give the following response on a S tatement raised  by Hon. Tobias Samba dated Thursday 4th 
July, 2019 on the st atus for drainage rehabilitation w orks on Tudor estate.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir the project has been under taken by the D epartment of Lands, Planning 
and Housing in Tudor , they  were mainly drainage work s, construction of sockets, piping and 
sliding works.  
 Mr. Speaker I made a site visit on 8th July, 2019 to the estate ac companied by the Chief 
Housing O fficer in charge of the estate, after the site visit we concluded that the contractor be 
called to acc omplish the work.   
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes thank you. Y ou are a Member of the said 
Committee?  
 Hon. Mgwisho Mwalimu: Yes. 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu. Y es what is it 
Athman Shebe?  
 Hon. Athman Shebe: Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker either my eyes are 
deceiving me  or what because we  have not been served this S tatement by the Hon. Member, so 
we do  not seem to be in the same frequency or channel Hon. Speaker, please we need your 
indulgences in this. Thank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You have not  been  served by what?  
 Hon. Athman Shebe: We do  not have the copy of that S tatement, now the Hon. Member 
is now reading a statement and we are supposed to be served that statemen t so that we can be 
able to know otherwise...  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 (Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : The Hon. Member is just reading the response 
on a statement raised by Hon. Samba. This is a response Hon. Member...  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Athman Shebe: I know Mr. Speaker.  I know it  is a response but...  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : What  is your concern?  
 Hon. Athman Shebe: How can we authenticate that response? W e need to have the 
paper so that we can know, so if we do  not have any papers on our side how are we going to 
know then ? I think it  is only wise and fair for us to be served with a copy of statement is  not it? 
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Members order! Resume your seats ! 
Hon. Members , you see it is only the Member who raised the concern , to raise an issue whether 
he is okay or not with the response replied by  the Hon. Member from the same D epartment and 
when the Member from Tudor W ard who raised the concern has not complained then why are 
you complaining  for the rest of the House? Am still talking Hon. Members, just resume your 
seats, you see when the statement is raised it can be either responded immediately or the Member 
of the Committee asked for time to have a site visit so to me I would wish first to he ar from the 
Member who raised the concern last week before I give it to other Members to discuss it. Yes 
what is it Hon. Samba kindly are you comfortable with the response from the Member?  
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker thank you.  I would wish to inform this Ho use and to make a 
communication, that indeed the C ommittee concern ed did a site visit and am very much 
comfortable and today is the first time as I was telling the Chairman of Lands that if at all the 
Chairmen of the Committees would be like the Chairman f or Land, I think we  will be far and 
currently as we are speaking the work is ongoing and some first aid w as done . Hon. Speaker am 
comfortable I beg that we should move to the next business.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . 
 Hon. O mondi: I am standing on point of information.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Whom do you want to inform?  
 Hon. Omondi: The House.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir first of all I want to corre ct the notion  that when any kind 
of communication comes in this House, I think that  is a property of this House and it is not a 
property of an  individual ... 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  And it is very important that every Member in this House  Mr. Speaker Sir get informed 
because what  you are trying to say  we want to avoid a situation whereby when that particular 
issue is not tac kled well, it is going to be upon the whole House to tackle that issue it is not going 
only to be left to the Member who raised the issue . Mr. Speaker so it is  prudent that we are 
served w ith this S tatement response so that we can be able to react and conclude on it. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member let me first hear from Hon. 
Amur.  Yes Hon. Amur?   
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. S peaker with all due respect in this  Statement which has just 
been read to us whereby we do  not have any copy to ascertain the fact of the report, again it was 
read to us ; I, as a person not as a Committee so we are doubting whether the Committee went on 
site visit…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order! Hon. Member, we are familiar 
with the Busin ess of this House and when the S tatement is…kindly resume your seat Hon. 
Member, kin dly resume your seat Hon. Thoya. W hen the Statement i s raised in this House is 
always directed to the Chairperson of the Committee and the Committee and whoever do brings 
back the response is the Chairperson and it is just the traditions of this House that the 
Chairperson read s the S tatement as ‘I’ so we can not say ‘we’  the C ommittee . No Statement has 
ever come here reading ‘we’ , generalizing the C ommittee it  is always either the Chairperson or 
whoever is reading on behalf of the Chairperson so it  is very clear Hon. Amu r that the Member 
has read the Statement  on behalf of the C ommittee and it is the Chair who le d the delegation of 
the entire Committee to the Tudor W ard to investigate what the Hon. Member of Tudor reported 
the other day, so maybe you address something else but not that one.  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker with all due respect when the issue i s given to the 
Department it is the C ommittee that goes on site visit not the Chair  alone so the issue is did the 
Committee go or it is the Chairman who went because according to the report it is saying ‘ I’ 
made a site visit ; ‘I’ made , ‘I’ means what only one person…  
(Applause)  
 Mr. Speaker what we are trying t o see is the fact that did the C ommittee visit or it is the 
person who visited . Again Mr. Speaker this report was done by the le tterhead of the Mombasa 
County g overnment and not sign ed by the D epartmental head other than the Chair himself did 
not sign it…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho kindly let me have 
that response, serve me with a copy of that response.  No the  Member has just come in he does  
not know where we are so I will not let him to speak right now. Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho I 
would wish to see that response please, can I have the response? Ser jeant-At-Arms can I have 
that response? Am not blind, am seeing and I will give you time kindly please, Hon. Amur can I 
have just the other copy that you are just holding?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 (Consultations)  
 This is an order from the Chair, can I have the copy? Hon. Members the Chair is asking 
to have that copy ...   
(Consultations)  
 Order! Order! Members, Order! Hon. Tobias kindly serve me with that copy, kindly Hon. 
Member I would wish to have that copy ...  
(Consultation)  
 Serjeant-At-Arms, kindly get me that copy .  
(The Serjeant-At-Arms handed the copy to The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Bwire)  
 With me I have two different letters ...  
(Laughter)  
 One from the  Department and the oth er one from the County Assembly;  one signed and 
the other one unsigned and the copies o ught to be the same , even if you are served with one 
copy, the other copy was t o resemble the other one . Unfortunately we are having two so I 
therefore cannot Hon. Members trace which copy is genuine…  
(Applause)  
(Consultations)  
 
 Order Hon. Members!  Yes Hon. Tobias am yet to hear from the Members of the said 
Committee, I can see now  the Vice Chair ... 
 
(Applause)  
 Let us hear from the area representative from the Tudor Ward, then I’ll make the ruling 
on the same.  
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker . I would just wish to somehow this House is not familiar 
with the immediate good responses;  am the one who did raise the issue and raised the S tatement, 
the document that you have there and that is why you cannot authentisticate it, the genuine one is 
with the one that was presented to you by the Member but that one was my document so when I 
insisted that it was mine it had no sign so I do  not think whether it will be fair enough they did 
their work well, am the one who raised the issue, am  comfortable and you hear some M embers 
still are bringing issues what else do they really want? I am comfortab le and Hon. Speaker you 
can as well rule to favour me or if you all ow Hon. Speaker let the S tatement debate proceed but 
they did a right thing, you can never replace a good thing with a good thing, good thing is always 
good.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bw ire): Thank you Hon. Member . Yes the Vice Chair 
are you familiar with the discussion?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Hon. Mohamed  Abrari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker am not aware of 
anything…  
(Applause)  
 I was not around by that time.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you, your response is good. The Hon. 
Member was not around and it does not mean Hon. Member in fact you have answered my 
question. When the Vice Chair is not around the Chair and other C ommittee Members do take 
charge so I cannot rule just because the Vice  Chair was not there then  the exercise seems to have 
not t aken  place just like I said when the Chair and the Vice are not there the C ommittee under 
the authority of the Chair can take charge . So I just wanted to know whether the Vice Chair was 
aware but he  was not around when the C ommittee visited the site so we can not rule it otherwise 
he was not there, he was on other business.  
 I therefore Hon. Members have been guided enough and through my own wisdom and 
Hon. Member from Tudor h as just clarified here th is is an u nofficial copy because he got from 
other sources though the message seems to be the same and I will treat this as an official 
document because it has been signed by the Chairperson of the Committee…  
 
(Applause)  
 Hon. Members , the Committee M embe rs have agreed indeed they had a site visit…  
(Applause)  
 And I will only want to question what Hon. Shebe Athman raised ; it is not a failure of the 
Committee for us to have less copies, I will also want to appeal to the Clerks to make sure t hat 
whenever th e responses come  as it has been demanded by the Hon. Members kindly serve the 
Members with the copies . So it is not a fault made by the Commit tee or Chairperson neither the 
Clerks but maybe because of time it also depend s with when they receive the respons es, so order 
Members! Order ! I believe from tomorrow or from today onwards will be having enough copies 
whenever we have response. Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS HON . MOHAMED HATIMY ON CHA RGE S FOR TRUCK DRIVERS  
 
 Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy, Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimeona 
kuna suala ambalo nimeulizwa kuwa kuna ada ya madereva wa magari ya truck s. Mheshimiwa 
Spika kwa ufahamu wangu wa kila jambo linalofanywa ndani ya Kaunti hii ni lazima liende kwa 
sheria na nafikiri tukiangalia section  21 ya sheria ya County Government Act  iko wazi. 
Nimeweza kuangalia Mheshimiwa Spika hizi charges  nimekwenda through Finance Bill na 
nimeona kuwa hakuna jambo kama hili, kwa hivyo yule aliyeleta hili suala nataka aje na 
ushahidi w a kuonyesha ni nani amechajiwa na risiti aliyopatiwa ili tuweze kujua jambo hili kwa 
undani wake Mheshimiwa Spika.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Finance Bill  ndio inapi tishwa, ndio sheria ya Kaunti ya vipi malipo yatakavyofanywa  na 
hakuna jambo kama hili Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba yule 
aliyeleta hili suala atuletee  ushahidi w a kuonyesha kuwa kuna d ereva  ambaye amechajiwa na ni 
pesa ngapi ambazo a melipa? Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Moha med Hatimy. Yes Hon. 
Athman Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesikia 
jibu la Mwenyekiti wa Makadirio ya Bajeti ya kwamba anahitaji ushahidi kwa hilo nitalitendea 
kazi lakini zaidi nimemnukuu akisema ya kwamba hizi ada ambazo watu wetu wamekuwa 
wakiitishwa hazipo kwa hio  naomba kutaka kutoka kwake tukimthibitishia kwa ushahidi wa risiti 
na nikimletea wale waliohusika ama wale  waliotozwa ada zaidi ni hatua gani kabambe 
atakayoichukua ili haki itendeke kwa madereva wetu wamekuwa wakidhulumiwa…  
(Applause)  
 Na maafisa wetu kama sio kwa faida ya Serikali G atuzi yetu basi ni kwa faida ya maofisa 
wetu mashinani kuwatishia kwa ada amb ayo haipo ili wapate kupewa kinyume nyume kwa 
manufaa yao. Kwa hivyo nataka tu hakikisho kwamba tukileta ushahidi huu na wenyewe wako 
tayari nimletee kwa Kamati yake pia awahoji na ushahidi wake, tukipata ushahidi wa hilo ni 
hatua gani itachukulika ili wal e mader eva wa malori waliohujumiwa watapata haki yao. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri kosa likifanyika inajulikana ni 
kama kuc huku a hatua ni kile kitengo ambacho kina husika na jambo hili tuhakikishe  
wamechukua hatua lakini mimi nasisitiza kuwa ikiwa hakuna kitu chochote ndani ya Finance 
Bill basi malipo hayo ni malipo haramu si ya sawa…  
(Applause)  
 Kwa hivyo naomba ije na sisi tu ipeleke  mbele ya Kamati  yetu halafu tuangalie  hatua  gani 
tutaweza kuichukua. Ahsante sana.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante ilikuwa naomba kwa sababu wote huo uko kwenye mpango wa 
utendaji kazi, Ka mati ya Leba iweze kuhusishwa kwa sababu hapo ndio itakuwa tunajua zile 
tabia mbaya ambazo wafanyi  kazi wetu wa Kaunti wanafanya na hatua kali lazima zichukuliwe. 
Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So the Chairperson on Labour has jus t 
requested to be enjoin as an amicus curiae , it is upon you to decide but he has just stated out that 
yes of course I  will make a ruling on that since it touches on Labour issues and we also have 
those rotten employees within our system so he has just req uested to be enjoined during that 
meeting  where  Hon. Athman Mwamwiri will be representing the evidences showing that those 
people have been over taxed for a certain period of time before your Committee Hon. Hatimy, 
maybe before I make a ruling what  is your  opinion?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mwanzo Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kujua wajua hii ameiweka 
ni general issue of truck drivers unlawful charges  ni kitu gani? Specify  ni kitu gani? Kwa sababu 
mimi vile  nilivyoifahamu nimechukua truck drivers  wanachajiwa wao kam a madereva  na 
nasema kuwa kwenye Finance Bill  hakuna charges  kama hizo , sijui ni jambo gani ambalo 
utatuambia ni unlawful charges  utufungulie hapa tuweze kuifuata hii kesi kwa usawa na vile 
inavyotakikana.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Athm an Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimefahamu sasa ya kwamba Mwenyekiti wa Fedha na Mipangilio ya Bajeti hajafahamu alikuwa 
anajibu nini?  
(Laughter)  
 Na ni masikitiko kwa sababu kauli hii niliileta katika Bunge hili labda hakuwepo katika 
kikao lakini Makarani  wetu walinukuu na hoja hii ilifikishwa kwake ili yeye na Kamati yake 
wachukue majukumu kwa hilo sasa sijui alifikishiwa kauli gani ambayo amekuja kuijibu wakati 
hana ufahamu kwa sababu niko hapa kuwakilisha watu wangu na hali kadhalika kuwafundisha 
wengine . 
  Mheshimiwa Spika sitachoka kuregelelea shida iliyokumba watu wangu hususan katika 
hili ni ada zinazotozwa malori ya kubeba mawe na mchanga ambao walipaji ni wale wale 
madereva kwa sababu wao ndio wamilik i au wasimamizi wa magari yale . Kwanza katika ada ya 
mawe ama ilikuwa ni mzigo ama load ya lori tani  saba hadi 14 itozwe Kshs.1,600 na kwa lori ya 
tani 21 itozwe Kshs. 2,500 kwa hes abu ya haraka haraka kwa tani saba hadi 10 ikibeba mawe 
hayo ni mawe  takrib an elfu moja na zaidi .  
 Kwa hivyo kwa jiwe inakuwa ni shilingi na peni sita lakini l ililotendeka ndani ya Mwezi 
wa s ita madereva hawa walikuwa wakitozwa kwa jiwe shilingi tano na hoja waliyojibiwa kule 
waliambiwa ya kuwa Bunge hili kwa Mwezi huo walipitis ha sheria ya kuwa shurutishwa 
kulipishwa ada hizo. N diposa tuka taka kulifahamu lilipita lini? N a ninav yofahamu mimi baada 
ya bajeti tuna siku 90 za kutengeneza Finance Bill  nyengine itakayochukua hatamu kwa m waka 
wa kifedha ulioanza lakini kwa hili la mwezi  wa sita ni Finance Bill  ya m waka jana na ada 
zilizopo ni tofauti na zile walizokuwa wakitozwa nina imani atakuwa amelifahamu kama anajibu 
la sasa hivi hewala bado atasimamia kwenye ushahidi tutengeneze ushahidi. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you.  I think Hon. Members. Yes Hon. 
Hatimy?  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka 
kumwambia rafiki yangu kuwa mimi najibu na najua najibu nini na kama anazungumza maneno 
hayo kwenye kuchaji kweny e barriers  zetu, kuna kukusanya pesa aidha kwa lori au kwa bidhaa 
kimoja kimoja ile iliyomo kwenye lori, kama kuchaji gari yote kwa tonnage  ama kuchaji mawe 
jiwe moja moja hizo ziko kwenye Finance Bill .  
 Kwa hivyo nitaregelelea tena kuwa najua nazu ngumza nini; n ataka utuletee  ushahidi w a 
hizi ada ambazo unazosema ni unlawful charges  halafu tutaendelea nazo mbele. Jambo la pili 
sasa hizi tunazungumza kuwa tumetoka kwenye ishu ya ardhi  hapa juu ya  Taarifa , Mheshimiwa 
Spika ilikuwa tukipelekana tu hapa lakini  Taarifa  utakapozungumza kwa mujibu wa sheria hizi 
Taarifa  hazifai kuwa debated  baada ya kuzungumza ikiwa wewe mwenye kuleta  Taarifa  
hakuridhika anaweza kuja na supplementary question  lakini sasa vitu kama hivi naomba tuletewe 
hiyo ushahidi w a kusema kuwa kuna pesa zakusanywa kwa sababu si mara ya kwanza na mambo 
mengi yafanyika .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika twaweza kusema kuwa wajua si malaika tulioweka pale , 
wanaochukua pesa nasikia watu wanazungumza kuna wengine wana vitabu vyao, watu 
wanakusanya pesa wanawakusany ia watu hayo yote yafanyika lakini tusizungumze kitu 
ambacho hatujakiona tuleteeni ushahidi  halafu hapo ndio tutaweza kujua tutachukua hatua gani. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . As requested by the Chairperson of  
the Committee that was requested to bring the response, the Hon. Member from Likoni Ward 
kindly serve the Committee with evidence and if those people who are overcharged can also 
present themselves before the Committee to testify on a petition presented o n their behalf by 
yourself then I think it will be good . So you liaise with the Committee and the Chairman on 
when you will be bringing those evidence s, we need to know when do you think that you will be 
ready with those evidences?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika kufikia Ijumaa kwa sababu ni watu wana  
shughuli na siku ya leo inakamilika nikiwa mjini kwa hivyo kesho nipangane nao na wao 
wajipange lakini nina imani siku ya Ijumaa nitakuwa tayari kwa ushahidi na pamoja na wenye 
watakuwa na wasaa na uwe zo wa kufika katika Kamati.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So can we have that respons e come next week 
Wednesday at 2: 30p.m, is it okay with you?  
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri nodded ) 
 Thank you. So kindly serve the C ommittee with evidence,  if possible let t hose people 
who were overcharged  present themselves before the Committee and then the C ommittee will 
bring back the responses next week on Wednesday. Yes again Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante nasimama kwa ibara 41 (2) (c) 
kuomba kuwakilisha kauli. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ruhsa yako kauli hii inatokana na jawabu 
nililolipata juma lililopita kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti wa Fedha nilipoitisha makadirio ya miradi ya 
bajeti ya Mwaka huu .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwa jitihada zake nilipata daftari lile na nimepitia katika 
makashablasha yale na kuna vitu ambavyo sijaridhika navyo na ningevipenda kuvitaja hapa 
angalau viwe kwa ufahamu wake na Jumba hili .  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Kwanza ni idara ya afya;  katika makadirio yao wametaja zahanati za makasha ama 
container clinics , kwa bei ya million i saba na nusu lakini mahali wametaja kote, huku kote 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ama all mimi sijalifahamu nataka kuwe specific all  ni wapi? Kwa 
sababu hiyo ndio mikadirio ya miradi inapaswa kuwa kimpangilio, ijulikane ni ha pa, ni hapa.  
 Pili Mheshimiwa Spika katika idara hiyo hiyo kuna makasha sita ya zahanati za kirafiki  
kwa vijana, makasha sita ya zahanati kwa vijana lakini pia hayajataja ya tawekezwa katika 
hospitali zipi,  ama yatatafutiwa sehemu mahsusi kuwekezwa, ijuli kane kuwa makasha haya 
yataenda kwa Hos pitali hii na hii na hii. Hapa haijajieleza Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hivyo 
kufuatilia hili baada ya hapa itakuwa ngumu kwa sababu utaambiwa ziko na hatujui ziko wapi. 
 Mheshimiwa Spika ka dhalika katika idara ya fedha (F inance and E conomics), 
wametenga kima cha milioni mia moja na nane kwa minaajili…  
(Interruption ) 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes what is your point of order Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Tunaijadili bajeti, nafikiri sharia iko  wazi , bajeti isha pitishwa , 
ikiwa atakuwa na ombi  la kutaka kupinga jambo lolote  atafute kisheria njia nyengine ya kuleta 
ndani ya Nyumba hii lakini hivi sasa itakuwa ni makosa kuanza kuizungumza  bajeti  kwa mara ya 
pili Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order Hon. Member ! You see the other day a 
concern  was raised in a form of a S tatement and you brought back the response and in othe r 
words the Hon. Member is not satisfied  with the response so which avenue do you feel is good 
for the Member to express hi s opinion when it  ids not here? I think he has sense something in the 
response that you brought back to this House and that is why he is very eager to know from you, 
the one who brought the responses. I do  not think whether we are discussing the budget, he  is 
just asking question that is not understanding though it was captured in the report that you 
brought back to this House and he is not satisfied with the report and I think this is the only 
avenue that he will ask the concerned person , who is you,  the o ne that brought back the 
Statement . So I do  not think in any way that we are discussing the budget, I do  not know but in 
my own wisdom am not sure whether we are discussing budget here. .. 
(Interruption)  
 Yes Hon… what is it?  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningependa tu kuongezea 
hapo ambapo Mwenyekiti ameweza kuzungumzia kwamba na lazima iweze kuwekwa katika 
kumbukumbu ya Bunge hili wakati ripoti hii au yale maswali yaliyowezwa kuulizwa na 
Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri alipokuja katika Bunge  yaliweza kupatiwa Makarani wetu halafu 
baadaye sisi kama W abunge tuweze kuchukua kopi kwa ofisi ya Karani mkuu. Mheshimiwa 
Spika b aada ya kuchukua kopi tuweze kuzingatia na kusema kweli, kuweza kuzipitia tumeona 
kuna mambo ambayo hayajaturidhisha kama waw akilishi wa  Kata ndogo mbali mbali katika 
Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 Lengine pili mimi kitu ambacho hakijaniridhisha ni kwam ba katika idara zote, idara ya 
Uchukuzi pekee haina kiwango ambacho twaweza kuwekeza katika kila Wodi  pekee yake lakini 
kila idara imeweka viwango vya fedha ambazo vimekadiria katika kila miradi .  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  Lakini idara hiyo pekee haina viwango vyovyote tumeweka katika bajeti yao 
Mheshimiwa Spika, kwa hivyo ni jambo lazima tulizungumzie katika Bunge hili kwa sababu 
hatuzungumzii bajeti  ila twazungumzia yale majibu ambayo a lijibu yeye kama Mwenyekiti wa 
Fedha kuhakikisha kwamba sisi tumeridhia na kwamba hatuna kipingamizi chochote lakini yale 
majibu lazima tuweze kuyaridhia ili tuweze kuwaeleza wananchi wetu Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti. Ahsant e. 
 
 Hon. Athman  Mwamwiri:  Nilikuwa bado niko kwa  sakafu , kwa ruhsa yako niendelee?  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : On the same S tatement?  
 Hon. Athmani Mwamwiri:  Yes. 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes please.  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwir i: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika Mwenyekiti 
wa Fedha sijui ana wasiwasi wa nini  kiasi ya kilichomfanya asimame na Point of order  ambayo 
hakuinukuu . Nikiendelea Mheshimiwa S pika niko katika idara ya fedha ; kuna kima cha shilingi 
milioni 108 kimetengwa kwa ajili ya barabara zinazofikisha sehemu tunazochukua ada ama cess 
barriers na hizi barriers  zetu Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ninavyojua ziko katika barabara kuu, hizi 
access zenye zinatengewa pesa hii sijui zinaenda wap i.  
 Kadhalika Mheshimiwa Spika kuna grants  ama msaada tunapa ta kwa wafadhili unaitwa 
Kenya Development Support Program level two  ambayo mwaka wa nyuma kabla huu 
uliokamilika tulipata ada ya milioni 47 na mwaka huu tumetengewa, tunatarajia kup ata 259 
lakini lengo la hili ni maswala mahsusi yaonekane katika Wodi , kule kwangu sijui wenzangu 
sijawahi kuliona hili wala kuona tangazo la  tender  inayohusu ufadhili wa pesa hizi kule kwangu. 
 Mheshimiwa pia katika bajeti yao h ao hao idara ya fedha kwenye ile bajeti tuliyopitisha 
kwa ndani, estimation zao ilikuwa milioni 467 na katika response  walioleta inasema wana  mgao 
wa milioni 485, hatujui ipi ni ipi, ipi sahihi ipi sio sahihi.  
 Mhesh imiwa Spika katika maswala ya miundo msingi narejelelea kwangu nimewekewa 
barabara inaitwa Soweto Mtongwe ambayo ilikuwa kwa bajeti iliyopita na katika bajeti hii 
hawajasema ni phase two ama ni phase  three , sasa sijui inaendelezeshwa ama inaanzishwa.  
 Pili wameniwe kea drainage  ile ile iliyokuwa katika bajeti iliyopita, haijasema ni phase 
two haijasema ni pengine ...Kwa hivyo  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i ningemuomba tu Mwenyekiti 
wa Fedha anitafutie majibu ya haya ili niondoe duku duku katika moyo wangu tuishi sambamba 
tukitaz ama utekelezaji wa bajeti ya mwaka huu 2019/2020. Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . I think Hon. Members will not g o 
to  much deep into the issue ; I thought you could just single out the most, the key areas you think 
just like you hav e outlined your issues in your Ward than overall . You see it may create a debate, 
it might sound as if we are discussing the already budget that we have passed so it will be very 
wise for you just to take note even if it is not today, tomorr ow or the other day you take note of 
your area, you raise a concern that touches directly on the lives of the people you represent here . 
 Now that you have  raised  the issue  of Soweto I do  not know something  that is right 
because it is within the area of you r jurisdiction , so let  us not discuss it that much , I just gave you 
time because I thought it is a response on what you have already raised . 
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  So if you have seen the response Hon. Members and you feel may be there is something  
we are here to correct each other, you raise it so th at the  person concerned takes note on the 
same and next time you  bring a very co mprehensive one . What is it Hon. Samba?  
(Interru ption ) 
 Whom do you want to inform Hon. Hatimy? Whom are you in forming?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kuwaambia Members  stakabadhi  hii 
nilioleta ; ukiangalia PFM 125 ina orodha ya stakabadhi  ambazo zinafuatana pamoja zikiwa na 
estimate  na Appropriation Bill  ambapo hii  stakabadhi  sikuzungu mzia habari ya pesa na  isiwatie 
wasiwasi juu ya pesa kwenye hii stakabadhi  kwa sababu hii stakabadhi  ni Medium Term Plan, ni 
kujua kuwa ni vitu gani ambavyo vitakuwa vimetengenezwa, vile ambavyo vilianzwa mwaka wa 
nyuma na vile ambavyo vitaendelea . 
 Kwa hivyo ikiwa kuna makosa yoyote  juu ya kuonyesha pesa kuwa zinaonyesha huku, 
zinaonyesha kule isiwatie kiwewe ; hiyo si jambo la kusumbua, jambo la kusumbua juu ya pesa 
ni kuangalia Bill ile muli opitisha nyinyi , ile ndiyo pesa ambazo ile Bill, Appropriation Bill  ndio 
yenye kumpatia uwez o Executive Member  wa Fedha  kutoa pesa . Kwa hivy o hi ni plan na 
tafadhalini kama mko na hio sheria  angali eni 125 mutaona nazungumza nini . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Hatimy . You see Hon. Members have 
all reasons to be worried because they are the ones who passed the budget, they are the 
representative s of the people and all question s back at the grassroots  are directed to them . So not 
unless they are given everything  in black and white they will always have questions , so wit h that 
I just wish to tell you that you see when you bring the responses let  us bring those that are very 
clear so that when the Hon. Members read it, they have no doubt and whenever they raise d oubt 
you take them back to the Department for correction . Otherwise they have all reasons to be 
worried because they passed the budget and they have to know each and everything that contains 
in that bu dget and just like I said Hon. Members, I will not open it  up for the debate, I  woul d 
wish to give two or three Hon. Mem bers who have not sp oken if we are still under the Statement . 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Point of Information Mr. Speaker .  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is it Hon. Chief Whip?  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika lazima tuweke sawa Nyumba hii 
kuwa haya masuala tunauliza hatumuulizi Mwenyekiti  kama Mwenyekiti wa Fedha, tunauliza 
Idara kwa hivyo asichukulie kama sisi tunamuuliza yeye, twauliza kwamba majibu yaliyoletwa 
na Idara hayajaturidhisha sisi kama Wawakilishi wa Wodi tungependa ripot i aliyoleta ni 
Program Base d za Wodi na sisi n dio wawakilishi wa Wodi katika Bunge hili.  
 Sasa ikiwa sisi hatujaridhika mapendekezo yetu na changamoto zetu tutazipeleka wapi 
kama si Nyumba hii? Na nani watatekeleza, si ni Idara? Kwa hivyo as ijibu kitu kama yeye ndio 
anajibu kama Mwenyekiti bali tunapeleka kwa Idara waweze kujibu kama vile sisi tunavyotaka 
ili katika Bunge hili linapoulizwa kitu kulingana na bajeti kwamba katika Wodi yangu 
nimewekezewa nini, nitaweza kuwa na jibu kwa wananchi wangu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ni 
hayo tu.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 (Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Hatimy I would just wish to tell you that 
kindly just take note of the real concerns raised by the Hon. Members. I do not  think it will be 
healthy for us to now start  debating it, I would wish to direct you that you just take note of the 
issues raised by the Hon. Members wherever they feel something has gone wrong then you will 
address it with the relevant Departments for proper answers … 
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. Mohamed Ha timy: Ndio hapo Mheshimiwa ninakuja kusema Mheshimiwa 
nakubaliana na maoni ya Mheshimiwa Kitula ni kuwa mtu yeyote sasa ikiwa ataku wa ana jambo 
lolote kuna Wenyekiti  22 hapa, kila Idara  iko na Mwenyekiti wake wataweza kufuatilia huko 
lakini wasi elekeze  mikuki kwangu mimi…  
(Laughter)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members, yes I am coming to you Hon. 
Samba. It is now very clear though all questions are directed to you Hon. Hatimy because you 
took the responsibilities of bringing these responses back. And I think that is why all eyes are on 
you, but Hon. Member has just relieved himself, kindly if you have an issue raise it and let the 
Chairperson or the Vice Chairperson of the concerned docket that has been raised by the Hon. 
Member take note and  then you will have the Liaison Committee you iron out those issues and 
then bring a comprehensive response. I think with that we are ok ay. Yes Hon. Tobias ? Am 
coming to you.  
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker whenever we are given documents in this House w e 
tend to imagine or to ascertain that the documents are genuine and if you go to PFM Act No.126, 
he said PFM Act No.125 and I will take him through PFM Act No.126 1 a b c, (c)  It state s that 
programmes to be delivered with details for each program of the strategic priorities to which the 
Program will contribute, the service of the goods to be provided, measureable indicators of 
performance where feasible and the budget allocated to the Program .  
 Hon. Speaker I think the PFM Act is also very clear but as the  Chairman has stated we 
are just raising the issues that we tend to assume that they are very genuine. So at least whenever 
the documents were not in order let him give us the papers that are in order. That is our genuine 
concern. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Prischilla h Mumba ?  
 Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ilikua nimekaa hapa nikasikia nukuu kidogo 
inazungumza kuwa kama kuna shida watu warudi kwa Wizara zao waulize Wenye kiti. 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ni mu oga, sitaki shida…  
(Laughter)  
 Nimekwangurwa hapa mpaka nikakwangurika, tafadhali shida zisije katika Wizara yangu 
ya Uchukuzi tafadhali. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Member! Hon. Prischilla h what do you 
mean? In fact  Hon. Prischilla h the issue raised by Hon. Mwamwiri over Soweto Road is directly 
to your Department , so there is no way you can run away from that, it is your burden kindly just 
look on how you can deal with it. .. 
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Point of in formation Mr. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is your point of information?  
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : There is only one way Mr. Speaker, if she does not want to be 
pressured simply she should resign ... 
(Applause)  
 Hon. Mumba: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, lakini nazungumza kwa kuk uambia 
wewe kwa kukuheshimu ni ku wa hakuna mwanamke ngangari kama yule amesimama hapa 
wakati kulipokuwa moto na cheche sikuamua hata siku moja ku wa najiuzulu iwe ati leo ndio 
nitajiuzulu? I am there to stay … 
(Applause)  
 Lakini kuletewa mambo ya shaghala baghala n dio nasema nishapambana jamani 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu sasa hivi ni lazima munipe pumzi nipumue kidogo  because I am a 
strong Chair and an able woman … 
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bw ire): Thank you. Yes Hon. Omar?  
(Consultations)  
 Order! Order! Order Hon. Members ! Hon. Amur kindly consult in a low tone. Yes Hon. 
Omar ? 
 Hon. Ab rari Mohamed Omar:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Ningependa kutoa 
makosa hii response  iliyoletwa, m wanzo…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are giving a Statement?  
 Hon. Abrari Mohamed Omar:  It is not a Statement, I am responding on this…  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 (Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : No, we are not responding . 
 Hon. Abrari Mohamed Omar:  No, I am just raising a concern . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : That is why we are saying it is a Statement time 
so you rather give a Statement because we have no response time as we are, yes if you have a 
Statement I will just give you time to raise a St atement because…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Abrari Mohamed Omar:  I am raising a concern on the same . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Inform of Statement?  
 Hon. Abrari Mohamed Omar:  Yes. 
(Consultations)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Hatimy you see I am the C hair and I am 
the one giving directives. I wanted to know if the Member is standing to give a Statement or 
something?  
 Hon. Abrari Mohamed Omar:  I am raising a concern on the same, the replica of some  
things on previous budget which they are just like a copy  paste on this one. On the previous 
budget we had Bandari Road, Neem Avenue, Ratna Square and now it is just a replica of the 
same in 2019/2020  Budget. Those are the same  things that were on the previous budget and now 
we are having the same things. S o I am raising a concern, this is just a replica; there is nothing 
new it is just the same thing.  
 The Temporary S peaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Hon. Members I think I am giving 
you time and you will be the last Member to speak, or I give you time then I make ruling on this. 
Yes Hon. Ogutu ? Switch off your mic rophone  Hon. Omar. Hon. Ogutu will be the last speaker 
then we close the chapter.  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi ningependa kwa sababu ya 
umuhimu wa hii stakabadhi  tupewe nafasi kila M emba aipitie na tuangalie zile shida ambazo 
ziko tuweze kukaa ili tuzipeleke mbele ziangaliwe maana yake mwisho wa siku ikiwa kuna 
makosa na yatawachwa iende kwa Kamati tofauti tofauti, shida itatokea hapo Mheshimiwa Spika 
naomba.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Now Hon. Members the document 
that we have just been discussing though we have not discussed it yet is very crucial and the 
information contained in that document is also very crucial.  
July 10, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           57 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  The mood of the House is that Hon. Members are not happy with the document. So I 
would wish to direct that we all get th ese copies , I think from the Clerk’s Office you go through 
these copies . Hon. Members, kindly note where you think there is a problem  and address it with 
the relevant Committee on the sa id Department, if it is road kindly address it to the Committee 
on Transport and Infrastructure, if it is Health, anything to do with Health do the same through 
the Committee then we will compile those reports and present it to Liaison Committee  which is a  
group of all Chairpersons of all the Committees then they will address from there. I have also 
seen something in that now since I am the Chair I will not speak about it and I will do it in a 
written form.  
 Hon. Hatimy we appreciate your efforts and it is j ust by bad luck that we have seen some 
other things that Members are not happy with. So we will sit down and after digesting the 
document kindly allow us to bring it back to the Liaison Committee  then we will address the 
Department s from there kindly please .  
 So Me mbers we do not want to hear th ese blames , kindly from today up to next week 
make an effort of having your own copy, go through it especially those areas ... those projects that 
are designed in your areas get those copies go through them then make a writ ten submission to 
the Department concerned, ask the Department as the reasons as to why the same roa d was 
captured in the previous budget and again the same road has be en captured in this 2019/20120 
budget , maybe they will be able to answer. I think from th at point I have made myself clear so 
that we avo id the issue of discussing the budget , you just do the same. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members there having being no any other Business the House stands to adjourned 
till Thursday 12th July, 2019 at 2 :30 p.m.  
The House rose at 3 :48p.m. 
 
 
                
 
 