May 1 8, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 18th May, 201 7 
The House  met at 2:40p. m. 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members you may sit down. Yes, Clerk.  
MOTION  
 Yes, Hon.  Murfad Amur , MCA Old Town Ward.  
(Hon. Murfad  move d the Motion ) 
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUTH ON CASUAL BASIS TO ASSIST IN UNCLOGGING 
DRAINAGE WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I b eg to move the following Motion :  
 THAT AWARE that i t is the mandate of the County g overnment to ensure proper 
drainage systems on the roads provided under the Fourth Schedule Part Two (5) of the 
Consti tution of the Republic of Kenya,  2010 ;  
 FURTHER AWARE that  Mr. Speaker  the County Assembly, in its 50th Sitting held 
on Thursday, 4th May 2017 passed a Motion  that, the Depart ment of Transport and 
Infrastructure  to ensure that the drainage within the County is unclogged and the Department 
of Environment to ensure that they sweep the roads and collect the garbage to avoid clogging 
of the drainage;  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, CONCERNED that there is lack of enough personnel to assist in 
unclogging of the aforesaid blockages and that flooding continues to be experienced within 
the County due to the rains;  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I therefore URGE this Assembly to resolve that t he Department of 
Environment  to make a formal request to th e County Public Service Board through the 
County Secretary for 200 youths to be employed on casual basis as a matter of urgency to 
assist in unclogging of the drainage systems for proper flow of rain water within the County, 
thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You move the Motion.  
 Hon. Amur : I beg to move the Motion  Mr. Speaker and I ask my  brother Hon.  
Jimmy Odari . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon.  Jimmy Odari.  
 Hon. Odari:  Hon.  Speaker I rise to second the Motion . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you. Yes , Hon.  Murfad.  
 Hon. Amur : Thank you again Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the intention of this 
Motion  is to empower the Mombasa County g overnment seeing that it is performing the 
duties that is suppos ed to be done by the d epartment.  We know very well Mr. Speaker that 
the d epartment of storm  and drainage  as it is faces shortage of staff , it is a fact even in recent  
rains, the d epartment of I nspectorate,  our officer  we were made to go and assist in the 
department so that we ca n we get access to the roads by  knowing that  the drainage  and over 
falling on  the road and in the area . Mr. Speaker it is only some few months in the same 
Assembly a report was tabled by the C ommittee of Disaster that there is a shortage , also 
another  department of  Fire fighting  department  is a shortage of  more than 200 people are 
required  again within the same  department.  
 Mr. Speaker we are not requesting that people be employed because we know our 
wage bill is too big but we believe those who  are retired they collect their number, they  
collect their d ata instead of employing new people  or advertising for those d epartment this 
May 1 8, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 should be in particular only appli cation should be done either Fire  fight ing d epartment or the 
Drainag e Storm water Department  because if we don't have  enough man power t hen this issue 
of rain, blocking and over flooding of our towns will be a day in day out issue . 
 So I beg for the D epartment to be given that op portunity to empower our youth s, we 
will have  created at least some way of people getting  temporary and  I am not saying that  we 
don’t have money, the issue of money should not be brought because in every County  there is 
emergency money , Mr. Speaker  we should not be told that there is no money, because  in 
every budget there is a ki tty that is kept for emergency . We are asking the emergency  kit to  
be utilized , also by  provid ing casual employment for our youth s so that we can assist in the 
situation s whereby we are seeing  this time Mr. Speaker.   
Mr. Speaker Sir if this is combining with  the report that was tabled  in this Ass embly 
regarding the department required which was tabl ed in  this House , again even the required  
department had members, enough members then same people could have been used in the 
same issue but due t o lack of staffing both sections  it has force d the department to go to the 
Inspectorate  instead of them  looking after  the vehicle s on the road , they have all  been  taken 
to the same department of water storms . So I beg this House Mr. Speaker to support this so 
that we can have a team that can be able to be trained  and be ready to beat whatever elements 
are there . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Kalume.  
Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono 
mjadala wa Mheshimiwa Amur aliotoa , kweli huu ni mpango mzuri sana j ambo muafaka 
ambalo litasaidia Kaunti ya Mombasa hasa katika maeneo yangu ya Ziwa la Ng'ombe 
kumekuwa na mafuriko mengi sana ha ta tukaleta vyombo vya habari kuangazia  kuhusiana na 
mafuriko yaliyotokea kwa hiyo naunga mkono huu mpango ambao Mheshimiwa Amur 
ames ema ni mpango muafaka sana vile vile utasaidia kwa upande wa ajira kutafutia ajira 
vijana wapate riziki zao nafikiri wengi katika sisi W aheshimiwa tumeona mambo kama haya 
yakitendeka tunakuwa sisi ndio tulo mashinani inabidi k uingia mifukoni kuhakisha mitaro  
imezibuliwa  na maji yameenda . Kwa hiyo mimi naomba Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia  kwa kiti 
chako na  najua una  uwezo kwa hiyo utusaidie ili mpango huu uanze mara moja hata kama ni 
kesho.  Ahsante. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick  Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu : Thank you Mr. Speaker , as I stand here a s a Chair of Disaster 
Committee  I tabled a report in this House and during  my re search as a C ommittee  and to all 
Disaster department  we found that there was shortage and  this Motion  will cure that disease  
of shortages if  we will all ow the relevant department to take  casuals and  also it will create job 
opportunit ies for our youth s.  
Mr. Speaker I fully support  this because there is a shortage  of staff in cleaning of the 
storm  water system , it is a mino r thing just cleaning a drainage  system and storm  water 
system it will save the disaster that we would have seen in  the previous rain y season hence 
employing our youths in casual  basis it will make sure that the entry of the  storm  water 
system i s open all the time so that whenever we have rain s the problem of blockage will be a 
thing of the past.  
Mr. Sp eaker I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate my brother from Old 
Town to bring such a Motion  of which it will take the County forward. Mr. Speaker I fully 
support this Motion . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Kibwan a Swaleh Baya . 
Hon. Ki bwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker . Hon. Speaker I would like  to 
differ wit h my colleagues on  this issue , one; Hon. Speaker the recent rain s that made many 
people to cry including my area . 
May 1 8, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 What I need to say in this Honorable House is that the preparedness of the County is 
very cr ucial for us Mr. Speaker;  we normally know  that there is time for rain sea son and the 
blockage of  the drainage should be a priority , the Department of I nfrastructure Mr. Speaker 
rather than wa iting for a problem to occur then we try to do our intervention  we shou ld make 
sure the D epartment o f Infrastructure and transport is well  equipped and well  funded so that 
any issue that occur  should be able to handle . Hon. Speaker also t he area that is of  my 
concern  is about disaster, disaster is something that should  be looked on because this is 
occurrence from God  that nobody know s when  it is going to happen. Hon.  Speaker we  have  a 
disaster team in the County and I think we should also add it quickly  during our budget  and 
make sure there  will be enough funds  for this disaster team , otherwise we will  also be getting 
blame s from  wana nchi while our b udget is not adequately  funded on  the issue of disaster . 
Hon.  Speaker , another issue ; I think you are aware that there are 200 people  that we 
intend to employ , I don’t know where we will get the funds because the issue of the budget is 
very crucial , I think the mover of this Motion  should also  to tell the House whether he has 
done enough consultation s with the Department of F inance, on the issue of paying these  
casual worke rs because sometimes it happens that we pass several Motion s without 
considering the financial aspect on  it. So rather than rushing to this Motion  Hon.  Speaker the 
mover should also tell us clearly whether this money is there or the money had been captured 
in our budget . Hon.  Speaker as we are all aware that …. 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad  Ahmed  Faraj what is it?  
Hon. Faraj : Thank you  very much  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker this is a point of 
information, I think t he mover of the Motion  Hon.  Amur Murfad made  it very clear that he 
had considered the financial implications of having this project commencing and there is 
allocat ion which you made as a County government with regards to emergency and I think 
we need to look into the amount , how much has been allocated for this particular oc currence, 
and I think on the financ ial part Hon.  Kibwana  I think we have been  be able to address it, as 
herein stated by Hon.  Amur. T hank you.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Kibwana you may proceed . 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker, I do  also understand my colleague 
but the figure is not stated here a nd I think it should come from the Department of F inance , 
for any evidence on the issue of money it should not come from the Hon.  Member I think he 
should be able to attach the correspondence  between the C ommit tee and Department of 
Finance assuring us that the money has been allocated . Hon.  Speaker mine is just a concern 
and I think we should not just rush because there i s an emer gency but we should be able  to 
learn to  plan ourselves well . Hon.  Speaker I think  we should  also create awareness to  our 
people that also there is Department of Inspectorate and D epartment of Lands when people 
are building the house s they should also be cautioned  that there a re certain areas that the 
house s should not be built for the benefit of people. Hon.  Speaker , thank you for giving me 
time.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Omar  Meti . 
Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed O mar Ebrahim ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me 
this opportunity . Mr. Speaker I do  here stand to support my colleague for tabling such a noble 
Motion  concerning employment of youths on casual basis to assist in unc logging drainage in 
the County.  Mr. Speaker  all of us as residents of Mombasa we need  not be told about the 
situation which is  going on , as you well know the rainy season has begun and we have been 
witnessing floods , we have been witnessing loss of lives , even our financial or business wise 
Mombasa because of the rainy season there is a Swahili saying that says ,  maji hufuata 
mkondo . 
May 1 8, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Mr. Speaker the se rains or th e rain water s is affecting our people because our drainage 
systems  are blocked and water  cannot find ways to go to the oceans or any other sources 
where they can be utilized  well, and so this leads to all the damages  which  we are witnessing 
right now  in our  County . Mr. Speaker we should therefore , consider ing that the D epartment 
which i s responsible for unclogging th ese blockages has a s hortage of employees  then we 
should consider employing our youths  so that they can help this C ounty , and concerning the 
money issue we all know that our budget , two per cent  of our total budget , I think i s allocated 
to disaster or any  emergency . So the issue of money Mr. Speaker is not a problem , I can 
confirm it’s not a problem because all Hon. Members  were here when we were tabling  the 
budget  and two per cent  was alloca ted for emergency and disaster s o that money … 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  I beg to correct my fellow brother Honorable  not to 
mislead this House , we don’t have  emergency funds  so he should not mislead this House, 
thank you.  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed O mar Ebrahim ): Mr. Speaker I see my  Finance Chairman 
being worried about the issue , but we also know that even if you don’t have the emergency 
funds but we have people like Red Cross who are willing to assist us and they have been 
cooperating very well  on this issue  and we have  been  witness ing this  several times . So Mr. 
Speaker we still need to consider this for the wellbeing of our County and also the issue of 
our y ouths there are a lot of learned youths who are willing to do such kind of jobs instead of 
staying idle in  our villages . Mr. Speaker we  can employ th ese youths on casual basis because 
this is a very critical issue and I ne ed my fellow  Members  to stand up in solidarity and 
support this  noble Motion . Thank you. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Amur  Murfad  can you reply to 
the Motion … 
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker with all d ue respect  to the 
Chairman of the F inance but when things happen there are well -wishers they come on board 
and we believe we saw Red Cross as one of  the well-wishers who came on board and  i 
believe  all the private partners will come in because it is a situation whereby it needs help . It 
is true Mr.  Speaker maybe we have been constrained by the budget but as we speak the 
money that was there has been used since the rains started , there is some money being used 
so there is a way of getting money to help . I am not sa ying that I am challenging the 
Chairman but there is a way of getting money , even the Governor himself can volunteer and 
say that I am donating one million to this noble issue Mr.  Speaker so that even me as a 
Member of County Assembly I can give out Ksh.50 , 000 as a Member of the County 
Assembly so that we help our own , it is n ot all the time that it is the County government even 
well wishers , myself and my colleague s they can give . Mr. Speaker day in day out people  are 
retiring ; this year or the end of this mon th or June not less than 50 people are retiring so the 
reason I am requesting casual employment is to replace those who are retiring and I want to 
believe the County can manage it through well wishers and partners . Thank you , Mr.  
Spea ker. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Thank you Hon. Amur . 
(Interruption ) 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I am standing under Standing order number 91.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Let me read Standing Order 92(a) , closure 
of debate ; after the question on a Motion  the mover of which has a right of reply has been 
proposed a Member rising in his or her place may claim to move , “ That the mover be now 
called upon to reply” and , unless the speaker is o f the opinion that such Motion  is an abuse 
May 1 8, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 of the proceedings of the  County Assembly or an inf ringement of the rights of the  Members , 
the question , “That, the mover  be now called upon to reply ”, shall be put forthwith and 
decided without amendment or debate and if that question is agreed to , the mover may , 
immediately re ply to the debate and so soon as the mover has conclude d or if the mover does 
not wish to reply immediately the speaker shall put the question , subject to paragraph 3 of 
Standing Order 50 . 
Yes Hon.  Hatimy? What is it?  
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri naomba ruhusa kutumia 
Kanuni  za Bunge nambari  91 kwa sababu pesa kwa b ajeti huwa inafika lakini haima anishi 
ikiwa pesa ziko kwenye b ajeti tunaweza kuzitumia ikiwa sheria ya zile pesa haijatengenezwa , 
kwa hi o Mheshimi wa Spika mimi naomba Nyumba hii Bill ya Disaster and emergency  tuko 
nayo First reading  ishakuja tunaomba kama itawezekana Jumanne  tulete ndani ya Nyumba 
hii tuipitishe alafu  zile pesa zilioko kwenye b ajeti ziweze kutumika kwa njia ya kisawa sawa 
kwa sababu ukiangalia maswali  amba yo tume yapata kutoka kwa ofisi ya Auditor General  
swali  moja tuli lo nalo ni hawa watu wamechukuliwa vibarua na njia ya kando imetuletea 
shida sana  Mheshimiwa mpaka leo miezi mitatu wengine wanafanya kazi ambao  bado 
hawajaandikwa kazi wanalip wa kw a njia ya manual . Kwa  hio kukimbia hii shida kama ofisi 
yako itakubali sisi kuleta  hii Bill mara moja tuipitishe  ili asilim ia mbili ya zile pesa 
zilizokuwa kwenye accounts  za Kaunti zitaweza kufanyika kwa hi o kazi . Kwa hayo 
machache ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri mi mi pe ke yake ndiye niko mwenye ...  
(Laughter ) 
...hata mwenye Mswada  hana . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Chairman is the Bill 
ready? T he said bill is it ready?  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes, it is ready H on. Speaker ? Public participation has 
been advertised na imekwisha kw a hivyo iko tayari kuletwa kwa Bunge .  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Then Members then let us pass the Bill 
and then we will put the question after the Bill has passed . Yes Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
The H ouse rose at 3:07 p.m. 
 