July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Thursday, 11th July, 2019  
The House met at 2:39p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we  may be seated. Y es Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT B Y CHAIRPERSON COMMIT TEE FOR TRADE , TOURISM AND INVESTME NT 
HON. KIZITO OPEYA ON CONDUCT OF BUSINESS B Y EAST AFRICA SUB SAHARA COMPANY WITHIN 
THE COUNTY  
 Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya, the Chair for Trade, Tourism and Investment?  
(Silence)  
 Any o ther Member in the Committee of Trade, Tourism and Investment? Yes Hon. 
Mohamed Mohamed do you have the response? Hon. Amur I think you are in the Committee of 
Trade as well?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes I am a Member of Trade, Tourism and Investment.  
 The S peaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed you are a Member as well?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Mr. Speaker . 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Do you have the response?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes I do have the response. Mr. Speaker I request the 
Honourable As sembly to give us more time because we are still waiting for response from the 
Department, so we need more time Mr. Speaker. Thank you .  

July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : How long?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I think one week is ok ay for us.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, so we are giving you one more week. Yes Clerk , next 
Order please. Y es Hon. Faith . 
 Hon. Mwende:  Mr. Speaker I guess in this House there is no Hon. Sebby, it is Hon. Faith 
not Hon. Sebby and…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Sebby? Who said Hon. Sebby?  
 Hon. Mwende:  I heard Chairman Hatimy saying that ... I was the one who brought the 
Statement and it is with a lot of concern Hon. Speaker because our women are being forced to 
pay Kshs.120 and now they are going County wide . As I was talki ng with some of my colleagues 
even Hon. Bwire told me  they have reached in his place, s o it is a matter of urgency they have to 
treat it as an urgen t matter. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Faith. Yes Hon. Charle s Kitula?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Tungependa kupata 
muongozo kutoka kwako Mheshimiwa Spika maana desturi hii inayoendelea katika Bunge hili 
itakua sio  sawa;  ikiwa Mwenyekiti hayuko ni sababu gani yeye imemsababisha kutokua  katika 
Bunge? Naibu wake nae pia hayuko, sababu gani imesababisha N aibu wake kutokua katika 
Bunge? Hivi sasa nimeona Mwanachama  ametoka pale kuja kupatiwa ripoti na Karani,  hio ni 
ishara kwamba hata hawa katika mikutano hawakukaa , tungependa kupata muongo zo wako ili 
tabia hii isirudie katika Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika. Tafadhali toa muongozo tuweze kupata 
majibu yanayostahili kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti au Naibu wake Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ahsante 
sana.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula . Hon. Members I think we 
have the other Member of the Committee who is Hon. Amur , I think you wanted to say 
something. Do you have the response?  
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker with all due respect my colleague Hon. Hatimy had 
already request for one week yet in the absence of any Member as long as the Committee is there 
he can present on behalf of the Committee. I want it to be clear, it is not that we are not working 
but Mr. Speaker offices are there to stay, if the Committee is there then it does not mea n that the 
Chair or the Vice Chair is not in, the entire Committee will blame the Chair. We are here and we 
can represent on behalf of the Committee Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur. Hon. Amur the Hon. Member is just 
saying that we should take this thing serio us when people are bringing Statement s, so when we 
ask for one week we should have them by that time.  
July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  So please the Honourable House let just take this thing serious and next time when we 
ask for time we make su re that we have the response. Yes Clerk , next Order?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE OF FINANCE HO N. MOHAMED HATIMY ON 
STATUS OF MAJAONI RO AD, BAMBURI WARD  
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed Hatimy please give the response.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika naomba yule 
aliyeleta hii  Taarifa  akubali tu consolidate  na Taarifa  ya Mheshimiwa Bwire kwani lile jambo 
lililoulizwa ni lile lile twangoja ripoti ya status  ya bajeti ya mwaka uliopita  Financial year  ya 
mwaka uliopit a ambayo tumewaeleza, tumewaambia pia watupatie sababu gani zile kazi ambazo 
hazikufanywa pia watuandikie.  
 Kwa hivyo ilikuwa naomba asubiri kidogo nafikiri wiki ijayo ndio tutakuja na jawabu, 
hapo ndio tutaweza kujibu hili suala Mheshimiwa Spika. Nasubir i kutoka kwa Idara zote 
watueleze ile b ajeti iliyopita na hii ikiwa haikulipwa pia itakua imo kwenye ile ripoti ambayo 
itakuja.  
 Hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia kwa Kiti chako naomba unipatie tena muda wa 
wiki moja jambo hili ili tuweze kulimaliza. Ah sante.  
 
(The Speaker (H on. Khatri) exited the Chair)  
(The D eputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the C hair)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy. So it is upon the 
Honourable  Chairs to take matters seriously whatever that has been raised by  the Hon ourable  
House please Committees take note and take char ge and respond back to this Honourable  House 
within the stipulated time.  
 Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE OF EDUCATION , INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY AND MV 2035  ON STATUS O F KWA HOLA ECDE CENT RE 
 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. As I can see a s ign of success ahead  because 
you have just referred me as Hon. Hatimy but I am Ibrahim Omondi. Mr. Speaker Sir I stand 
with your perm ission to give a response on a S tatement that was raised by the Member of Kipevu 
Ward Hon. Faith Mwende on issues concerning the status of  Kwa Hola  ECD Centre.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir  the response  was indeed com municated from the respective  D epartment 
but we had a meeting and  we did deliberate intensively on that particular respo nse that was given 
by the same D epartment but our findings was that  the response did not meet the merit s of what 
we expected from the D epartment , and therefore as the C ommittee we decided that the part icular 
response should not see the light of day, and  in this particular Honourable  House and therefore 
we threw that particular response away.  
 The reco mmendation that we made by the C ommittee was that the Chief Officers of the 
Department to appear before  the C ommittee on Tuesday morning . 
July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  This is to allow them to give a very com prehensive reports on the same which will satisfy 
the Member and also not only the Member because this i ssue is touching on various EC D centres 
in our County . That is where we are thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim and I can see also the  
Hon. Member  who brought this S tatement from Kipevu Ward, she i s very much satisfied by 
your response so the House will be waiting for  the response as you  have said you found that it 
has no merit, so we  will be waiting for the response tha t the C ommittee will see that it got merit s 
to see the floor of the House  so that the p eople from Kwa Hola and Kipevu W ard at large will 
start enjoying  the services of Education D epartment and the County at large.  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Most obliged  Mr. Speaker Sir . I also stand on Standing O rder 41(2) ( c)  
and I would like to give a S tatement if am allowed Mr. Speaker Sir?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just a minute Hon. Ibrahim am consulting ... 
 
(Consultations)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu):  Okay proceed . 
  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker Sir . It is a very touching issue which I 
want to direct to the Chair Labour Committee. Mr. Speake r Sir, we  have had a culture where 
most of the employees in the companies where they are  working especially the t ransport 
companies, are being handle d like ugali if I may use that particular term whereby you simply 
mingle it and put it in your mouth. A s I want to emphasize to use that term to emphasize Mr. 
Speaker Sir if you may allow me.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir I want this to serve as an example, it  is a company called Abebe 
Transport, situated in Port  Reitz, this company dismissed employees without notice, with out 
them being paid their duties and without proper reason s as to why they have been dismisse d. I 
know this has been happening  to very many companies in our W ards but I want to direct this to 
the Chairman of Labour to come with a lot of force to address th is particular issue Mr. Speaker 
Sir, so that it shows an example to other companies which are doing that.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir  the following people one  Derrick  from Mshomoroni, two Kennedy from 
Miritini, three Christine Juma from Airport W ard and very many oth ers which I have not 
mention ed have fallen  victim s of this particular company and therefore I request the Chairman 
of  Labour to investigate intensively ; I may use the word intensively because it seems there are a 
lot of activities which are going on in t hat particular company  which are not at par with our 
Constitution  or with our County government C onstitution . Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim and I think the Chair 
Labour is around , you will share with the Labour Chair plus the C ommittee the names of the 
company and affected individual s, so that t he Labour Committee may fast -track and bring back 
the response on that issue. Yes Hon. Samba? Yes Hon. Bwire before Hon. Samba?  
July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Hon. Bwire: Thank you Mr. Speak er. Mr. Speaker I also happened to a Member of the 
said Committee and as a Member am concern ed with  the terms that ha ve been used by the Hon. 
Member . Mr. Speaker, we may not be able to get the full meaning of intensively or something 
maybe he c larifies bef ore you direct the C ommittee to have a sitting together kindly please, am 
sure my Chairman is also not conversant with it the term used by the Member.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Raphael Bwire . Yes Hon. 
Ibrahim?  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone.  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Sorry with your respect and your permission, I would like the Member to 
clarify to enlist the terms Mr. Speaker Sir that he could not understand so th at I may clarify those 
terms to them. Thank you.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  With your permission Mr. Speaker I may repeat he has used the term maybe 
my fellow colle agues can pronounce but am unable ‘intensively’, combanies  you see Mr. 
Speaker ‘ combanies’  those are the terms I mean I cannot be able to clarify maybe you come out 
clear Hon. Member. Thank you.  
  
 Hon. Omondi:  Hon. Member from Mishomoroni…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Junda, Junda…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Junda Ward . 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Yeah Junda W ard, sorry for the term Mr. Speaker . With due respect it has 
been captured well with the Hansard the term I used Mr. Speak er they should be investigated 
intensively . I said , intensively;  yes Mr. Speaker Sir unless if there i s a question about it, the 
meani ng of investigating intensively is actually getting all the information , going deep into it not 
just doing ... its going deep and even reaching to the owner of that particular company and getting 
the right report, ndani ndani kabisa . Thank you.  
  
 The Depu ty Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think the concern by the Hon. Member is how 
you pronounce it; your pronunciation. Yes Chair?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am happy that some of my Member s seek for  
clarifications but to me is in -depth  clarification, i n depth investigation . 
July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  But sometimes when Hon. Ibrahim Omondi emphasize s on it you will hear as if it is from 
Amer ica today but we will do the in -depth investigation and I should believe in 14 days we are 
going to  be back with the report. Thank you for th ose vocabularies but we will do  a fair job to 
your S tatement. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Point of Information Mr. Speaker Sir . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Information on what and the Chair of Labour 
has said that . 
  
 Hon. Omondi:  Point of Information  Mr. Speaker Sir ! I do not want words to be put in 
my mouth. Mr. Speaker Sir I want to be heard very carefully I used the term intensively  and it is 
the right term Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 And if the re is somebody doubting that word was used wrongly this time we are digital.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Nyiro? Hon. Ibrahim let Hon. Nyiro 
raise concern . 
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Maybe because of where I come from I do  not suffer the problem of 
pronunciation so maybe I will be able to help the term Hon. Bomoa  used; was i t intensively  but 
you are pronouncing it indensively  so that  is where the problem is , so intensive and in -depth is 
the same thing…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes kwa kina na kwa upana ; intensive ly and in -depth. Thank you but you are 
pronouncing it indensively , combany  that is the problem.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Ho n. Ibrahim you are 
out of order! C onsult on a low tone. Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
          
 Hon. Sam ba: Hon. Speaker thank you . I am standing on a Standing O rder 41 (2) (c) if 
you may allow me . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
  
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you. I would like to seek a S tatement from the Chair of Education 
and ICT on bursary of college  and universities. Hon. Speaker I do  not know the reasons why 
when it comes to the issue of bursaries we need to put pressure and mind you we have done t he 
main budget and two supplementary budget s of which as at now if the bursary is to help maybe 
others who are in form fours last two years they have been benefitted . 
July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  But we do  not know when will this trend stop so I just want the Hon. Member for 
Education at least to tell the House when exactly will the bursaries for colleges and universities 
be distribut ed. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Tobias Samba. Yes Hon. 
Ibrahim Omondi, puttin g in mind that we are in a new financial y ear what happened to the 
previous college bursaries?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. S peaker Sir for the chance agai n. I would request for a 
period of one week so that I may respond on it. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker am standing under 
Standing O rder 41 (2) (c) . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on 
Education, Information and Technology and Mombasa Vision 2035 on the case of Shadya 
Muslim who was offered a chance to study cognit ive neuroscience in Noteria  university in 
England this child is indeed of help from the department to enable her pursue the degree. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim any response?  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir th ank you again I would also request for a period of one 
week so that I may respond Mr. Speaker Sir. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Well noted, yes Hon. Feddis Mbura?  
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba kupitia Standing O rder 41 
(2) (c) . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay proceed . 
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Nikitaka kujua Chairman wa Education  katika lile jengo la Mwakirunge 
ECDE walienda kuzuru na kusema kweli sijapata ripoti mpaka leo na watoto wanapata shida ; 
darasa moja linas omewa na watoto 120. Kwa hivyo ningetaka kujua, je walipoenda pale walipata 
shida ni nini na kwa nini lile jengo halijafunguliwa na lina muda gani? Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim, any response?  
 
 Hon. O mondi:  Mr. Speaker also I would request for one week so that I can give a 
comprehensive report on that. Thank you.  
July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Well noted. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker we are fond of this one week , two 
weeks, three weeks the Committee on Education had site visit long way back before even we 
went for recess t hey ought  to have the report as we speak now .  
 Mr. Speaker, they have never reported back to the House I do  not know whether they 
reported bac k to House because there was a S tatement they were to go on a site visit and bring 
back the report to this House  and I do not know the reason as to why the C hairman is keeping on 
asking for one  week, two weeks and yet is in possession of the said report.  
 Even when the issue which was raised by Hon. Faith they o ught to have answer ed it here 
because they already have the report so I would wish just to call upon the Hon. Chair on 
Education and other Chairpersons kindly let us be serious we are here as the re presentatives of 
the people and we are always delaying the issues of development . 
  I would wish to end this scenario and call upon everybody who is assigned the 
responsibility to take it with a lot of seriousness. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwa limu) : Okay thank you and well noted so Hon. Chair as 
you have requested for one week the House will be waiting for your response and we will not 
tolerate any further postponement. Yes Hon. Member from Mikindani Ward , Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker. I want to seek a S tatement from the Board 
representatives ; I believe they are not here but you may send this message to them what plans do 
they have in equipping the Department of Public R elations so that they can be capturing the 
information in this  plenary very well . I understand they do  not have even a single camera, is very 
absurd for those people to be using mobile phones and whatsoever , so what plans do they have to 
equip that said Department in the C ounty Assembly of Mombasa.  
 
 The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Thoya. Yes Hon. Faith?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika nasimama katika K anuni ya 41 (2) (c) . 
Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba kujua kutoka Kamati ya Maji Mwaka wa bajeti iliopita Wodi ya 
Kipevu ilipangiwa visima vit atu na mpaka leo  hii sijaona kisima hata kimoja. N aomba kujua 
hiyo pesa iliwekezwa wapi? Na ni kwa  nini hiyo kazi haijatendeka? Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. The W ater Committee will respond 
on that issue in two weeks time. Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningependa kusimama kwa hicho hicho 
kipengele ambacho k imemruhusu Mheshimiwa wa Kipevu; k una barabara zangu ambazo 
niliomba taarifa hapa; barabara ya Changamwe Police Station, barabar a ya Changamwe 
Industrial Area, barabara ya Changamwe (??) hiyo barabara Mheshimiwa Spika iko  Wodi ya  
Port Reitz na imewekwa Changamwe na inasemakana imejengwa .  
 Sasa nataka niambiwe na hiyo Kamati hizo kazi zitafanyika lini? Manake ni pesa ambazo 
zimetum ika tayari. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
July 1 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           58 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information  
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Ogutu and the Committee on 
Transport will respond on that issue in two weeks time. Hon.  Ibrahim you had given us your 
Statement not unless you are up on informat ion because we gave yo u a chance and you raised 
your S tatements.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir it i s a very burning matter I would like y ou to allow me 
to give another S tatement because it is a very heavy issue which is very much eating up , if you 
will al low me . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir I want to know from the 
Chair on Environment about the garbage collection which have been asked here more than five 
times ; the garbage that had not b een collected for more than  seven  years in a place called 
Saratoga so I would like to know from the Chair what are the plans to remove that particular 
garbage. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ibrahim what you convey to the Chairman 
Environment is that garbage has not y et been collected for the last seven  years ? 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Exactly . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Hon. Members it is a privilege that I 
had given to the Members noting that today the Thursday will be the last for the Hon. Members 
to give their Statement s because in ou r next calendar will be having Statement times on 
Wednesday . So I had given this opportunity but as par our procedures you are supposed to notify 
the Speaker on whatever that you wan t to raise or Statement in what you want to give in this 
Honourable  House . So thank you for the Statements and let  us move to the next order. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no other Business the House stands adjourned until Tuesday 
16th of July , 2019 at 10: 00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3: 13p.m. 