July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 31st July, 2018  
The House met at 2:58p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : You may have your seats, Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION F ROM THE CHAIR  
 
Hon. M embers I wish to brin g to the attention of this Hon ourable  House that t oday we 
have got visitors from U niversity Link day care and academy , a delegation of almost 85 
pupils and I would request all those with the delegation plus the pup ils to stand up and bow in  
front of this Assembly because they are 85 in number I will not name as per the list but I will 
ask all of you to stand up and bow before this Hon ourable  House.  
 
(Students bowed)  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you and on behalf of this Ass embly I 
welcome you all to the C ounty Assembly of Mombasa. M embers , the school if am  not wrong 
is from Kisauni Sub C ounty or  Constituency and Magogoni Ward  so I will let two or three 
Members from the Sub C ounty or the Asse mbly to atleast say a word to the pupils in the 
House . Yes Hon. Shomari.  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii , 
ningependa kukaribisha shule ya University Link kutoka Junda karibuni sana Bungeni . 
Ahsante sana.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Bwire . 
 
Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity I would also join my fellow 
Hon. M embers in appreciating and saying a good t hank to the House for accommodating the 
pupils from Junda Ward, t hey a re very bright and I appreciate for they have come to learn 
how we conduct our businesses . 

July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 So I will just call upon my fellow Hon. Members  that we really give the true picture 
of this House, we let them know what we normally do as we play our role of repre sentation, 
thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Atleast a lady to say a word yes Hon 
Rosemary.  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to 
welcome the pupils from Junda  let them feel welcome d I think I do  not have much to tell 
them but to them they are welcomed to this Assembly.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Honourable , they are f rom 
Magogoni W ard.  
 
MOTION  
 
APPEARANCE OF COUNTY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEMBER S (CECMS) 
AND CHIEF OF FICER IN COMMITTEES  
 
Hon. Charles Kitula , the Chief W hip. 
 
(Chief Whip ( Hon.  Kitula ) Moved the Motion ) 
 
THAT AWARE that pursuant to Standing O rder 41(c) M embers may re quest for a 
statement from the Committee C hairperson relating to ma tters under the manda te of 
the C ommittee;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that the request for statement directly relates to our 
constitutional mandate of representation and oversight; the Committees  must seek 
statements from the County Executive Committee Members and Chief O fficers.  
 
NOTING T HAT often times;  statements as requested,  are not issued in time by the 
County Executive C ommittee Members and Chief O fficers concerned and at times the 
statements are not satisfactory hence need for clarification from the relevant County 
Executive Committ ees or Chief Officers;  
 
CONCERNED that when County Executive Committee Members and/or C hief 
Officer s are invited to appear before C ommittees to clarify on statements or any other 
issue, they opt to send junior staff wh o have not been invited by the C ommitt ee; 
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that;  
 
i. THAT whenever a statement is requested f rom County Executive Committee 
Member and/or Chief O fficers,  it ought to be availed to the C ommittee in good time 
for presentation  before this Honorable Assemb ly; 
ii. THAT whe n a County Executive Committee M ember and /or Chief O fficer  is 
invited to appear before a C ommittee to clarify on any issue, they ought  to appear in 
person and not to instruct their juniors to represent them;  
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  
Mr. Speaker sir may I request Hon. Aran to second my Motion . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Aran . 
 
(Hon. Aran seconded by  bowing ) 
 
Thank you, Members I now propose a question that the Motion  by Hon. Cha rles 
Kitula be debated as moved?  
 
(Question proposed and not agreed to ) 
 
(Applause ) 
 
Yes what is it Hon Kitula, are you up on division?  
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Yes. 
 
(Members stood up for Division ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : The division bell to be ru ng. Members as the 
Serjeant is going to ring the division bell , the n ays sh ould stay on one side and the a yes to 
stay on the other side, so ay es on my left and nays on my right side.  
 
(Hon.  Members moved to the respective side s as directed)  
 
Hon.  Fahad Kassim:  Mwam wiri njoo hapa Mswada w ako ujao tutapitisha.  
 
The Depu ty Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Fahad you a re out of order, we are in 
the A ssembly.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Serjeant please close the door.  
 
(Silence)  
 
(The Serj eant –At –Arms closed the door of the chambers)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Members under the S tanding Order 
69 the Clerk will call you one by one and you will say either yes or no for the roll call voting, 
yes Clerk proceed.  
 
(Honourable Members Voted)  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. M embers now tha t the roll call voting 
is over, it ’s upon the Chair to announce the result, the ayes 22 votes and the nays 7 votes so 
the debate will proceed. Yes Hon. Kitula.  
 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwa mara ya kwanza ni ngependa kutoa shuk rani kwa W abunge wenzangu kuweza kuniunga 
mkono ili kutoa ruh usa kwa mjada la huu uweze kujadiliwa katika B unge hili . Mheshimiwa 
Spika kinachonishangaza mimi kama muwakilishi ni hasa Mwenyekiti wa Delegation  
Mheshim iwa Lucy Chizi akiweza kupinga M swada huu. Mheshimiwa Spika ni kw amba 
ninapatia nguvu hasa wale W enyekiti katika ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : There is a point of order, yes Hon. Lucy . 
 
Hon. (Ms.) Chireri: Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumfahamisha Mheshim iwa 
Mwenzangu kila mtu yuko na haki yake kwa hivyo yale aliyoyaongea mwanzo aniombe 
msamaha kwa sababu pia mimi nina haki yangu yuanikosea.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : What is it Hon. Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Bwana  Spika ningependa kuchu kua nafasi hii, nafikiri kuna sheria 
ambayo inasema ni vizuri kama tunatumia lugha ya Kiswahili tujue tunatumia lugha ya 
Kiswahili lakini kuchanganya changanya rights na nini, umfahamishe ambaye ametoka hapa 
kwamba sisawa atumie lugha ya moja kwa moja ili atakae mjibu ajue anajibu nini Bwana 
Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kitula proceed.  
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika sisi 
kama Wabunge wa B unge hili tuliweza kula kiapo kama W abunge na kuweza kuhudu mia 
wananchi wetu , baada ya kula kiapo katika B unge hili Gavana aliweza kuteuwa Mawaziri na 
vile vile Chief officer  kuweza kuwahudumia katika idara mbali m bali, baada ya kuweza 
kuwateuwa M awaziri na Chief officers  ni sisi W abunge tuliweza kuwapitisha katik a Bunge 
hili. Mheshimiwa Spika ni wakati hasa sisi kama Bunge kuweza kuangali a utenda kazi wa 
Chief officers  hawa na M awaziri katika idara tofauti tofauti ikiwa mojawapo ya majukumu 
matatu tuliyoweza kupewa na katiba yetu.  
Mheshimiwa Spika leo hii nime simama mahala hapa kuweza kuwa na mshangao ya 
baadhi ya Kamati ikiwa M wenyekiti ameweza kupendekeza Chief officer  aweze kujibu 
taarifa  yake, la  kushangaza yale majibu ya naletwa katika Bunge ikiwa haina hata sahihi 
inakuja inaleta mjadala mrefu katika Bunge hi li Mheshimiwa Spik a. Kwa hivyo mimi kama 
kiongozi nikaona  kwamba ni muhimu zaidi wakati M wenyekiti na kupitia uamuzi w ako 
katika Bunge hili kwamba  taarifa  iweze kuletwa kwa mda unaofaa au kulingana na uamuzi 
wako, ni bora yule Mwenyekiti kama anamuhitaji y ule Waziri au Chief officer  aweze  kuja 
kutokezea yeye mwenyewe bina fsi, sio aweze kutuma ili yule M wenyekiti aweze kutuletea 
hapa maneno yanayostahili kuwa katika Bunge hili.  
Mheshimiwa Spika hatusemi kwamba sisi tunawapinga hawa ma Chief O fficer  au 
Mawaz iri lakini ni  wakati nasaha sisi sasa kuangalia je wanastahili kuhudumu katika id ara 
hizi au la  maana sisi t unatunga sheria  lakini wanaotimiza ni wale ma  Chief Officers . Kwa 
hivyo ni jukumu letu sisi kama W abunge kuweza kuangali a utendaji kazi wao kuanzia leo 
maana bajeti tushaipitisha, hasa ikiwa hatuwaiti hawa ma  Chief Officers  tutakuwa hatujui 
utenda kazi wao ni vipi kupitia W enyekiti wa idara tofauti tofauti. K wa hivyo mimi leo hii 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 hoja yangu kuu ni kuwapatia wale W enyekiti nguvu ya endapo atahitaji haw a Chief officers  
waweze kuwa wanatokezea wenyewe  sio kuwa wanatuma watu ambao hawajaalikwa katika 
Kamati hizi Mheshimiwa Spika. V ile vile ningependa kuhimiza Bunge hili wazidi kuni unga 
mkono i li kuhakikisha hoja hii inapita  na tuweze kuona utenda kazi kwa watu ambao 
wameweza kutumwa katika Bunge hili, ahsante sana.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim.  
 
Hon. Omondi : Hon. Speaker S ir thank  you for this opportunity and  I rise here to 
oppose this Motion  firmly and I have the reason and remarkab le reasons why am opposing 
this particular Motion  on the following grounds . Mr. Speaker sir it is our  constitutional 
mandate as Members  of the County Assembly to call or sermo n under the Article 195 of the 
Constitu tion, it is  the mandate of the particular Committee to sermon  the C ounty Executive 
Committee Member (CEC) and even the Chief O fficers  to that particular respective 
Committee and therefore if the C ommittee themselves are not able, do not have wings t o fly 
to call or to sermon the Chief O fficer and the C EC they should come to this House and resign 
so that  we should again appoint other C hairm en and other C ommittee s and as far a s am 
concerned the Chairman of E ducation I have a mandate under the const itution  to call  out and 
to sermon, I can not bring it to this House so that it can be constitutional, this one is already 
constitutional . Mr. Speaker sir, under the Article  195 t herefore it is a waste of time for us to 
come here and pretend that  now we want power to call the Chief O fficers and the 
secretaries … 
 
(Applause)  
 
When Mr. Speaker s ir it is in the book, it is in the Constitution , read Article 195 under 
the Constitution of Kenya, we h ave been given the powers already...  
 
(Applause)  
 
And that one is the best ground I stand to oppose this particular Moti on Mr. Speak er 
sir, and any Member to challenge me on that ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
(Loud consultations)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Members are you up on the point of 
order or?  
 
(Loud consultation s) 
 
Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
Hon. Nyiro:  Bwire it is me I am on the floor!  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Nyiro!  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  I am Nyiro it is not Bwire it is Nyiro. Thank you Mr. Speaker, first I beg 
to support like I have supported before and I also want to give the following argument for my 
support of this that the mover of this Motion  is very much aware that we have constitutional 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 backing to the calling of th ese CECs but there is attendance of these Chief officers and it is 
clear in this Motion  that they usually send junior officers as we exec ute our m andate of 
calling them  they don’t come in person  they send junior officers. So we are petitioning this 
Assembly to make sure that whenever the CECs or Chief Officers are summoned they appear 
in person, t hey do  not send junior officer . The bone of contentio n here is the appearing of 
junior officers to bring responses which sometimes are not conclusive , so Hon. Bomoa 
should be informed, Hon. Omo ndi should be informed that we are very much aware of the 
Constitution al mandate that we are empowered to call them but the problem is the sending of 
junior officers to bring response s to the Committees . So we are saying w e need them to 
appear in person s o that they can give conclusive information but not sending junior officers 
with unsigned documents. Thank you Mr. Sp eaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa 
nasimama kupinga Hoja ilioletwa na Kiraja wa Bunge hili. ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Hoja hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kama sio hii sitanu kuliwa vibaya nitasema ni Hoja 
ambayo haijaenda shule. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
Kwa sababu kipengele cha 195 na Mheshimiwa a mekinukuu kiko sahihi na kwa ru hsa 
yako nitakisoma ili Mheshimiwa  akifahamu na akirudi kwao aka fanye mazoezi ya kukipitia 
katika Katiba yake.  Kipengele cha 195 sehemu ndogo ya kwanza inasema , ‘A County 
Assembly or any of its C ommittees has powers to summon any person to appear before it for 
the purpose of giving evidence or providing information ’. Sehemu ya pili inasema , ‘for the 
purpose of cla use (1), an Assembly has the same powers as the High court …’. Kwa hivyo 
tunaona nguvu ambazo sheria imetukabidhi katika Bunge hili na Kamati zetu za Bunge tuna  
uwezo wa kumuita yeyote sio tu Waziri hata asiyekuwa mfanyi  kazi wetu katika serikali hii 
bado t una nguvu na uwezo wa  kumuita yeyote na tuna popeana habari hii ama  summon  hii 
hana sababu mtu ya kupinga na iwapo kuna mtu ama Waziri aliyekataa kuja kwa Kamati basi 
ingepasa Kamati ile ilete mjadala katika Bunge hili ya kwamba sisi kama Kamati na nguvu 
zetu tulizo  nazo tulimuita Waziri f ulani akatup uuza tukamuita afis a mkuu fulani akatupuuza, 
hapo tungejua kwamba kuna utepetevu katika Wizara fulani na hata kama ni Hoja ya 
kumg’oa m husika yule tungekuwa tume shadili  hiyo. ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Lakini Mheshimiwa k upurupuka kwa sababu hana shughuli,  hana h oja, hana mijadala 
ambayo inaweza  peleka mbele  Kaunti ya  Mombasa Kaunti na wananchi wetu wa Mombasa 
atuletee Hoja ya kumuita Waziri kwani si iko kikatiba. ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Hili si geni ...na alete Hoja kwamba kwake h akuna maji Waziri ametepetea  na alete 
Hoja ya  kwamba barabara hazipitiki Waziri am etepetea lakini kusema kumuita W aziri hili 
lipo kikatiba  nguvu tunazo , uwezo tunao na kama kuna Mwenyekiti ambaye amelalia 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 majukumu yake anaandika barua kuita mtu kana kwamba  anaandikia msichana wake ama 
sijui ni rafiki wa kiume.  Yeye ndiye atakuwa hajui majukumu lakini naandike barua kwa 
uzito wake kama Mheshimiwa, kama Kamati halafu tupate ripoti kama Bunge ya kwamba 
kuna Waziri amepinga  lakini kutupotezea muda Mheshimiwa Sp ika k wa Hoja ambazo 
hazijaenda shule...Mheshimiwa Spika na mheshimu ndugu yangu Kiranja wa Bunge hili ni 
Kiranja wa Bunge hili lakini hizi si Hoja ; angalia Hoja zilizo kwenda shule kuweza kusaidia , 
kadhalika Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kila kiongozi ana  uwezo wa kupeana fursa ama ya 
kutuma msaidizi wake kumuwakilisha kwa sababu hatakuwa yeye kila siku na ndio maana 
nafasi hizi ziko na manaibu , ziko na wasaidizi kama tumemuhitaji W aziri na amesafiri ama 
ana jukumu jengine la kutumikia wakaaji wa Mombasa lenye dharu ra zaidi  awaache wakaazi 
wa Mombasa anatuma msaidizi wake kumuwakilisha na kama tutasema hatujaridhika na 
msaidizi wake lazima Waziri tumuambie rudi tupeane muda kwa Waziri atakapopatikana aje . 
lakini kusema anatuma afisaa mdogo wake  ana haki ya  kutuma aw ezae. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
Ni haki yake ya kiofisi kama mkurugenzi , kama mkuu wa idara ile kuwa aweze na 
kama hatu jaridhika na utumwa ule tumuambie arudi tutafute muda ambao muhusika 
atapatikana aje akae na sisi. Lakini Mheshimiwa Kiranja kama hizi ni  lalama kut oka kwa 
Wenyekiti wa baadhi ya  Kamati katika Bunge hili basi W enyekiti wamezembea na kazi zao. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Shukran Mheshimiwa Spika kwa wakati huu kwanza nata ka 
nimfah amishe Mheshimiwa  Mwenzangu kwamba juzi alileta M swada uliotoka  Chuo kikuu  
juzi ulioenda shule na ukarambishwa sakafu. ...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Huo ni Mswada uliokuwa umeenda shule, w acha tuuzungumzie huu wa leo.  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nadhani hili swala l ikiletwa na mmoja wetu limeathiri Kamati 
nyingi sana.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Are you on a Point of Order, or information?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  I am on a point of information Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Bwire:  I don’t want to be informe d Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Kindly!  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : He doesn’t want to be informed.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Yes Kindly.  
 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : So proceed Hon. Raphael Bwire.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Shukran.  Mheshimiwa tunajua K amati nyingi ambazo mpaka leo 
hazijafanya kazi wala hazifanyi  kazi kwa sababu ya haya yote ambayo tunayazungumzia ; 
moja wapo ikiwa ni Kamati ambayo ilikuwa  ikiongozwa na Mheshimiwa Fahad;  Kamati hii 
imekuwa na changamoto nyingi sa na na hata wakati mmoja Mheshimiwa Fahad amekuja 
hapa akasem a ya kwamba Waziri hapatikani a kiitwa na Kamati haji wala Chief Officer  haji. 
Ipo sheria kweli Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  lakini sheria haif uatwi na ndiposa Mheshimiwa 
akaona ni vyema alet e apate usaid izi wa Bunge hili k wa sababu sisi ndio twatengeneza sheria 
kama ipo ama kipo kitu ambacho tunawezafanya kipatie msaada ama kipatie uzito  ile sheria 
ambay o tulioiweka . Hakuna mtu ambaye ametoka mbi nguni leo Mheshimiwa Menyekiti, k ila 
mtu tuko hapa naye na n ajua kwamba kuna mawaziri wengine, machifu , ofisaa wengine 
ambao hawafanyi  kazi sambamba na Kamti zetu . Kwa hivyo mimi naomba W aheshimiwa 
tuache dhihaka ; huu ni mjadala ambao uko wazi na utatusaid ia sisi watu kutoka mashinani 
kwa sababu hata mimi barabara zangu mbaya nikipeleka kwa Kamati n aambiwa wizara 
haifanyi  sawa sawa na Kamati. Kwa hivyo ni  ulizingatie hili swala tu patie uhai hii Hoja na 
tupate mw elekeo ambao hawa ndugu zetu ambao walichaguliwa na Mheshimiwa Gavana na 
tukapiti sha hapa wamefanya sawasa wa na W enyekiti wetu tuliowach angua na hivi vitengo 
vyote na K amati zote ili utenda  kazi kule mashinani Mheshimiw a Spika uweze kuwa wa 
manufaa l akini tusia nze kudharauliana huyu ameleta m jadala usiona shule sijui  vipi 
haitatusaidia Mheshimiwa.  Shukran.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Okay, thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 
this point I am very shocked , mesmerised and I am out of words due to the misinterpretation 
of this Motion . Mr. Speaker the Motio n is quite clear that the Motion  mover intends to 
resolv e that in the event the County E xecutive Member is offered with a query on every 
matter pertaining to the different Committees they should avail their response in due time and 
the second resolution is  with regards to if in the event they sh ould be required to attend any 
Committee sittings, they should avail themselves in person and not send proxies that are not ... 
what  do we say? That are not in copy of what is going on Mr. Speaker. So I think  I am muc h 
mesmerised and you will agree with me because alive to the fact that A rticle 195 requires that 
the County Assembly has a right  to summon witnesses or any other person and has the 
jurisdiction as the High court. What I want to elaborate is; summoning is t o demand the 
request of a person to appear before an y place, a C ommittee, a joint or in court so the 
invitation ... we are not ... the Motion  is not abo ut the invitation Mr. Speaker t he Motion  is 
about the issues that  I have just mentioned before . 
So those w ho are ...sorry Mr. Speaker but it is just that I don’t believe that there is this 
level of misinterpretation and misconstruction and secondl y, I think onto my contribution … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Mr. Speaker I am on my feet and I need protection!  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Will you need to be informed?  
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya Juma : No I have no intentions to be informed.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes proceed Hon. Amriya?  
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  
Hon. (Ms.) Amriya Boy:  Okay Mr. Speaker . Finally, I wish to state that this h as been  
a burning issue in all the C ommittees and I think one of the major hindrances are on the 
process itself. Once there is a  statement it goes through the Clerks; the Table C lerks and the 
process is very tedious i t goes through the County Clerk then go es to the County S ecretary 
for it to be delivered to the various department s.  I think if that is the process , I agree if that is 
in law but at the moment I feel that the moment there is a statement that has been posted in 
the House that requires a respons e probably we should send a dead copy to the Chief Officer 
or the Minister in due time because what I feel is that they receive the request for statements a 
day; a day before the response is supposed to be delivered, so that is why there is that hiccup. 
So I prefer that if there is request for a statement a dead copy before it goes through all the 
process a dead copy to be sent straight to those personnel who are in charge to respond. 
Thank you so much , that is my submission Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Kombe Nzai?  
 
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii niweze kupinga 
mjadala huu. ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika chambilecho Wahenga M gala muuwe lakini haki yake umpe ...! 
 
(Applause)  
 
Ni jambo la  kufadhaisha kuona  mwenzangu ambaye ni very senior  katika Bunge hili 
la Mombasa akiwa wa  kwanza kukashifu vion gozi wake aliowachagua mwenyewe, i kiwa ni 
wengine walie basi wangekuwa wao lakini sio yeye akiwa ni mmoja wa hao Executive ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Toka niing ie Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika, toka ma  Chief hawa kuapishwa sijawahi 
kusikia hata siku m oja wamedhalalisha mtu mwengine, s hughuli iliotokezea mpaka tukaipata 
kwa manung 'uno ya kwamba Waziri mmoja ametelea.  
Ilikuwaa ni mambo tu ya kusikia , hearsay  lakini u wazi wa kwanza wa kwamba 
alikataa ama walizungumza nini Bunge hili haikuletwa Hoja hiyo. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
Mimi ningependa kusema hivi Mheshimiwa Spika heshima ni  kuheshimiana ; wenzetu 
hawa mawaziri na ma  Chief Officers  wanatupa heshima zetu zilivyo, u akilish i ni mahali 
popote mimi mara zengine huitwa kwa mikutano na nina haki zangu kikatiba kutuma 
uakilishi wangu kama sina nafasi hiyo ya kwenda ..... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 Mambo haya Mheshimiwa Spika hayajaanza jana wala juzi ama yakianza saa hii 
yawe ni mapya tumeona h ata siku zengine Rais wa n chi mwenyewe kuitwa mahali fulani na 
hakakosa kwenda na akatuma ujumbe wake ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Mimi nitasema hivi sio kwamba ninapinga hoja hii kumdhalilisha mkubwa wangu sije 
akanikosa safari ya kule na hapa lakini ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Ukweli lazima ni useme ya kwamba mjadala huu chambilecho tunaupotezea wakati tu 
na ilhali kuna kazi nzuri zaidi mitaani kama kazi za hapa Bunge zimeisha tungekuwa saa hizi 
twazishughulikia. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : I can read the mood of the House, yes Hon. 
Fatuma Swaleh (Kushe)?  
 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii , 
nimeona heri nitoke hapa niweze kusimama hapa ili nikizungumza nizungumze nikiwa na 
nguvu.  Mheshimiw a Spika kwanza kabisa mimi nimesimama kupinga vikali hoja ilioletwa na 
Mheshimiwa Kitula ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Nazungumza kwa machungu sana na masikitiko sana Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mheshimiwa Spika inaonekana lile Bunge lililopita na Bunge  la sasa ni vitu viwili tof auti....  
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika kama sijakosea sasa tunamaliza mwaka mzima na hoja ambazo 
tushawahi kuzileta ndani ya hili Bunge kulinganisha na Bunge lililopita hili Bunge halijaweza 
kuleta hoja za kisawa sawa ndani ya hili Bunge.  Kwanza kabisa  Mheshimiwa Spika 
ningewaomba wale wenye viti kwa kizungu wanaojiita Chairman or C hairlady  ikiwa hawana 
kazi ya kufanya ama niwatepetevu katika kazi zao waweze kuacha hivyo vyeo watupe sisi 
ambao ni wachapa kazi .... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika inaonekana lab da kuna baadhi ya watu wanachuki binafsi na 
baadhi ya Mawaziri ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Kwanza kabisa nikizungumzia Mheshimiwa aliyetajwa hapa mtu amesema kwamba 
kuna sijui barabara hazijajengwa , sijui kuna porojo gani ? Mheshimiwa Spika hilo ni jambo la 
uongo , amba ye ana macho haambiwi tazama .... 
 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 (Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika Mwenyezi Mungu mwenyewe anasema kwamba , si maneno 
yangu ni aya ya Kiislamu hiyo asiyeshukuru kidogo wala kikubwa hatoshukuru . Mheshimiwa 
Spika ukiangalia sasa mji unavyong 'ara, barabara zinavyo ng'ara mwataka mupewe nini 
Waheshimiwa ama mwataka muone vipi Mawaziri wanafanya kazi...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Taarifa Mh eshimiwa Spika . 
 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Sitaki kutaarifiwa Mheshimiwa Spika tafadhali naomba, 
nakuomba sitaki ku taarifiwa na mtu yeyote ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Ukiangalia tuna M awaziri kadha wa kadha ikiwa ni majumba yetu, majumba 
yanang 'ara, taa ziko, barabara ziko Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia nina hakika wewe 
mwenyewe nyumbani ikiwa hauko mama anakuwakilisha pale nyumbani ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika W aheshimiwa wenzetu ambao walichaguliwa bila shaka na 
kutoogopa nafikiri wamepewa nafasi za kazi kuweza kuajiri watu wao ; ikiwa yeye atakuwa 
Mheshimiwa hayuko kwenye ofisi lazima kuna mwakilishi ambaye anamwakilisha pale ndan i 
ya ofisi , ikiwa wao wanalazima kwamba M awaziri waweze kuja katika K amati ama katika 
Bunge na wao vile vile hizo nafasi walizopewa za kuweza kuajiri watu wanyanganywe hizo 
nafasi tupewe sisi kwa sababu wamesema kwamba mtu akiitwa aende yeye mwenyewe na 
yeye basi abaki pale ofisini yeye mwenyewe. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Feddis Mbura?  
 
Hon.  (Ms.) Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi niko kuunga mkono 
mjadala huu na hata mimi naona wenzangu wameupinga lakini n ataka kuwakumbusha 
kwamba kuna M awaziri ambao hatujakutana nao toka tuingie Bunge hili mpaka leo wako, 
kuna Chief O fficers  wengine ambao hatujakutana nao toka t uingie Bunge hili nawakumbusha 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu.  Pili M swada huu ni mzuri na ni  wa kuunganisha sisi W anabunge 
na washika  dau, Mawaziri na Chief O fficers  kwa sababu zile shida ambazo ziko m ashinani 
wakati tutakapokaa na M awaziri wetu na Chief O fficers  wetu mimi nikijieleza kama mama 
wa Mwakirunge shida zangu atazijua kutoka kwangu mimi sio  kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti ama 
kutoka kwa nani? H ilo tulifahamu na itakuwa si vyema kwamba mnaupin ga na wewe 
mwenyewe hujakaa na W aziri fulani, wewe mwenyewe haujakaa na Chief Officer  fulani 
shida zako hujamuelezea hajazijua na hata ukienda ofisini hayuko . Mimi kuse ma kweli 
nataka kuwaambia hawa W aheshimiw a wenzangu tukaweze kuzingatia M swada ulioletwa n a 
mwenzetu tuko hapa kusaidiana,  Mombasa yang 'ara kweli lakini Mwakirunge imekaaje?  
Kwa sababu tuko hapa, naomba tafadhali  nyamazeni  tafadhali , Bwana Spika nawa nisikize 
nimewasikiza ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12  Kwa hivyo n aomba tukaweze kusaidiana kama W anabunge kama ni Mombasa 
yang 'ara ianze kung 'ara kuanzia huku mpaka Mwakirunge, saa hii hivi ninavyozungumza 
Waziri wa barabara sijakutana naye nimeenda mara kadhaa sijakutan a naye Mwakirunge 
imeoza na barabara ya pale dumpsite  twatukanwa kila siku Mheshimiwa wetu anatukanwa 
kila siku kwa nini n afasi hii tusiipate tukakaa na M awaziri wetu tukajadiliana tukaweza 
kupata njia mw afaka ya kuweza kutatua shida . Mimi naunga mkono mar a 99.9 . Ahsanteni.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Faith Mwende?  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand to oppose the Motion ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Mr. Speaker first of all I would like to inform one Hon. Member who has said the 
Motion  is not talking about summoning;  when you cal l someone to appear before the 
Committee, what are you doing? That is the question ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
So we should not beat around the corners and come straight to what is being brought 
on the table . 
 
(Applaus e) 
 
Mr. Speaker I don't want to be informed ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Mr. Speaker am up on a point of information.  Mr. 
Speaker I had no intention of saying what she has just said . Mr. Speaker am on my feet . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwal imu): Just sit, Standing Order 104 . 
 
Hon. (Ms.) Amriya  Juma : Gross disorderly conduct (1) ...! If a conduct is grossly 
disorderly , if the Member concerned  - (f) deliberately gives false informati on to the County  
Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalim u): So which false information?  
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Mr. Speaker the Hon. Member with due respect has just 
stood here and said that I have mention ed...wait I finish my dear you've just said that I have 
mention ed... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : This is a parliament, use parliamentary 
language . 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Okay Hon. Member sorry before I also become 
disorderly...The Hon. Member has just said that I have said that the Motion , the resolution is 
not talking about summonin g, it is not talking about summoning, the resolution is not talking 
about summoning . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir . Point of O rder! 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : You cannot stand on a Poin t of Order on a 
Point of Orde r. She is on a Point of Order , just come clear on your Point of Order . 
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : My point of order is that information that Hon. Member 
has just given is false I didn't say that I even gave the meaning of summoning , I said Mr. 
Speaker summo ning is to order somebody to be present.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you, okay proceed Hon. Faith?  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker as I continue as per the Constitution of 
Kenya , 2010 Article 195 t he Committee has the power and I don't want to repeat myself so if 
the Chairperson s are not competent enough to act or to work on their mandate then they 
should resign because I believe every Chair and Vice C hair they receive responsibility 
allowance so that responsibility allowance sho uld be exercise d on giving the right 
information which is required after giving the statement in this Hon. House.  Mr. Speaker 
today I can say you are representing the Hon. Speaker;  you are sitting on behalf of the 
Speaker ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 What if the Co unty Executive Committee Member (CEC ) is sick do you ex pect him to 
come or to appear before  the Committee? If am in Labour do you expect me to come in the 
Committee?  
 
(Applause)  
 
So we should think soberly, I oppose this Motion  Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Member, now that you have 
exhausted on the Motion  I will call upon the Mover of the Motion  to respond before we put a 
question. Yes Hon. Chief Whip?  
 
  Chief Whip  (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
ningependa tu kuweza kutoa shukrani kwa W abunge wenzangu waliopinga na wale pia 
hawakupinga japo naelewa kwamba hawapingi kwa moyo ila wanapinga kwa mdomo maana 
wanafahamu ya kwamba hoja hii itasaidia kila mmoja wetu kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba  
tunatekeleza wa jibu wetu kama W abunge kuweza kupatiwa madaraka matatu kama Katiba.  
Vile vile niliona kwamba wanaopinga walizingatia kipengele 195 Mheshimiwa Spika lakini 
hoja yangu imekuwa wazi . 
July 31, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           59 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  Natumai pia wakati tunapitisha kwa ku kubaliana kwa pamoja sijasema kuwa ndi o 
tuna jukumu la kuita mtu yeyote katika Bunge hili lakini leo hii  katika hoja yangu nimeweka 
watu wawili ambao tumewapa kipao mbele ambao sisi kama Bunge tuliweza kuwapitisha 
katika Bunge hili sio mtu yeyote  nao ni Chief Officer  na W aziri.  Kwa hivyo W abunge 
ningependa ya kwamba niwabadilishe moyo wao kwamba ni hawa wawili sisi tumeweza 
kuwapitisha kwa hivyo tunapowaita katika Bunge hili tunatekeleza wajibu wetu kama 
Wabunge na vile vile kuhakikisha hu duma mashinani imeweza kufikiwa. L eo hii  ikiwa 
unataka barabara lakini W aziri yule au Chief Officer  hajakuja katika K amati Mheshimiwa 
Spika itakuwa vigumu wewe kama Mbunge kupata maoni kamili ili kuweza kuelezea 
wananchi wako Mheshimiwa Spika.  Kwa hivyo ningependa mubadilishe mioyo yenu na 
muweze kuzingatia kw amba sisi tunatekeleza wajibu wetu kwa manufaa ya watu wetu 
Mheshimiwa Spika . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you the Mover of the Motion . I now 
stand to put a question that the Motion  by Hon. Charles Kitula on appearanc e of County 
Executive Committee Members and Chief Officers in Committees be ap proved in this 
Honorable  House?  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
(Applause)  
 
Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Am asking for a second ballot . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwal imu) : Hon. Members under Standing Order 68 (1a) 
I will ask this Hon ourable  House to proceed because  am seeing there's no reason as to call for 
division.  
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Having there no other Business the House stands adjourne d until tomorrow 
Wednesday at 9: 00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 4: 02p.m. 
 
 