June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 16th June, 2016  
The House  met at 2: 37p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Have your seats Hon.  Members . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Hon.  Members of this Assembly i would like to address you on an important issue that is 
before us as an Assembly ; the Budget estimates of the Year 2016/2017 were presented before 
this Assembly through a Special Sitting of the 29th May, 2016 at exactly 2.30 pm by the 
Leader of the Majority Party as per the Standing Order 207 (3) and (4) that provides th at; 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) read Standing Order No. 207 part 3 and 4)  
3. Upon being laid before the County Assembly, the Estimates shall be deemed to have been 
committed to each Sectoral Committee without question put, for each such committee to 
deliberate upon according to their respective mandates.  
4. Each Sectoral Committee shall consider, discuss and review the Estimates according to its 
mandate and submit it s Report  and recommendations to the Budget and Appropriations 
Committee within 21 days, after being laid before the County Assembly.  
       Of the estimates before the County Assembly the estimates stand committed to its 
sectoral committees without questio n put , each sectoral committee should then interrogate it ’s 
Budget esti mates and respective Executive d epartment must submit the Report  to the 
Committee on Budget and Appropriation , the period known is within 21  days but since the 
Assembly did go for a rec ess the  period is still extended and m y expectation is that coming 
next week all these processes might be adhered to , Chairpersons to take charge and you 
ensure that you drive the process so that nothing will be questionable. Hon.  Members we 
have less than  two weeks to ensure that we complete the b udgetary process so that the 
Mombasa County Appropriation Bill, 2016 can be passed by the 30th of June, 2016 as 
required by the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 . So M embers be 
aware to exerci se responsible leadership and le t us work as a team for the benefit of the 
people of Mombasa  County.  
PAPER  
       Yes Hon.  Kasangamba . 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Ka sangamba ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, i have a Report  on 
the Committee of the Selection. Mr . Speaker i would like to table it and i seek leave to move 
it as a Motion...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is it Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo?  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  kupitia kiti chako na stakabadhi 
tulizopata k utoka kwa ofisi ya Gavana ningeliomba Kinara wa Bunge kuwakilisha ‘the Paper 
that is concerning this County Assembly through His Excellency the Governor ’. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Leader of Majority , continue . 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2        Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, i wish to table 
with your permission i would like to move the Report ; the Committee on Selection...  
(Interruption ) 
       The Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar ): Point of Information Mr. Speaker . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes can the three of you have your seats ; before we look 
to the content of th is particular letter tabled it is important before we approve it that it's being 
considered by the Assembly and that's when we can disc uss clause by clause so it shou ld be 
actually to consider the M otion, this House  to consider the M otion .  
MOTION  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the direction i 
would like to move the M otion for this House  to consider  this Report  of Committee on 
Selection .  
(Question of reconstituting Committees proposed)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes ladies and g entlemen i now propose the question for 
this Hon.  House  do consider the Report  of the Selection Committee on the re constitution of 
the Committees . 
 (Question of reconstituting Committees proposed and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
       Now can you continue?  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir 
following the...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Chief Whip you are up?  
       The Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar) : …As to what Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo has 
said concerning the communication from the office of the Governor was presented to me as 
the Chief Whip of the House  and i wish to present the information to the Clerk and so that the 
Clerk should show you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Riziki Fundi . 
       Hon. Fundi : Ahsante sana Mheshimi wa Spika ningependa kumjulisha K inara wa Bunge 
ambaye  anatufahamisha kwamba kuna barua ambayo imetoka kwa Gavana lakini nataka 
afahamu katika Katiba ya Kenya ambayo imeleta ugatuzi katika Serikali za Kenya iliweza 
kuhakikisha kuwa katika serikali ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa ama yo yote ile kuna mikono miwili 
ya serikali; mkono wa kwanza ni Bunge la Kaunti  na walioandika katiba hawakuwa wajinga 
walipoweka Bunge  inakuwa ya kwanza halafu Executive inakuwa ya pili , na ikiwa kuna 
taarifa  yoyote kati ya mikono hii miwili kuna njia a mbazo zimepangwa kwa sheria, njia zile 
ziweze kufika na lazima tuhakikishe ya kuwa katika Bunge yuko mtu ambaye anaongoza 
Bunge hili la Mombasa na hakuna mwengine isipokuwa ni Spika . Tunajua hakuna kitu 
chochote ambacho kinaweza kuingia katika Nyumba hii iwe ni petition , iwe ni barua, iwe ni 
ripoti lazima ipitie katika ofisi ya Spika ...  
(Applause ) 
       ...iidhinishe  ndio ipite katika Bunge . Hata kama Gavana ameandika barua anajua hakika 
njia ambazo zina weza tumika kufikisha  barua hiyo katika Bunge hili. Mheshimiwa Spika hii 
ni serikali kuna she ria na sheria ni lazima zifuatwe....  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You are the one being informed Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim so 
just resume your seat i will give you your time , yes continue . 
       Hon. Fundi : Lazima sheria zifuatwe bila ya kuj ali mkubwa au mdogo , this is an 
institution  lazima tuheshimu kiti cha Rais sio Rajwayi kama unamuona ama una mdharau 
Rajwayi, Rajwayi hakujiweka pale Rajwayi aliwekwa na sisi na lazima tufuate sheria .        
Ikiwa tunataka kufanya jambo lolote katika Nyumb a hii hakuna njia mtu anaweza kupeleka 
barua yoyote katika ofisi ya Gavana ikipitia kwa subordinate  staff haiwezekani hata kama ni 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 barua ilikuwa ifike kwa Mheshimiwa Rais lazima ifuate ile njia inayotakikana , hatujakataa 
Gavana ni kiongozi wa Kaunti yetu ikiwa ana jambo lolote anataka ku wasiliana  anajua njia 
ambazo anastahili kuzipitia na leo ikiwa wewe kama Kiranja wa Bunge  unamfahamisha 
Spika kwamba una barua lakini Spika hajui kama una barua nafikiria tunakosea ; sheria 
zifuatwe, katiba ifuatwe ili Bunge hili liweze kufanya kazi zake kulingana na sheria. A hsante 
Bwana Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can we just …, let me give the direction before we go too 
far with this ! Hon.  Ahmed E brahim can you resume your seat,  I want us …, we only have the 
paper before us we need to know what is before us as Hon.  Members and the issue of 
discussing anything to do with His Excellency the Governor it's neither they nor they and i 
want Hon.  Members …, can you stop dragging any name that is not within the Assembly o r 
any business that is not even appearing here … 
(Applause ) 
       And also i want to say this and i wish you are getting thoughts and th at's why i allowed 
Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim to make the point of information ; you see the order paper is very clear 
the time t hat we do communication is actually in the order paper number two which has 
already pass ed, we have pass ed messages, we have pass ed petition so the best interest and the 
best practices of this Hon.  House  what you need to do Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim bring that 
particular communication official because it is the right of the Governor or even a Senator or 
any person to petition anything in the House  and when it is time to make a communication 
communicate and it will remain in the House , the Standing Orders provides that His 
Excellency the Governor is given an official address to this House …  
(Applause ) 
       So then if it is a communication I’m again going to say in the next possible sitting Hon.  
Ahmed Ebrahim the Chief Whip that's a Communication the Speaker himsel f will do to this 
particular Hon.  House  and i t is important we must avoid the se dirty scenarios where Chief 
Whip is reading a different page and the Leader of the Majority is also reading a different 
page , this is one g overnment and i ex pect one voice if t here's anything those party differences 
don't bring them here deal with party di fferences outside the Assembly I’ m assuming we 
have more than one party  issues … 
(Applause ) 
       So you don't behave as if you are the one carrying the whole nation , that yes indeed a 
single party rule is a dangerous, disastrous and does not need  a person so allow us to discuss 
the content before us so that we can see how it will serve our people the others leave them. 
Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo .  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante  Bwana Spika.  Bwana Spika tunajua hili ni Jumba la 
sheria na ikiwa sheria zinaanzwa kufuatwa ni lazima ziende zinavyostahili. Bwana Spika 
nimesimama mbele ya Nyumba hii kuongelelea swala ambalo limepitishwa na halikuenda 
kikatiba na Kamati  zimekuwa  zimefanyiwa mabadiliko.  Bwana Spika kumekuwa na ‘caucus  
within your office ’ ambayo i lijadili swala hili na bila...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Just sit down Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo , can you allow the 
House  to be informed .  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nashangaa 
Mheshimiwa ambaye amesimama na kusema kuwa kuna  mabadiliko  katika  Kamati na hata 
Kiongozi wa W alio Wengi katika Bunge anataka kusimama atueleze yaliyojiri na mwengine 
kumbe ashajua nini  kiko ndani. Kwa hivyo ningependa kufahamisha Jumba hili kuwa 
tufuatane na vile mambo yanavyokwenda tusiruke katika stepu ya tatu na watu wako katika 
stepu ya kwanza.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : And again allow me to advice the whole House  ladies an d 
gentlemen i will give each and one of you an opportunity so that you exhaust those particular 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 interests that you have. It is not very much in order Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo when you say that 
there was a caucus and let me just inform you that anything that is b eing done in terms of a 
meeting is call ed a caucus and you either ignore something or use the correct word and you 
avoid unique words that you may land your information into problems because you just need 
the right information how it is exactly , how it is I want to believe  you have what is it.  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nikiongezea ni 
kwamba sisi pia ni Wanachama wa Kamati ya Uteuzi  na swala hili limefanyika hatuna 
taarifa, hatuna ripoti, hatuna hata ujumbe wowote  ambao u metumwa kuhusika katika Kamati 
ya Uteuzi  kufanya mabadiliko haya . Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa tunataka mambo 
yapelekwe vile yanavyos tahili ni lazima sheria ifuatwe, w aliokaa na kurekebisha Kamati hizi 
sijui mbele ya Nyumba hii tujue ni kina nani,  waliokaa na wakapitisha h aya mabadiliko  kwa 
muda wa masaa pekee yake ambapo Nyumba hii imeletewa hapa mbele. Kwa hio Bwana 
Spika mimi bado nasimama na msimamo ule ule wa kwamba hizi Kamati pia ambazo 
zimekuja kwa Nyumba hii  kwa njia ambayo haistahili . Ahsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Lucy can you allow Hon.  Siminyu then you continue 
from there  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Ahsante Mheshimiw a Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . Mheshimiwa Spika 
Kiranja wa Bunge  ndio analeta taarifa  ya Serikali ama ya cha ma na naamini ana ujumbe 
kutoka kwa Naibu Mwenyekiti wa Chama ... 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Siminyu i want to believe that …, do you remember 
the ruling of the Chair? So concentrate on the business before us o therwise you are goi ng to 
touch the ruling of the Chair . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Naja hapo hapo , huo huo mwelekeo wangu naja hapo hapo kwa mambo 
ya Kamati , Kamati  Mheshimiwa Spika zinatengenezwa kwa misingi ya chama na wale 
ambao ni wanachama lazima wakae chini ambapo  Kiranja wa  Bunge  na Kiongozi wa Walio 
Wengi Bungeni  wakae wasikilizane kitu ambacho kimekubaliwa na chama. Mheshimiwa 
Spika naona hii ni adhabu ambayo yataka kupatiwa watu fulani …  
(Applause ) 
       Sio utendekazi kwa sababu unampinga Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni , unampinga 
Spika basi utapewa adhabu. Mheshimiwa Spika hili Jumba linaenda kiheshima kulingana na 
vile inavyotakikana kama orodha  imeletwa hapa iletwe hapa kulingana na matakwa ya chama 
na kama kuna taarifa  ya chama kwa Nyumba hii Kiranja wa Bunge  ndio an atakikana alete 
ujumbe wowote kutoka kwa chama.  Kwa hio kila mmoja ana habari ya kuaminika kwamba 
kuna ujumbe uko kwa ofisi yako ambao umefuata njia ya sawa na iko kwa meza yako 
Mheshimiwa Spika na kama iko isome tujue chama kimesema nini? Nafikiri yangu n i hayo.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Members allow the Leader of Majority to 
proceed .  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika la ngu nikuelezea 
hii Nyumba yale W aheshimiwa walikuwa wakiuliza maswali mengine amba yo majibu yao 
nilikuwa ninayo . Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba nijibu maswali kabla ya ku  ‘move’ huu 
Mswada w angu manake maswali mengine yanajibika. Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na kikao 
cha tarehe 14 mwezi wa sita … 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi ):  Hon Ibrahim can you resume your s eat. 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : You cannot move a Motion without a Notice of Motion Mr. 
Speaker this is a House  of procedures , can we follow the rules and procedures of this House ? 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon Members, Hon . Riziki F undi that is what i don't like 
and if you want to face the wrath  go ahead, i have said resume your s eat Hon.  Lucy and 
Ibrahim, you allow the information to be given , the Speaker as the C hair is very much in  
order and will give the p osition based on the submission, you continue.  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mheshimiwa  Spika nampa pole Bwana  Kiranja wa Bunge ambae ana taarifa  yake na 
tumempa nafasi ikafika mwisho lakini yetu hataki ifike m wisho . Mheshimiwa  Spika  mswada 
ni kuhusu kikao kilichofanyika tarehe 14 mwezi wa sita ambapo kupitia taarifa yako 
uliniagiza mimi kama Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi ambae ni Mwenyekiti wa K amati ya  Uteuzi  
kwamba  kuna barua umeipata kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa  Kiranja wa Bunge letu hili ya kupitia 
katika chama na katika ile barua ilisema kwamba Speaker 's caucus  haina uwezo wa kutoa 
uamuzi wa Kamati.  Mheshimiwa Spika ila uamuzi wako na mwelekeo w ako kupitia kwangu 
uliniagiza kwamba niend elee kufanya Kamati ya Uteuzi  alafu nilete majibu kabla tarehe 21 
na katika uamuzi wako ule  ule ulisema kwamba uamuzi wa Nyumba umesimama vile vile na  
nikinukuu  maneno yako Mheshimiwa  Spika kwamba huo ni uamuzi wa N yumba bado  
wasimama.  Mheshimiwa Spika ndiposa nikaita mkutano jana, mkutano nilioita jana ulikua na 
Wanachama  wale ambao wako kwa ile orodha ilioko kwa sasa , na ningep enda ieleweke kuna 
ushahidi wa H ansard ningependa ieleweke kuna ushahidi wa kila aina kwa mkutano 
kufanyika ; kuna H ansard ili nasa kwa mitambo  mambo yote yali otendeka kulingana na sheria 
Bwana Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika nikija kwa Kamati  yangu tuliokaa mchana wa leo kama 
Kamati ya Uteuzi  na mimi ndio Mwenyekiti  tumewahi kupitisha Wanachama wa kikao cha 
ma Spika hapa Bungeni  akiwemo Mwenyekiti  wangu … 
Thadius Achien g Rajwa yi 
Mswabah Rashid  
Riziki Fundi  
Beatrice Kai  
Serah Nyamvula  
Stephen Wangudi   
(Noise)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now unless you have a point of order or information on 
the Speaker’s  panel otherwise i put that to question,  
(Interruption)  
       Yes?   
       The Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar) : Mr. Speaker I will take this opportunity 
to communicate back to the party and br ing information about M embers who are supposed to  
be in those committees to the M ajority leader so that he can proceed  with the Selection 
committee , but there was no communication from the party that was passed from my office 
to the Selection committee so I don't agree with w hat is going on right now.   
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Amir Thoya that  is a poin t of information i 
believe . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Bwa na Spika, yang u itakua ni k uzung umzia hali ya Bunge  
ilivyo … 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I think you need to avoid loud consultations, or i will give 
you some  time to go an d consult as we continue, yes… 
       Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nina  wasiwasi nafikiri sote na Kenya nzima 
tunajua kwamba Bunge  la Momb asa ni Bunge  ambalo inaongozwa na chama kimoja, na hali 
ambayo inaelekea ni kwamba tayari chama chetu kimoja kina  mpasuko tayari kwa sababu 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6 mkono mmoja mwakilishi wa chama ambae ni kiranja wa Bunge  hili Mheshimiwa Meti 
amejaribu kufanya mawasilian o, mawasiliano ambayo kutokana na kiti chako inaon yesha 
kana kwamba hajafanya mawasiliano rasmi na yeye upande wa pili ana sisitiza kwamba kuna 
mawasiliano ameyafanya kwa kiti chako . Kwa hio hali hii isipopata muongozo wako wa 
busara tayari inaonekana kuwa kutoku weko na mwelekeo  na huenda pengine italeta 
mpasuko, kwa h ivyo yangu ni kuomba tu...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speake r (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Leader of M ajority you are the one on the floor, can you 
allow the House  to be informed then you pick from there.  
       Hon. Thoya:  Yangu  ni kuomba tu Mungu akujalie busara Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
sababu hali ilivyo hivi sasa ni kwamba maw asiliano hayako sawa maanake kiranja akiwa 
anasema hivi anasema amewasilisha ujumbe kutoka kwa chama ujumbe ule umefika kwako 
sasa inakua ni mvutano , naomba kiti chako Mheshimiwa Spika tunakiheshimu na uweze 
kutumia busara ili Bunge  lisizidi kupasuka zaidi  ya pale imeweza kufikia, ahsante Bwana 
Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Lucy Chizi had information for the House , then 
again if you h ave point of order ... now if you don’t say you have a P oint of order I will not 
give you an opportunity , if you don’t say P oint of information i will not give you a chance to  
speak , and you must be very specific, so you don’t  say there is some bias , yes Hon Chireri . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Chireri : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika,  kwanza nitazungumzia kuhusu hii 
Kamati , hii inaenda nje na maadili ya Kamati , mimi ni  Mwanachama wa Kamati ya Uteuzi…  
(Applause ) 
       Na sikupata ujumbe wowote wa kuwa kuna mkutano … 
(Applause ) 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ningekuomba tuendelee na mada nyengine, mambo ya hii 
Kamati mpaka tur idhike sisi, mimi siridhishwi na hiki kil ichofanyika na siliungi mkono, 
ahsante Bwana Spika … 
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes you had a point of information Hon . Hudson Kalume . 
       Hon. Kalume:  Point o f order . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. R ajwayi) : Which order is that?  
(Laughter ) 
       Hon. Kalume:  No it’s a point of information . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Go ahead . 
       Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika, Kenya tunaongozwa na katiba na sisi humu 
tunaongozwa na sheria za Bunge yaani ‘Standing order s’, sheria hizi  ndio inayotu ongoza  sisi 
katika mambo yetu , kwa hivyo mimi napinga vikali. .. 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : That is not point of information can you inform what is 
not right … 
 (Applause)  
       And don’t harass him, Hon . Amur I’m seeing you do n’t harass Hon . Salim.  
       Hon. Kalume:  Kwa hivyo mimi nasema Mheshimiwa Spika hii orodha  ambayo ni ya 
Wanachama wa Kamati  ambao inasomwa na Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  haiko sawa 
kwa s ababu mimi ni mmoja wa po wa Kamati hio ya Uteuzi  na sijapata ujumbe wowote ya 
kuwa Kamati  inakaa … 
(Applause ) 
       Kwa hivyo hii orodha  naweza kusema kuwa ni haramu . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can we hear from Hon . Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I believe  you are a wise Speaker , and i believe  you 
are a learned friend, I want to believe there is a communication that was sent to your office 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7 Mr. Speaker , please Mr. Speaker let's not take this House  again to what happened, let ’s 
follow the procedure, if the communication was sent to your office just tell us you received it 
or not so that we begin the business … 
(Applause ) 
       We respect you as the Speaker…   
(Applause ) 
       Don’t  make us quarrel yet you are the father of this House , please give us a  way forward, 
did you receive the communication or not?  Then we can proceed, thank you . 
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes let ’s hear from Hon . Muriuki.  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity , as you can see there is  
contradicting inform ation from both the Chief Whip and the Majority L eader and I remember 
the last time you gave a direction for those two people to go and sit down. .. 
(Applause ) 
       To come with a Report , it is in the Hans ard Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker this House  
depends on you as a father and we expect you to give a credible directive for the benefit of 
Mombasa and people are trying to intimidate people because if you are not with anybody 
then you are supposed to be punished Mr. Speaker and we have M embers from the Selection 
committee Mr. S peaker Sir saying and conf irming they have not sat for these  changes.  
(Applause ) 
       It is high time you have to take a direction and you should not be partisan Mr. Spea ker 
because there are two sides;  the Assembly has been divided into two, you have to be as a 
referee or else we are going to say like IEBC must go because it has taken sides Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Maimuna Salim . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Salim:  Mheshimiwa Spika  ningependa kusema hii ni N yumba ya 
sheria na mimi ni Mwanachama  wa Kamati ya Uteuzi na  sikuitwa na sikuhushishwa. .. 
(Applause ) 
       Kulingana na sheria kila kitu kinatakikana kiende kulingana na taratibu na sheria, mimi 
naona katika Bunge  hili tunazidi kugawanywa na tunazidi kuletewa fitina na chuki nyingi 
ambazo hazitaweza  kutusaidia; ni vizuri t ukae sisi kama viongozi na tukalie  kikao cha Uteuzi 
tupange  Kamati  kulingana na sheria kila mtu aweze kuridhika, hayo ndio maoni yangu 
Mheshimiwa Spika.   
(Appl ause) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Mumba . 
       Hon. (Mrs.)  Prischillah  Mumba:  Ahsante Bwana Spika, unajua hapa kuna Mumba sijui 
kama baba yetu alikosea, sijui hata ilikuaje . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi najua wewe ni Spika 
wa busara na ni Spika ambae  tunamfahamu mkuu kuliko sisi sote hapa ambao tunakuangalia 
wewe kwa jicho la kua unajua sheria kwa Bunge  hili, la pili umesikia  sauti kadha wa kadha , 
serikali yenyewe ina mpasuko mara mbi li na ikiwa serikali yenyewe ha ina uelewano 
Wanachama wa Kamati ya Uteuzi  ambao wamesimama  zaidi ya wanne wamesema 
hawakuhusishwa katika kupanga Kamati  hizi. Mimi ningeomba Mheshimiwa Spika 
tunapenda kuheshimu Bunge  letu na tunapenda kuheshimu Nyumba hii na kama 
ishazungumzw a na sauti imes ikika kulikuwa  hakuna u husiano wa  Kamati ya Uteuzi kuitwa , 
imeenda tu ikapangwa kihole la holela na ikaletwa hapa ili tuipitishe na kwa sababu  
tumeangalia hapa tukaona wale watu ambao walikua wako kundi  hili na kundi l ile ni kama 
kuadhibiana hapo sasa kwa sababu sisi wenyewe tume kuwa na mpasuko afadhali chama ndio 
itoe taarifa, chama ndio itu ambie kivipi tutaendelea kwa sababu  sisi wenyewe sa a hii 
tumegawanyika tuko makundi mawili  na tusidanganyane hapa ni kama ambae ukiwa hunitaki 
nitakupiga panga na hapa tuko hapa kwa ajili ya m wananchi na kwa ajili ya chama che tu 
tukufu kilichotuleta katika N yumba hii . Ikiwa sisi tuko na Naibu Mwenyekiti wa Chama cha  
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 8 ODM ambae ndio kiranja wa pili chini ya Kiongozi wa Chama  tuko nae hapa na ametoa amri 
zake...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you .     
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi … 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Order ! Order! Yes Hon . Riziki .  
       Hon. Fundi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa  Spika ni masikitiko 
makubwa sana ; nafikiria katika Bunge hili tulipokwenda kupiga kura  tulipiga kura na watu 
wa Mombasa wakatuheshimu, walituma Wawakilishi wa Wodi 30 na baadae wakaletwa 
wengine 15 kutoka katika ODM na mfumo wa Bunge  unaendeshwa na chama na watu 
walioko ndani ya Bunge  kwa lugha ya kiingereza inaitwa parliamentary group  na sisi ambao 
tuko hapa ndio ODM hakuna ODM nyengine.  Sisi ndio ODM …  
(Applause ) 
       Kama ikiwa leo unazungumza kwamba chama kimesema, wewe ni nani ? Wewe  si ndio 
chama , kwa nini unajisahau, s isi tuko hapa kama parliamentary group  ya Kaunti ya 
Mombasa na sisi ndio tumepatiwa mamlaka  ya kuamua mambo ya chama katika Bunge  hili, 
usijisahau ukasema unataka …, wewe unataka Secretary general  ndio aje atuamulie hapa ama 
unataka Mwandishi  wa chama cha  ODM Mombasa aje atuamulie mambo ya Bunge , 
haiwezekani,  sisi kama wanachama wa Bunge  tunaweza kuamua …  
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now can I have …, now the reason why you have to cut 
some Hon . Members short from making their speech, now  remember you can’t  walk out 
when the Speaker is on his feet, you have to prevent that …  
(Consultations ) 
       You know the reason why, order M embers ! You don’t  interfere with that Hon . Member 
who has passed that door so whoever is past that can leave bec ause he left when you were 
there seeing him S ergeant At A rms so he can either come back, can you avoid such 
interruptions … 
(Applause ) 
       Now the issue, there is an element being raised here an d i want the Leader of M ajority to 
actually confirm as he co ntinue s with his submissions  whether this particular notice was 
communicated to the Hon . Members,  that yes indeed there was th ese particular issues, and 
secondly about a party communication it is very clear and let us not try to insinuate …, do not 
mention anything to do with the party if y ou know you did not inform any M ember that will 
question that information … 
(Applause ) 
       In the same manner that we are also discussing this because  finally we must have an 
answer that will make us move forward as a team, we are one what business do we have 
when we get divided? B ecause actually we are going to get nothing when we are divided that  
is the assurance am giving you.  So Hon . Mumba that is now the last chance  I’m giving you if 
you do it again then  you will fin d yourself outside , now Hon . Members can we have it this 
way you have made only two points since you started making point of information, point of 
information ; one is that there was no communication from  Committee on Selection then two 
communication actual ly from the party has not been done so can you make such clarification 
Hon. Leader of M ajority … 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker here 
I have my phone with me, there was a  mess age which was sent yesterday t he number that 
sent the message I  have saved it as Dorothy Clerk…  
(Loud consultations)  
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 9        Mr. Speaker the message was sent on 15th June 2016, it was sent at around 6:05p.m, the 
message says, 'Hon.  please note that Committee on S election will hold a mee ting on 
Thursday 16th June, 2016 at 10: 00a.m, Committee  room …  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Speaker n ow I want to confirm that is there any Hon.  Member  in this House  who 
received that communication?  
(A number  of Members answered in the affirmative)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Now if that particular information was  received then you 
can continue ... 
(Noise)  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir on 
the matter mentioned by the party I think it was very clear , it was very clear your directive 
from what Chief W hip had written to you. Mr. Speaker it was dated Friday  last week and you 
communicated to the Leader of M ajority on Tuesday that the letter of the Chief W hip should 
be taken to the S election Committee, then  Mr. Speaker I’ve said it clear that … (Inaudible)  
and now I’ve decided to move the M otion and the C ommittee did the  necessary consultation 
with the Chief W hip Mr. Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Majority Leader you must stop it! Hon. Majority L eader 
you must stop being ch eeky! Order! Whatever you want to say Majority leader you must 
make sure you cannot allow or adopt this in lump sum , we have S peaker’s panel, one at a 
time so that we adopt each and every clause.  Otherwise if we adopt it wholeso mely we might 
be having submissions from the Hon. Members. We continue.   
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Thank yo u Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir 
we earlier moved that Members of the Speakers panel the C hair is Hon. Rajwayi followed by 
Hon. Mswabah Rashid, Hon. Riziki Fundi Kitsao, Hon. Beatrice Kai, Hon. Serah Nyamvula, 
Nitakupiga ngumi shehe wewe … 
(Noise)  
        Mr. Speaker S ir the last M ember is Stephen … 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Chief Whip can you now get it , I was also  going to  say 
this way, can you stop interrupting, and I will give you enough time to address this House , 
but if you continue to behav e in that manner then I’ll make sure you … (Inaudible).   
       Yeah, but don’t make this a market place, c an you all have your seat s, we are consulting 
briefly then we will get back to you . 
(Consultations)  
       Okay I hope you have also done your consultations, yes Hon.  Majority…   
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) :  Mr. Speaker sir I had earlier moved that;  
 
SPEAKERS PANEL  
1. Hon. Thadius Rajwayi - Chairman  
2. Hon. Mswabah Rashid – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Riziki Fundi Kitsao  
4. Hon. Beatrice Kai  
5. Hon. Serah Nyamvula  
6. Hon. Stephen Wangudi.  
HOUSE  BUSINESS COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Thadius Rajwayi  
2. Hon. Mswabah Rashid  
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba  
4. Hon . Riziki Fundi  
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 10 5. Hon. Abubakar Kibwana  
6. Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  
7. Hon Amir Thoya  
8. Hon. Caroline Auma  
9. Hon. Duncan Onyango  
10. Hon Enock Mwadziwe  
11. Hon. Mary Ooko  
12. Hon. Khamis Mwabashiri  
13. Hon. Hamisi  Musa Mwidani  
14. Hon Hudson Karume  
15. Hon. Ja bess Oduor  
16. Hon. Jimmy Odari  
17. Hon. Karisa Munyika  
18. Hon. Kizito Opeya  
19. Hon. Lucy Chizi  
20. Hon. Maimuna S Mwawasi  
21. Hon. Nasser Rashid  
22. Hon. Moham ed Madundo  
23. Hon. Moham ed Chiro Ndanda  
24. Hon. Beatrice Kai  
25. Hon Paul Onje  
26. Hon. Pris chillah Mumba  
27. Hon. Salim D Kalume  
28. Hon. Serah Nyamvula  
29. Hon. Stephen  Wangudi  
30. Hon. Tom Oluoch  
31. Hon Zainab Kithinzi  
 
COMMITTEE ON SELECTION  
Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba  Chairman  
Hon. Maimuna S Mwawasi  Vice Chair  
Hon. Jabess Oduor  
Hon. Beatrice K ai 
Hon. Khamis Mwabashiri  
Hon. Duncan Onyango  
Hon. Hamisi  Mwidani  
Hon. Zeinab Mumba  
Hon. Paul Onje  
Hon. Riziki Fundi  
Hon. Nasser Rashid  
 
COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMENTATION  
1. Hon. Kizito  Opeya - Chairman  
2. Hon.  Kibwana .S. Baya .– Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba  
4. Hon.  Fatma Mote  
5. Hon.  Lucy C Chireri  
6. Hon. Maimuna  Mwawasi  
7. Hon. Mswabah R Mswabah  
8. Hon. Enock Mwinga  
9. Hon. Tom Oluoch  
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 11 FINANCE BUDGET AND APPROPRIATION  
1. Hon. Hamisi Mwidani  – Chairman  
2. Hon. Karisa  Munyika  – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba  
4. Hon. Caroline A Owino  
5. Hon. Beatrice S Kai  
6. Hon. Khamis M Mwabashiri  
7. Hon. Mohamed N Chiro  
8. Hon. Serah Nyamvula  
9. Hon.  Jabess M Oduor  
10. Hon.  Riziki  Kitsao  
11. Hon.  Nasser Rashid  
12. Hon. Paul Onje  
13. Hon. Tom Ogalo  
POWERS, PRIVILEGES & WELFARE COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Thadius  Rajwayi  – Chairman  
2. Hon. Ahmed O  Ebrahim  - Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba  
4. Hon. Caroline A Owino  
5. Hon. Mohamed  Ndanda  
6. Hon. Lucy C Chireri  
7. Hon. Enock Mwinga  
8. Hon. Mary A Ooko  
9. Hon. Suleiman O Boma  
 RULES AND PROCEDURES COMMITTEE  
1. Hon.  Thadius  Rajwayi  – Chairman  
2. Hon.  Fatma Mote - Vice Chair 
3. Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba  
4. Hon.  Maimuna  Mwawasi  
5. Hon. Jimmy Odari  
6. Hon. Serah Nyamvula  
7. Hon.  Zeinab  Mumba  
LIASON COMMITTEE  
Hon. Mswabah Rashid - Chair, Deputy Speaker  
All Chairpersons of all C ommittees  
COMMITTEE ON APPOINTMENTS  
1. Hon.  Thadius  Rajwayi  - Chair  
2. Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba – Vice Chair 
3. Hon.  Khamis  Mwabashir i 
4. Hon.  Maimuna  Mwawasi  
5. Hon. Stephen Wangudi  
6. Hon. Serah Nyamvula  
 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 12 WARD DEVELOPMENT FUND  
1. Hon. Lucy Chireri - Chair  
2. Hon. Fadhili Makarani – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Hudson Karume  
4. Hon. Mary A Ooko  
5. Hon. Serah Nyam vula 
6. Hon. Stephen Wangudi  
7. Hon. Hamisi Mwidani  
8. Hon. Kibwana S Baya  
9. Hon. Asha Mohamed  
10. Hon. Saad Faraj  
11. Hon.  Patrick  Simi nyu 
(Interruption)  
      The Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed  Ebrahim Omar) : Mr. Speaker  may I please confirm if this  
House  has quorum . 
       Mr. Sp eaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You are saying there is no quorum,  order ! Order 
Members ! We are in the House , why are you in a hurry to respond, y ou are saying  there is no 
quorum ? 
       The Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed  Ebrahim Omar ): Yes there is no quorum Mr. Speaker, n o 
quorum.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is  the quorum number, Hon. Ebrahim?   
       The Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ): The S ergeant should know that .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is the number that you want to make the quorum ? 
20, 30, 40, 100?  
       The Chief Whip  (Hon. Ahmed  Ebrahim  Omar) : 17. 
(Laughter)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you read the Standing order, now can you stop 
harassing ; Hon. Ebrahim  allow him to express himself you know we keep on le arning every 
day, can you Hon. M ajority leader can you have your s eat.  
       The Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed  Ebrahim Omar ): A third…     
(Laughter)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now a  third of the M embers is how much Hon . Ebrahim?  
       The Chief Whip  (Hon. Ahmed Ebrah im Omar ): 17. 
(Laughter)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  I want to believe that Hon . Ebrahim  is a student from one 
of the great universit ies in this country as we speak , but I want to believe  that a  third of this 
House  is not 17 and we know the members hip we have here, the entire membership is 45 
although  we lo st two, so a third of that, so H on. Ebrahim ? 
       The Chief Whip  (Hon.  Ahmed  Ebrahim  Omar) : I think I will have to use a calculator . 
(Laughter ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well as it stan ds Hon. Members I stand to count myself as 
Hon. Ebrahim  is trying  to get his calculation from this smart gadget, now … 
(Hon. Speaker counted up to 13)  
       And you yourself Hon . Ebrahim ...? 
       The Chief Whip  (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar) : Am leaving . 
(Lau ghter and applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Okay ladies and gentlemen one of our Hon.  Members that 
we should encourage to learn more is our Chief W hip and we cannot actually  punish him for 
that because it  is also very wrong to use the S tanding o rders to mislead the House  and more 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 13 so the Chair that there is no quoru m; we are learning so next time you have information  
before you give the House  a task …, continue Hon.  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Kasangamba) : Thank you Mr. Speaker I was on Ward 
development fund … 
WARD DEVELOPMENT FUND  
1. Hon.  Lucy Chizi - Chair  
2. Hon.  Fadhili Makarani – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Hudson Karume  
4. Hon. Mary A Ooko  
5. Hon.  Serah  Nyamvula  
6. Hon. Stephen Wangudi  
7. Hon.  Hamisi M Mwidani  
8. Hon.  Kibwana S Baya  
9. Hon.  Asha Mohamed  
10. Hon.  Saad  Faraj  
11. Hon. P atrick Siminyu  
COMMITTEE ON COUNTY DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
1. Hon. Paul O Onje  - Chair  
2. Hon.  Zeinab  Kithinzi – Vice C hair 
3. Hon.  Abdalla h Kasangamba  
4. Hon.  Karisa N Munyika  
5. Hon.  Maimuna C M Mwawasi  
6. Hon.  Kizito  Okoth  Opeya  
7. Hon. Beatrice Kai  
8. Hon. Hudson Karume  
9. Hon.  Zeinab Mumba  
10. Hon. Caroline A Owino  
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  
1. Hon.  Khamis  A Mwabashir i- Chair  
2. Hon.  Saad  Faraj – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Stephen E Wangudi  
4. Hon. Caroline Auma  
5. Hon. Suleiman O Boma  
PUBLIC INVESTMENTS COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Maimuna S Mwawasi  - Chair  
2. Hon. Aisha Husse in – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Zeinab S Ali  
4. Hon. Stephen Wangudi  
5. Hon. Serah  Nyamvula  
JUSTICE AND LEGAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Jimmy K Odari  - Chair  
2. Hon. David Kalume – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Abdallah M Kasangamba  
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 14 4. Hon. Hudson Karume  
5. Hon. Mary O Ooko  
6. Hon. Moha med Madundo  
7. Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  
8. Hon. Serah  Nyamvula  
9. Hon. Nassir R Suleiman  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, LIVESTOCK AND FISHERIES  
1. Hon. Duncan O Onyango  - Chair  
2. Hon. Zeinab S Ali – Vice Chair 
3. Hon. Khamis A Mwabashiri  
4. Hon. Enock M Mwadziwe  
5. Hon. Suleiman O Boma  
6. Hon. Mary A Ooko  
7. Hon. Lucy S Chireri  
8. Hon.  Zeinab S Kithinzi  
9. Hon. Nassir R Suleiman  
10. Hon. Hudson Karume  
11. Hon.  Serah  Nyamvula  
EARLY CHILDHOOD, EDUCATION, CHILDREN AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING 
COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Stephen E Wangudi  - Chair  
2. Hon. Suleiman O Boma – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Mary Ooko  
4. Hon. Beatrice S Kai  
5. Hon. Caroline A Owino  
6. Hon. Enock N Mwadziwe  
7. Hon. Kibwana S Baya  
8. Hon. Maimuna S Mwawasi  
9. Hon. Duncan O Onyango  
COMMITTEE ON TOURISM COOPERATIVES, CULTURE AND COMMUNITY 
SERVICES  
1. Hon. Enock  Mwinga  - Chair  
2. Hon. Abubakar  R  Kibwana – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Priscillah Mumba  
4. Hon. Duncan O Onyango  
5. Hon. Moha med Madundo  
6. Hon. Jabess M Oduor  
7. Hon. Paul O Onje  
8. Hon. Suleiman O Boma  
9. Hon. Zainab  Mumba  
10. Hon. Zainab S Kithinzi  
11. Hon. Stephen E Wangudi  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORT  
1. Hon. Caroline A Owino  - Chair  
2. Hon. Nasser R Suleiman – Vice C hair 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 15 3. Hon. Beatrice S Kai  
4. Hon. Lucy C Chireri  
5. Hon. Khamis A Mwabashiri  
6. Hon. Moham ed N Chiro  
7. Hon. Tom O Oluoch  
8. Hon. Zainab S Ali  
9. Hon. Zainab S Kithinzi  
COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL PLANNING, LANDS AND HOUSING  
1. Hon. Nasser R Suleiman  - Chair 
2. Hon. Beatrice S Kai – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Riziki F Kitsao  
4. Hon. Moham ed Madundo  
5. Hon. Karisa M Munyika  
6. Hon. Khamis A Mwabashiri  
7. Hon. Zainab O Mumba  
8. Hon. Abdalla h Kasangamba  
9. Hon. Jabess M Oduor  
10. Hon. Paul Onje  
11. Hon. Hudson Karume  
COMMITTEE ON SPORTS, YOUTH, GE NDER AND SOCIAL SERVICES  
1. Hon. Serah  Nyamvula  - Chair  
2. Hon. Ahmed O Ibrahim – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Amir M Thoya  
4. Hon. Duncan O Onyango  
5. Hon. Lucy C Chireri  
6. Hon. Enock  Mwinga  
7. Hon. Stephen E Wangudi  
8. Hon. Tom Ogalo  
9. Hon. Zainab  Mumba  
10. Hon. Asha M Hussein  
11. Hon. Hudson Karu me 
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVE 
DEVELOPMENT  
1. Hon. Moha med Madundo  - Chair  
2. Hon. Jabess O Mdhai – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Riziki F Kitsao  
4. Hon. Tom Ogalo  
5. Hon. Lucy Chizi  
6. Hon. Caroline A Owino  
7. Hon. Khamis A Mwabashiri  
8. Hon. Maimuna S Mwawasi  
9. Hon. Suleiman O Boma  
10. Hon. Paul Onje  
 
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 16 COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATION, COUNTY SECURITY AND DISASTER 
MANAGEMENT  
1. Hon. Riziki F Kitsao  - Chair  
2. Hon. Ibrahim Kondo – Vice Chair 
3. Hon. Jabess M Oduor  
4. Hon. Karisa N Munyika  
5. Hon. Maimuna S Mwawasi  
6. Hon. Mohamed N Chiro  
7. Hon. Murfa d A Amur  
8. Zainab O Mumba  
9. Mohamed Hatimy  
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH SERVICES  
1. Hon. Mary Akinyi  - Chair  
2. Hon. Amur Murfad – Vice C hair 
3. Hon.  Riziki F Kitsao  
4. Hon. Suleiman Boma  
5. Hon. Hamisi M Mwidani  
6. Hon. Kizito  Opeya  
7. Hon. Mohamed Madundo  
8. Hon. Zainab S Ali  
9. Hon. Duncan O Onyango  
10. Hon. Hudson Karume  
11. Hon. Ibrahim Kondo  
COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES  
1. Hon. Hudson Karume  - Chair  
2. Hon. Zainab  Syokau – Vice C hair 
3. Hon. Abubakar R Kibwana  
4. Hon. Amir Thoya  
5. Hon. Caroline A Owino  
6. Hon. Mary O Ooko  
7. Hon. Moha med Hatimy  
8. Hon. Paul Onje  
9. Hon. Kibwana S Baya  
10. Hon. Saad  Faraj  
11. Hon. Priscilla Mumba  
12. Hon. Patrick Siminyu  
13. Hon. Asha Hussein  
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEE  
1. Hon. Zainab O Mumba  - Chair  
2. Hon. Mohamed N Chiro – Vice Chair 
3. Hon. Abdallah M Kasangamba  
4. Hon. Beatrice S Kai  
5. Hon. Enock M Mwadziwe  
6. Hon. Priscilla Mumba  
7. Hon. Jimmy Odari  
8. Hon. Karisa N Munyika  
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 17 9. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy  
10. Hon. Kibwana S Baya  
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE  
1. Hon. Tom O Ogalo  - Chair  
2. Hon. Maimuna  C Mwamassa – Vice C hair 
3. Hon.  Abubakar R Kibwana  
4. Hon.  Hudson  Karume  
5. Hon.  Kizito O Opeya  
6. Hon.  Lucy C Chireri  
7. Hon. Mary O Ooko  
8. Hon.  Murfad A Amur  
9. Hon.  Nasser R Suleiman  
10. Hon. Fadhili M Makarani  
       I beg to move.  
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Kasangamba ) moved)  
(Question on Report  of Selection Committee proposed)  
       Mr. Speake r (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now I put to question that the Report  of the Committee  on 
Selection  on the reconstitution  of committee  membership be considered in this House  on the 
same term as tabled…  
(Question put and agreed to)  
       Hon. Mohamed  Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika , kazi  
iliyofanyika  mimi  napongeza  sana kwa sababu pia kama Mwanachama nilipata i le taarifa  ya 
kuwa  kutakuwa na kikao  hiki cha kuangalia  hizi kamati  na alivyosema Mheshimiwa Riziki  
ya kwamba  hapa  hakuna ODM wengine isipokua sisi ambao tuko kwa  Bunge , Mheshimiwa 
Spika kisingizio  ya kuwa  nani alisema  ni kutaka  tu watu  wajue  ya kwamba …. 
(Interruption)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order Hon.  Ndanda, do you have submission  on this ? 
Only that…  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda: Mimi  napongeza Mheshimiwa Spika .… 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you so much for your congratulations. Yes Hon . 
Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Do you have anything on this particular …?  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Nataka kuongeze a kidogo  tu kuwa hizi K amati zimepitishwa kwa 
mda ambao ni mzuri…  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Okay now that you are happy thank you. Yes Hon. 
Riziki . 
       Hon. Fundi : Mheshimiwa Spika yangu ni ombi ; kupitia  kiti chako  kwamba  sisi kama  
Wawakilishi  wa watu  tumeletwa  hapa  kufanya  kazi sio kuja hapa kuunda K amati hii na ile . 
       Kwa hivyo ningependekeza Bunge  hili lihakikishe kwamba haya mambo ambayo  
tumepitisha hapa yasiwe  na mabadiliko  mpaka  tutakapomaliza muhula wetu ... 
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  
       Hon. Mohamed Madundo : Mimi maoni  yangu nam uunga mkono  Mheshimiwa  Riziki 
Fundi . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Madu ndo what are you seconding?  
June 16, 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 18 (Laughter)  
       Hon. Madundo I know you can be such, aah, can you resume your s eat, yes any 
comme nts, yes? 
       Hon. Onyango:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi  kama  Mwanakamati  nimeridhika na 
Ripoti hii . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon . Rajwayi) : What I want to say the concern that has been raised by 
Hon. Riziki Fundi you need not to bring a Motion ; that a Motion to be passed in this House , 
you know and you wait until then, because even now that is the position  and it is automatic 
that the only considerations can be after six months,  that is the position . 
(Applause)  
(Question of proposed)  
       You need not t o introduce other matters again;  ladies and gentl emen if there is no other 
crucial information the only option left is to put this  to question, t hat the Report  of the 
Selection committee  on the reconstit ution of the committees membership be approved in this 
House  in the same terms as was tabled.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon.  Mwabashiri  Khamis.  
       Hon. Mw abashiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa. Mheshimiwa nil ikuwa nitoe taarifa  yangu 
lakini ningeomba kupitia kiti chako niilete wiki ijayo .  
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You have to remind us on the C ommittee the House  
Business.  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen this House  stands adjourned until next week on Tuesday of 21st of 
June, 2016 at exactly 2:30 p.m. 
The House rose at 3:40p.m. 
  