Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 5th September , 2023  
Third Assembly –Fifty Ninth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:49p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Deputy  Speaker ( Honourable  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the Chair] 
 
PRAY ERS 
The Depu ty Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Have your seats . Yes Clerk ? 
 
MOTION  
NAMING OF ROADS IN MARIKITI AREA  
 
Honourable  Abdi rahman Abdulkadir MCA Old Town Kizingo Ward.  
 
Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, it is my great ple asure to move 
the Motion of naming roads in Mar ikiti area.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Read the whole thing.  
 
Hon. Abd irahman Abdulkadir:  I read the whole thing? ! Mr. Speaker Sir, I b eg to move 
the following Motion.  
 
THAT AWARE  that, Fourth  Schedule, Part 2,  5(a) of th e Constitution  of Kenya provides 
for the function of County governments to include County transport including roads;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that the feeder road that gives access from behind Family Bank, 
giving way through behind Macki nnon Market and Umoja B uilding and Kericho Street 
were named a long time ago;  
 
NOTIN G THAT  Seif Bin Salim was a notable philanthropist who contributed land for 
various charitable and public causes including land to establish the Kenya National Library 
and Mombasa Sports Club;  
 
FURTHER NOT ING THAT Sonara Budha is a notable entrepreneur  who established 
Jewelry  in the Old Town, Marikiti area and beyond;  
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 2 CONCERNED that the failure to recognize the two who have been remarkable people in 
the history of Mombasa an d whose families continue to play  crucial roles in the 
comm unity will be unfair and unjust;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE ; 
 
1. THAT the County government through the Department of Transport and 
Infrastructure to name feeder road that gives access  from behind Family  Bank, giving wa y 
through behind Mackin non Market and Umoja Building to SBS lane in honour of Seif Bin 
Salim , 
 
2. THAT the County government through the Department  of Transport and 
Infrastructure to rename Kericho Street to Sonara Budha Lan e in honour of Sonara Budha.  
 
May I a sk Honourable  Rodgers to second this Motion?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Katana?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Spe aker, I second this Motion.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Membe rs, I now propose a 
question that the Motion by Ho nourable  Abdirahman Abdu lkadir on naming of roads in Marikiti 
area as moved be debated in this House . 
 
[Question Proposed and Agreed To ] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Abdi rahman?  
 
Hon. Abdi rahman A bdulkadir:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and  I also thank the Members 
for admitting this Motion  and raising their voices. Mr. Speaker , we are talking of two roads that 
are in Mar ikiti, those  who are familiar with  the area  will attest that these roads currently do not 
have any name s. Mr. Speaker , there are two i ndividual s who I would like t o perhaps say one or 
two things;  one of the roads t hat I am proposing be named after S eif Bin Salim . Seif Bin Salim is 
the son of  Sir Ali Bin Salim who was the Liwali  then, that was the title of t he Governor of 
Mombasa ; he was knighted  by the British in 1929 , ten years after he ha s been nominated  to 
Kenya Legislative Council as the Arab representative . He develop ed modern education in 
Mombasa , he over saw the establishment of s chool s for local s at the coast , he has seen education 
as the key to development of his subject s. Hon ourable  Speaker , this is an individual who has 
made a remarkable contribution  and t his family we are talking about donated Mackinnon  Market , 
which right now belong s to the County  government of Mombasa. Mr. Speaker , there is no  Law 
burring as to honour these individuals  who hav e be en notable philanthropist  amongst our 
community,  I do therefore plead with my colleagues to join me today and to not oppose this 
motion without any basis  Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker , the other road we are talking about is the 
Sonara Bud dha road ; currentl y the road is named  Kericho road, however Mr. Speaker Sir the 
establishment I am talking about h as been there since 1900 . So these are individuals who hav e 
also made immense contribution to the community  and they have written to various offices 
including my o ffice to have the road rename d to Sonara Budha , the late founder of the gold 
entrepreneurs.  
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 3 Mr. Speaker , I do not wish to ta rry more on this subject , I therefore seek the support of all 
the Members of this Ho use. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy S peak er (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Frankline 
Makanga (Hosanna)?  
 
Hon. Makanga: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nasimama ku pinga Hoja hii kwa 
sababu zifuatazo ; Mheshimiwa Spika , leo ni metamaushwa sana, nahuzunika sana kam a katika 
Bunge  hili tunaletewa Mswada wa kupeana jina kwa barabara ambayo imebidi pia tupewe 
historia ya ni nani ambaye inakuwa named after . Hii barabara kwa sababu wengi wetu hapa hata 
saa hii tukiuliza dakika tano baad a ya kuambiwa huyu Seif Bin Salim ni nani hawatakwa mbia  
Mheshimiwa Spika saa hii licha ya kwamba wameambiwa dakika tatu zilizopita ukiwauliza huyu 
bwana ni nani hawajui ni nani.  Mheshimiwa Spika , hatupingi kwamba barabara zipewe majina 
lakini napinga kwamba  barabara hii kama ni  kupewa jina lipewe jina si kwa  sababu na hii 
nieleweke isisemekane kwamba nimeingiza ukabila kwa sababu amesema alikuwa Arab 
representative  lakini nasema hivi katika Mji w a Mombasa we have our icons . Tuko na v iongozi 
ambao mbali na kufa nya biashara kama hawa anaowataja kwa sababu hawa n i wafanyi  biashara 
faida walioipata kutoka kwa fedha za wananchi wa Mombasa inatosha kabisa kuwalipa ile 
waliweza kutoa kama sadaka.  Kwa hiv yo Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kusema ya kwamba 
wapo wak aazi wa Momb asa, wapo wazaliwa w a pwani ambao walitoa maisha yao  muhanga na 
wengine wakafa wakipigania uhuru wa Jimbo letu hili la Mombasa. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
Spika mimi napinga haya majina yaliyoletw a hapa kwa sababu hayatatupa na hayatahifadhi 
historia ya Pwani kat ika Mji wa Mombasa. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi  nasimama 
kupinga in total . Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you.  Yes, Honourable  Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank yo u, Mr. Speaker . I stand to support;  I stand to support becaus e as we 
are aware we know that Seif Bin Salim is one of our v ery important heroes  in Mombasa...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
This family is the one which donated the Mackinnon Market Mr. Speaker ; being from the 
Mombasa Community we treasure this family an d Mr. Seif Bin Salim because they are the ones 
who gave us the Mackinnon Market, the  Mombasa...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): There is a point of order ! Yes, 
Honourable  Frankline (H osanna)?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  (Inaudible )...kusema ya kwamba …[Spoke  off mic rophone]… 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Use your microphone ? 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 4 Hon. Makanga: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Wajua Jumba hili ni Jumba la rekodi ; 
wanaposema kwamba Soko la Marikiti lilipeanwa na hii familia, je kuna stakabadhi mbele ya 
Bung e hili kuonyesha kwamba hawa ndio kweli wali  donate  ama wanafanya hivyo tu whip hii 
emotion s?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Hamida do 
you have any documents as per what Hon ourable  Frankline (Hosanna) has raised ?  
 
Hon. Noor:  The documents are there we want to go to the archi ves and look for them 
Mr. Speaker Sir . So far us in Mombasa we think the se are our heroes coming to the Sonara 
Budha f amily ; right now,  Mr. Speaker when I go to the market and I am telling somebody where 
I am standing and am standing in front of Sonara Budh a street as we want to name it I will tell 
that person am standing at Sonara Budha...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
They do not know i f it is called Kericho road, I myself do not know it is Kericho Road 
unless probably I see the board but if there was no board there the s treet name is Kericho I will 
not have known for me and the rest of the people in Mombasa know that street as Sonara Bu dha. 
Mr. Speaker , let us have our  heroes’  names on our streets, let us treasure our heroes ; these are 
families in Mombasa that ha ve given out to the communities who are giving hands up to this 
time as I am speaking to you and with those few remarks,  I stan d to support the Motion. Thank 
you very much.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Jacktone 
Madi alo? 
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I do not know Sonara Budha and I have never 
heard of him and I say fo r today the Hon ourable  Members come s to present and for the first time 
I have heard of tha t name . I do not want to deny the Hon ourable  Member becau se very soon I 
will also come with a Motion to want to name some street s Mombasa Cement...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Because Mombasa C ement has done a lot and we have seen all those and also later on I 
might want some  other streets to be named after Madialo my grandfa ther... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
He has done a lot by giving birth to my father who has gave birth to me and you can see 
me am a Hon ourable  Member and for that reason I will support you.  
 
[Laughter ] 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Sp eaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Manuari?  
 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 5 Hon. Ju ma Manuari: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mimi nimesimama kumuunga 
mkono ndugu yangu Anza Fresh , Honourable  Abdi rahman  kwa Mswada wake huu alioleta na 
niwaambie tu wana  Mombasa ni wakati hivi sasa ni  lazima tubad ilisheni mwelekeo wa maisha. 
Kwa sababu wakati wa n yuma  ilikuwa watu hawana fik ra jinsi gani tutapeana majina na jinsi 
gani tutapeana mwelekeo ili maeneo yetu yawe yatatambu lika. Sasa ikiwa leo barabara yaitwa 
Kericho road, Kericho na watu wa Mombasa sisi watu wa Mombasa ni wapi na wapi !  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Huu ni wakati muafaka hivi sasa mwe nzetu almaarufu Anza Fresh amekuja na hili au 
neno hili ili kesho mwengine na  yeye asimame af ikirie ile barabara ya kwenda kwao kama kuna 
mtu wake ambaye anamuona ni muhimu na anahitaji ile barabara tuirekebishe kama ina  jina l a 
mtu la kiajabu ajabu, litolewe liwekwe jina la maana.  Mimi nawaambia ndugu zangu huu n dio 
wakati wenzangu , huu ni wakati kw a sababu tumeona barabara nyingi hata ukiambiwa hii 
barabara ina  jina la huyu unashi ndwa sasa hii kwa nini imeitwa hivi ! Kwa hivyo ndugu  yangu 
Anza Fresh almaar fu Mwanzo ameanza na wewe nawe pia kaa ukifikiria lile lak o kama Seif bin 
nani?…Huyu Seif bin Sal imu haukumjua yeye yuwamjua na wewe tengeneza wako umlete. Kwa 
hayo mengi machache  Mheshimiwa Spika naunga mkono ndugu yangu . Ahsante . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akara ni): Thank you . Honourable  Hossana what is 
it? 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni  vizuri na umejionea mover of the Motion  kaa 
chini you will have all the time to re spond … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadh ili Makarani ): Honourable  Abdu lrahman , just have a 
seat. Yes proceed?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimetangulia kusema  Jumba hili ni Jumba la rekodi 
na…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Honourable  Hossana, I hope y ou are up 
on a poin t of Order  because you have already contributed.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  I have a point of information Mr. Speaker.  
 
The De puty Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Then inform the House . 
 
Hon. Makanga:  I inform the House , thank you for your guidance. I want  to stand and 
say this Mr. Speaker for record because it has been confirmed that a  Member up on his feet but 
even does  not know what  he is supporting…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 6 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): So, what are you saying ? 
 
Hon. Makanga : So Mr. Speaker let these Members not mislead this House because an 
Honourable Member has whisper ed to their ears to sup port. Let it go on record that we passed 
something that is substantial Mr. Speaker. T hank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fa dhili Makarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Osana and there 
is no harm for a Member to whisper to a Member for hi m or her to support th e Motion.  
Honourable  Hossana. Yes , Honourable  Kimari?  
 
Hon. Kimari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika yangu yatakuwa ni machache na mambo 
yaliyo hapa  ni matatu jambo la kwanza nikupinga, kuunga mkono, ama ujizue.  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
Sasa Mheshimiwa Spika hii  Hoja iliyo mbele y etu kusema kweli ina  umuhimu wake.  
Umuhimu wake wa kwanza na nimesik iza Waheshimiwa wengi wakijadili hapa lakini kila street  
ama katika njia yoyote ikipewa jina itakuwa urahisi wa mtu hata akiwa mbali anaweza 
kuongozwa ma hali fulani kwa urahisi. Nikian galia mover of the Hoja  hapa ni kweli ametueleza 
kuhusu mwenye alifanya maendeleo f ulani kupeana hadhi ka tika maeneo eneo la Ma ckinnon. 
Lakini Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sitaunga mkono wala sitapinga ; kwa nini? Mheshimiwa Spika 
aliyeleta huu Mswada hapa mbele yetu hajaweza kutuelezea vizuri tuweze kujua huyu mtu n i 
nani, hajaweza kuleta stakabad hi tujue kama kweli  alipatiana a rdhi na upande wa pili ni vizuri 
siku zijazo hata wewe Mheshimiwa Spika ukitoka hapa kama ut akuwa umefanya positive 
contribution in our society  ni vizuri kuwa recognised  ili hata kila mtu yaani mmoja wetu apate 
ile motisha ya kufanya bidii akijua kile atakachokifanya baada ya yeye kutoka kuna wale 
watakuja kumkumbuka hata watu wetu walioko kule  kule nje wakifanya positive contribution  
angalau  wanaona hata viongozi walioko mamla kani a ngalau  tuwe tunata mbua  zile nguvu zao.   
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa ndugu yangu hapa Abdu lrahman kwa nini nitapinga lakini kwa 
upande mwengine naunga mkono; jambo la kwanza amesema hii njia ipewe jila la Sonara 
Buddha. Nyanyangu akiwa kule bara am a kule mashinanai itakuwa ngu mu sana kutamka kwa 
hio ingekuwa urahisi angesema jina lipewe Sonara peke yake.  Kwa mfano Mheshimiwa Spika 
kuna majina mengi sana yako huko kwen ye barabara huku lakini hata wewe kuelewa ni ng umu. 
Majina yamekuwa magumu a ngalau  hata kama ni jina moja angesema jina Sonara peke y ake 
angalau  tutakuwa tume mtambua  lakini tuk iweka Sonara , Buddha h ili jina lenyewe hata 
kulitamka  ni shida Mheshimiwa Spika,  lakini naunga mkono pia ndugu yangu ameweza 
kutambua zile juhudi  za Sonara Bu ddha. Ahsante kwa hayo.  
 
The Depu ty Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Bhaloo Samir?  
 
Hon. Bhaloo:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Langu ni mawili , matatu hapo ; nataka 
kumjibu mwenzangu nyanyake akiwa kule bara pia kutaja jina lil e Fidel Odinga pia ni shida 
afadhali hilo Sonara Bu ddha ni rahisi.  La pili, wakaazi wa Mombasa wanajua wenye tuk tuk 
wote ukiwaambia Sonara Bu ddha alikuwa wapi wanakupeleka mpaka  mlangoni ... 
 
[Applause ] 
 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 7 Mimi nataka kunga ndu gu yangu Abdulrahman na nataka wenzan gu waheshimiwa sisi 
tumekaa Old Town tunajua kule k unav yoendelea. Ahsanteni.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you, the Majority Leader is up . 
Yes, the Majorit y Leader?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Kulingana na 
uchangiaji wa hoja hii ipo haja Mheshimiwa Spika ya Mwakilish i alieleta hoja hii kwa mtazamo 
kuiboresha hoja hii ama iki wezekana Bunge hili tuweze kush irikiana kuja na Mswada  amba o 
utapean a mw elekeo rasmi katika zoezi hili la kutaja majina barabara zetu . Mheshimiwa Spika  
kama ilivyo leo Mheshimiwa amesema barabara ilioko  pande ya M arikiti iitwe Sonara Bu ddha 
kesho naweza kaja na hoja barabara hiyo  hiyo nikasema igeuzwe jina iitwe  Mwam wiri Factor  
kama Kiongozi wa Wengi kwa Bunge hili . Mheshimiwa Spika, kuna she ria ambayo barabara 
ikipewa jina hili ina ruk hsa kukaa k wa m iaka kumi bila kubadilika kwa miaka ishirini bila 
kubadilishwa ama kwa miaka mia bila kubadilishwa  lakini nia ambayo Mheshi miwa 
ameonyesha katika kuwakumbuka wazee wetu waliochangia uf anisi wa mji huu wetu wa 
Mombasa ni jambo la sa a hii inaelekea kwamba kwa  sababu unapokula kwa mwenzio miguu 
hukuangaza ya kwamba siku zijaz o na sisi ambao tumepita katika zama hizi kwa yale mengi 
machache tuliofanya jamii yetu tutakumbukwa kwa yepi . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spi ka 
kuwatambua waliotutangulia katika michango ya masuala ya kimaendeleo  leo masuala ya 
kimaendeleo na uhuru na ustawi wa jamii ni sa a hii kwetu lakini pia lazima tuwaenzi na kanuni 
ambazo zitatupa mwelekeo kwa  sababu naona hofu hapa ya mmoj a kati yetu katika Bunge hili 
huenda juma lijalo tukakuta hoja katika meza yako kwa barabara zile zile am bazo zimetajwa na 
Mheshimiwa  Abdulrahman na yeye anakuja na orodha ya majina ya kut aka kubadilisha yale kwa 
haya aliokuja nayo mwisho wa siku tuta poteza maudhui na lengo la  kuwaenzi wazee wetu . Kwa 
hivyo naunga mkono lakini nimuombe Mheshimiwa kuiboresha ama  tushirikiane kama Bunge 
tuje na Mswada ambao utalinda barabara zetu . Ahsante Mhesh imiwa Spika.  
 
  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mak arani): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Allen 
Katana.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Mwanzo Mheshimiwa Spika nikushukuru sana kwa nafasi hii ; pili 
nimshukuru Mheshimi wa Abdulrahmani kwa mawazo ya aj enda ya hoja ya leo , lakini pia  tatu 
kuna mtu ambae huharibu mane no akisema lake pata  haribika lakini amepanyosha . Mheshimiwa 
Kiongozi wa Wengi nakush ukuru kwa changizo hiyo na n inapoendele a kutoa changizo zangu ni 
kwamba baada ya tukishakub aliana haya basi tutakua na Bill ambayo itakuja mara moja ili 
pengine hayo yarekeb ishw e. Lakini Mheshimiwa Spika n inachotaka kusema ni kwamba 
nimesikitishwa sana na Mheshimiwa Daktari hata singependa kuchan gia akiwa ametoka lakini 
nafikiri ametoka kwa  sababu alijua nitam husisha, yaani wew e unakaa Mombasa na unasema 
hujui Sonara Bud dha. Hiyo Mheshimiwa na weza sema mtu huyo hana  tofauti na Kipy egon 
Kiprop hajui Mombasa, kokote ulipo ukitaka kuja maeneo haya njia rahisi unayoweza kusema 
hata Kericho Road nime sikia hapa n inacho  kijua siku zote ni kwamba hayo maeneo na njia yake 
yote utasikia mtu anakupa maelekezo ya Sonara Bud dha. Mheshimiwa Spika pia ni vizuri 
Waheshimiwa ambao wanahudumu katika Bunge  hili ni vizuri pia mbali na sehemu wanazotoka 
kama Mikindani na Mkomani ni vizuri tuwe tunaweza kuwashika mkono hawa  Waheshimiwa na 
kuwatembeza maeneo ili wapate kuuliza wananchi sehemu hii ukitaka kuelekeza mtu anasema 
Mombasa Cement  kwa sababu pengine alipata mchele na mgonjwa wake alisaidiwa . 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 8 Lakini kwa magwiji wa bi ashara ambao wame weka Mombasa yetu katika hadhi za jiji ni 
baadhi ya watu ambao hao wam etajwa Mheshimiwa Spika na sidhani kwa uweledi Mheshimiwa 
Abdulrahman alio  nao anaweza kutuletea Ripoti  katika hii Bunge akijua wazi kuna  kanuni ya 
kudumu 87  ya kwamba Mheshimiwa atakapo leta ujumbe hapa awe na u hakika nao ; mimi 
kusema upo uhakika wa kwamba Seif bin Salim alipeana ardhi yake na hivi sasa zinatumika  na 
umma wa Mom basa mpaka leo . Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika kwa nguvu ulizo  nazo wewe na 
kwakua najua Mheshimiwa Spika umekua safarini ume chok a pia wewe kwa nguvu ulizo nazo 
nafikiri unaweza kuuliza swali tayari maana Waheshimiwa wote tuko tay ari na ni  kama amba ye 
tumekubaliana kwamba kwa heshima na taadhima ya  kazi walizozifanya watu hawa kwa ajili ya 
jiji let u la Mombasa mimi pamoja na walio unga mkono hoja hii tunasema na tunaomba kupitia 
kwa u ongozi wako taya ri Mheshimiwa uulize swali ili barabara hizi zikaweze kutajwa kwa  ajili 
ya majina y aliopo .  Kumalizia Mheshimiwa Spika utaniruhusu n iseme tu hivi ili kugusia tu sw ala 
dogo ambalo Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Wengi amelisema ; Mheshimiwa Abdirahman nakuomba 
ujipange ulete sheria  mara moja ili hiyo  sheria ipitishwe na  hili pengo liko mpaka kwa serikali 
kuu si hapa tuu peke yake kwa  sababu Katiba yetu katika kipengele cha 186 kimeweka wazi 
sehemu kama hizi ambazo kunaweza ku wa kuna pengo ya k isheria na sasa na sisi tusingoje 
kutengeza sheria ndio tulete hoja kama hii. M imi nakuomba Mheshimiwa Spika swala hili lipite 
na taya ri barabara zile ziitwe kwa majina kama Mheshimiwa Abd irahman alivyoomba . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika , naunga mkono.  
 
[The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) exited the Chair] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ) in the Chair ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable Abdulrahman , please 
respond to the Motion?  
 
Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir: Thank  you Mr Speaker . Mr. Speaker , I have taken 
great note of the contribution s made by all Members of this Honourable house. Mr Speaker , I 
would like to just perhaps comment on one of the contributions  made by the Leader of Majoritry 
that we do need an Act or rather a Bill that should come to thi s House as soon as possible to 
govern such situations.  Mr. Speaker, before I came up with this particular Motion I had 
exhausted all means an d I noted that the re was a legal gap, legislative gap I  can say and that  
instead of waiting for the Bill, I suggested that  we should first do a Motion and then after I will 
definitely initiate the Bill and  I can confirm that i have initiated the first proc ess of the Bill.  Mr. 
Speaker , without taking much time I  do take note of the support by all the Members. Mr . 
Speaker , I think that is the end of my contribution. Thank you soo much.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili  Makarani ): Thank you . Members , I now put a 
question that the Motion by Honourable Abdulrahman Abdulkadri on naming of roads in 
Marikiti area as moved, be approved by this Ho norable House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
BILL  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY WASTE MANAGEMENT AMENDMENT BILL, 2023  
 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or  Page 9 FIRST READING  
 
Yes Clerk, please read the long title?  
 
[The long title read]  
 
1. The Mombasa County Waste Management Amendment Bill, 2023 . A Bill f or an Act of the 
County Assembly of Mombasa to a mend the Mombasa County Waste Mana gement Act, 
2021 to provide for definition of some word s 
 
2. Functions  and responsibilty of Country government to delete the classification of solid 
waste generators to intr oduce the charges for the County services at the Port and for 
connected purposes . 
 
Honourable Members , the Bill on Mombasa County Solid Waste Management 
Amendment Bill , 2023 is now committed to the Committee on  Environment and Solid Waste 
Management, Yes  Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes, Leader of Majority ?   
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwam wiri): Mr. Speake r Sir, I beg to move the 
following Motion;  
 
That pursuant to Standing Order 30(1) , this House resolves to adjourn today, Tuesday 5th 
Septemb er, 2023 on definite matter of urgent County importance and resume its sitting on 
Tuesday 12th September , 2023;  
 
May I as k Honourable Leila to second the Motion . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable Leila? 
 
Hon.  Nyache : I stand to support the Motion . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Honourable Members . I now 
propose a question that the Motion by the Majority lea der Honourable Athman Mwam wiri on 
adjournment of the County Assembly be debated in this H ouse. 
 
[Question propsed and agreed to] 
 
The Leader of Majo rity (Hon.  Mwam wiri): Thank you Mr. Speaker . As you are  aware in 
every calender year Mombasa County hosts the ASK sho w and as an Assembly  apart from the 
Agriculture Committee we also get invites to pa rticipate in the main arena and in this years ’ 
show  tomorrow bieng the first day of this event we will be having a football tournament where 
the Mombasa County Assembly foot ball team will grace the occasion and also the Mombasa 
County Netball team are having a game tomorrow . 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or Page 10 On that note Mr.  Speaker a s a House and in solidarity with the ASK solidarity , I wish to 
urge the Honourable M embers that we adjourn to attend to this matte r of County importance and 
we resume next week so that we can celebrate, enjoy  and what has been planned for this year’s 
event . Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honorable Pamela ? 
 
Hon. Ojala : Thank  you Mr. Speaker Sir I stand to support the motion brought by leader of 
Majority that we adjour n the county assembly because of the matters of the  importance of the 
county mr.speaker as you are aware we have a very important function that begins tomorrow the 
6th at th e Showground we need to attend as hono urable Members because there we are going 
learning and it will also help us acquire knowledge so that, it can also help us to run our affairs 
as the County Assembly. So, I stand to support the Motion, thank you Mr. Spea ker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Mary am 
Baimu?  
 
Hon. Baimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kun ipatia nafasi hii. Mimi 
nimesimama kuunga mkono Mswada huu kwa sababu, kama tulivyoelezwa ni kwamba 
maonyesho ya Mwaka huu ya Kilimo Mombasa ya meanza siku ya k esho na ziko timu zetu za 
football  na netball  ambazo zita shiriki . Kwa hivyo tunaomb a tujitokeze kwa  wingi tuweze kuwa 
pamoja hapo show grou nd, naunga mkono ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhi li Makarani ): Thank you . Yes, Jac ktone Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir ; going by the mood of the House, can I 
request you to ask  the mover of the Motion to come and respond?  
 
The Deput y Sp eaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Madialo , you are out of 
order! Yes , Honourable  Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika na mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii 
iliyokuja na Kiongozi wa Wengi kati ka Bunge hili. Mhe shimiwa Spika kama vile tulivyoelezewa 
ya kw amba kesho maonyesho ya nafunguliwa rasmi na sisi ndio manahodh a wa kuweza 
kufungua ile Show . Kwa hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika na pia umeel ezewa ya kwamba  kuna michezo 
mimi ni mmoja wapo wa kucheza netball  na mimi ndio mf unga mabao mkubwa katika netball  ya 
kina mama ... 
 
[Applause] 
 
Kwa hivyo ninawaomba tujumuike pamoja tuweze kufika pale Show  muweze kutuona 
vile tunavyosakata dimba na pia muweze kutushangilia. Kwa hivyo mimi na unga mkono hoja hii 
mia fil mia. A hsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Hossana?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Karibu nipinge hii hoja lakini 
nikakumbuk a mimi nacheza katika mpira  wa miguu  namba kumi . 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or Page 11 Kwa hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika hata mimi nasi mama kuunga mkono kwamba tulifunge na 
kesho Waheshi miwa  muje pale mtushangilie  kwa sababu tutawafung a mabao mengi sana wale. 
Kwa hi vyo kesho tukutaneni show ground  naunga m kono Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Mwaka 
Mwalundonda?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante Mheshi miwa  Mwenyekiti . Mimi nasimama kuunga 
mkono kwa sababu, Show  ni mahali ambao kwamba tunapata elimu ya kutosha mbali na 
mich ezo na kilimo. Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono kwa sababu  mimi ni mkulima na nitafika 
pale kwa niaba ya kwamba niweze kuangalia jinsi wen zetu wanavyofanya mambo na ukulima. 
Pili vilevile sisi tunaenda kucheza mpira, hata mimi pia ni kiungo muhimu sana katika  netball , 
msinione vile japo kuwa hamjaniona wengine na hamjanishangilia, lakini mi mi ni mchezaji 
mpira mkubwa sana wa  netball ... 
 
[Applause] 
 
Ikiwepo mimi na Mhe shimiwa Hamida tukiwa pale hakuna bao kufungwa pale. Kwa 
hivyo mimi naunga mkono hoja hii ili tuweze  kushiriki maone sho ya  uwanja wa maonyesho  ya 
mwaka huu. A hsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Mwaka . Yes, the 
host Member from Mkomani Ward?  
 
Hon. Kimari: Thank you , Mr. Speaker . Being the Memb er of Mkomani Ward and 
residents  of Mkomani, I stand here t o welcome all of you tomorrow,  come and learn, you are all  
welcomed . Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwal imu): Thank you . Yes, Leader of Majority 
please respond.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika na pia 
niwashukuru Waheshimiwa wenza kuweza kuafik i kuahirishwa kwa vikao kwa minajili  ya 
kuhudhuria maonyesho ya kilimo ya mwaka huu wa 2023  katika mji wetu huu wa Mombasa . 
Mheshimiwa Spika  Kama ilivyo changiwa na juu ya maudhui ya maonyesho ya kilimo pia vile 
vile nihimize baadhi ya wachezaji ambao wamekuwa wakitubwaga kwa s ababu wamekuwa 
wakihepa mechi. Mheshimiwa Spika , wachezaji hawa wa kwanza ni Mhe shimiwa Abdirahman, 
ana kipaji cha ufungaji mabao lakini tatizo lake ni muoga wa mechi. Hili swala nalikemea ndani 
ya Bunge na ikumbukwe kesho tunatarajia awe katika kikosi kitakacho  anza mfano huu 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  Vile vile tunaye m chezaji wetu Mheshimiwa Gome ambaye tukikabidhi 
nambari tano pale ny uma basi wapinzani hupata tabu,  Mheshimiwa Mchungaji  Madialo lakini 
pia hukimbia mechi sijui ni kwa uwoga, sijui kwa huruma ya wapinzani  lakini tunatarajia kesho 
tutakuwa nao pale tukiwao nyesha watazamazaji na mashabiki wetu mpira burudani  kwa sababu 
timu yetu haina mwambamba Mhe shimiwa Spika.  Pia mama zangu wa wa chezaji wa mpira wa 
pete Mheshimiwa Spika  niwatakie kila la heri na ushindi, wamek uwa wakitubeba sana katika 
Bunge letu  lakini lalam a zilizoko kuna wachezaji wawili mbali na zile sare  za kuchezea mchezo 
ule wa pete wao huzivalia juu ya mabuibui na kuwafanya wazito wa kukimbia kwa sababu ni 
sawia  na wale wanaovalishwa magunia . 
Septembe r 5, 2023                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                       59 
DISCLAIMER: The e lectronic version of the Off icial Hansard Rep ort is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from th e Hans ard Edit or Page 12  Mheshimiwa Hamida na Mhe shim iwa Mwaka tafadhili muvae sare inavyostahiki  ili 
tuone udamwe udamwe mkiwa pale uwanjani Mhe shimiwa Spika. Kwa hayo mengi Mwenyezi 
Mungu atubariki, atupe ushindi, atupe ufanisi na turudi ju ma lijalo tukiwa wazima na zaidi ya 
yote kesho atakuwa captain  wa football  na yeye atacheza nambari kumi . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Hossana  kesho utachoma mahind i. Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you L eader of Majority . 
Honourable  Members , I stand to put a qu estion that, the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Rama 
Mwamwiri on adjournment County Assembly  be approved by this Hon ourable  House . 
 
[Quest ion put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , the House stand adjourn until Tuesd ay 12th September , 2023 at 10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:24 p.m.  
 
 
 
 