May 23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 23rd May, 201 7 
The House  met at 2:37p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Members you may sit down .Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Ma karani,  Chairperson  Public Accounts Committee.  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  swala la 
ukosefu wa maji ndani ya  mji wetu wa Mombasa na niliulizwa ndani ya Bunge letu hili na 
ilikuwa tuwe ni wenye kule ta ripoti lakini Mheshimiwa nasikitika kwa mambo mawili ; baada 
ya kupewa majukumu hayo niliona Kamati nyengine ambayo ilitembelea haya maeneo , 
Kamati ya Liaison  na Mheshimiwa Spika…  
(Interr uption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon.  Amu r? 
Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker my learned friend stood in thi s Assembly and asked from 
the Committee that  this issue be directed  to his Committee of PAC  and it was given to that 
Committee ; he should not tell us about his regrets , we want to be given fa cts, he stood firm in 
this Assembly and said that if the Committee cannot deliver then be directed to his 
Committee and that’s exactly what happened in this Assembly . So today he should give us 
the way forward , he should not tell us his regrets  Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon. Saad Faraj?  
Hon.  Faraj : Thank you very much Mr.  Speaker . I think Mr.  Speaker as Members of 
this Assembly we should give an opportunity to the Hon.  Member to be able to explain 
himself on the reasons as to wh y he has not been able to bring the report on the same,  but I 
understand very clearly that this Assembly is not the normal Assembly that other people have 
been sitting all along , ours is a unique kind of a set up bearing in mind that  some of u s come 
from nomination , some of us are not going to be , are no longer going to be Members of this 
Assembly and th ese are facts that we need to also to consider because am aware of some 
Members being committed to cases, and  therefore I call upon in this House, to understand to 
give time to the Hon.  Member for Po rt Ritz to explain as to why he has not been able to 
deliver the statement as agreed. Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Honorable  of Tudor.  
Hon. Siminyu : Hon. Speaker the issue of nominat ion that the Honourable  who has 
not yet introduce d to this House , he has to re member that we are going to be Members until 
August before the election and we want to serve our people and it should not be an issue that 
need to be discus sed. Mr. Speaker we n eed a clear report because the wa ter report has taken 
too long and I remember through  your Chair directed  the Public  Accounts Committee 
because the previous Committee has not perform ed or has not br ought  any report , we need 
complete  report from the Chair and he should  not bring us any reason which is not tangible , 
thank you M r. Speaker.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Hon.  Fadhili be advised that it is your 
Committee which asked for this job to be  given to you because a lot of Committee s have 
been  given this job and not  perform ed, so it is your duty for your Committee to go around to 
those Committee s which have been doing  this job and bring the report here , so it’s your 
mandate, it's the mandate of your C ommittee to bring the report here irrespective o f who 
went where, thank you.  
May 23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika kama Kamati tumechuku a jukumu, tumeandika 
barua kwa Mombasa Water Board , na swala hili lilikuwa na utata m wingi ndani yak e ndio 
maana likawa tumelip okea . Mheshimi wa Spika ninaipatia Kamati yangu pongezi kwa  kazi 
nzuri ambayo inayofanya . Mheshimiwa Spika  wajua Kamati hii mvua imeanza kunyesha 
ndani ya Mombasa na tatizo la maji limean za kupungua kwa kiasi kikubwa, tulichobaki a 
kama Kamati ...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari, what is it?  
Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon . Speake r. Hon. Speaker  it is very disappointing when 
we are discussing such a very critical matter, that we are not serious enough ; the problem for 
water scarcity  in Mombasa is a very serious matter and it deserve s to be given the importance 
that it deserves . Let us look for a way forward if we feel that the matter is displaced I think 
it’s handled by the Public Accounts Committee , let it be directed to the relevant Committee if 
it is possi ble for the provision of water in  the C ounty, thank you Hon. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon.  of Tudor  
(Loud consultations ) 
Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker, is the ra in water a solution? Mr. Speaker we needed a 
report , a comp rehensive  report of water, tap water supplied to the resident s and the shortage 
is still there . We need a report ; as the Committee directed there is  a letter that any 
corresponden ce to the water body we have received that letter so that we can see whether the 
Committee is seriously handling the matter….  
(Applause ) 
 ...because this matter has been disturbing Mombasa and it is not something to joke 
about. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon. Saad Ahmed Faraj .  
 Hon.  Faraj : Naam ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa Spika nikichuku a 
mfano wa kwetu Lamu  na hususan tukizungumzia kule kwetu kisiwani maji ambayo kwamba 
yanatusuk uma kwa muda mrefu kwa wale wanaoish i kule , wale nyanya zetu na mama zetu 
walioko kule tunatumia maji ya mvua ambayo kwamba yanahifadhiwa katika majabia 
ambayo kwamba yanatumika mara nyengine kwa miezi sita , miezi saba. Kwa hi o ukitumia 
lugha kuwa m aji ya mvua si maji ya kuzungum ziwa tena n i maji muhimu sana yafaa 
kuzungumziwa ikiwa tuna mfumo  ambao kwamba tunaweza kufuata tujisaidie sisi watu wa 
mjini hapa Mombasa pia ingekua ni njia nzuri ya kujisaidia. Ahsante.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Members, yes Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
 Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker  what we are talking here about is the tapped water that 
people are paying for and they are not getting this commodity , it is not about the rain, rain is 
individual  to whatever structure  one has  to harvest the water but this is concerning somebody 
who is paying a bill  and it is his right  to get water by the Constitution of this Country 2010 
and then you are telling us we should go for the rain water ; it has not been treated with  
chlorine, it has not been treated Mr. Speaker let them be fair  to this Assembly , let them table 
the report if they fail then the Committee should be dissolved .  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Mheshimiwa Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani 
rain water is very good water but that should be in your report which this House is waiting, so 
put that r ain water in your report and bring that report here…  
(Applause ) 
 …yes can we have the report Hon.  Fadhili . 
 Hon. M walimu : Bwana Spika  ripoti iko na twaendelea kuitengeneza , nimetangulia 
kusema kuwa kwanza Bunge hili lil ikuwa limetoa wiki mbili tuweze kurudisha ripoti hii 
lakini tukaenda mapumziko .  
May 23, 2017                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                              59 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3  Mheshimiwa Spika ni jana Kamati ya House Business  imekaa ili iulizie kuhusu 
ripoti hii , mimi pia bado naomba kwa sababu bado naendelea, nilianza kusema kuwa 
twashirikiana na Kamati zingine . Kama wenzangu walivyosema wako Kamati kama 
nilivyosema ya Liasion iko na ripoti kidogo ilikua bado inaendelea kutengeza itulet ee tuweze 
kuichanganya na ripoti yetu . Mheshimiwa Spika kuna Mombasa Water weny ewe pia 
walikuwa wametufuata na wakatuambia wana ripoti kuhusu ni sababu gani sehemu k ama 
Mtongwe maji yamekuwa ni ta bu mpaka wazima moto wanaitwa wapeleke maji sehemu zile 
wakatuomba pia ripoti ile tuweze kuingiza katika ripoti yetu ili tuzidi kuioanisha na ripoti 
yetu. Mheshimiwa Spika sisemi kuwa ati Kamati yetu haijafanya kazi, mimi nitalaumu 
Kamati zile nyengine hazijaleta ripoti zao ili tuweze kuoanisha tupeleke ripoti yetu.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika mwanzo Kamati ya Uchukuzi  wakati wakiambiwa kwaletwa 
maji kule Mtongwe na sehemu zengi ne kwanza Kamati ya  Utalii  imezi di kudorora maana 
inafanya Momb asa izidi kuonekana jiji ambalo halina mwelekeo , haiwezekani  jiji kama la 
Mombasa liwe ha lina... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Hon. Fadhili can you dwell on the matter 
at hand please , yes Hon.  Amur . 
Hon. Amur : Mr. S peaker the Honourable learned friend cannot tell us that th e other 
Committees are pursuing the issue, it was him who said in this Assembly whereby he 
requested this issue be given that department,  he cannot tell us about o ther Committees , it is 
right to his Committee, he either  table s the report  or the Commi ttee be dissolved . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Okay Hon.  Fadhili you are given another 
one week to bring the report . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Mheshimiwa Spika tuliomba kama Kamati kwa sababu kulikuwa 
kuna mambo kadha ambayo lazima tuyaf uatilie na sio mambo ya kuchuku a sik u moja ama 
wiki mbili, uchunguzi kupitia kwa bodi, it is out of order  watu wawili wasimame kwa Bunge 
hili.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Hon.  Amur have your seat, you are out of 
order . 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunilinda, kuna mambo a mbayo 
tukisema sasa hivi uchunguzi tumepewa wiki moja ama mbili na mambo mengi pale 
tumepata r ipoti mpaka kuwa bod i ya maji inapoteza pesa nyingi , inapata hasara inapo teza 
maji kiwango  cha maji inakotoka na inayofika ni kid ogo, nyingi inapote a katikati . Kuna 
mambo mengi ambayo tun atakikana tuyachunguze na tuyaf uate na Mheshimiwa  bila 
ushirikiano  lazima tushirikiane na hizi Kamati zengine . Mheshimiwa Spika sioni ha ja ya 
kurudisha ripoti hii kwa Kamati zengine ambazo mwanzo zilikuwa zimezembea ndio mimi 
nikaomba jukumu hili niweze kufanya.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon Mswabah Rashid ): Hon. Fadhili your time is up you have 
gone more than five minutes so I have made a ruling ; in two weeks , you have to work hard,  I 
know you are  a hardworking Chairman so you work hard and produce  the report. Yes Clerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
Members the re being no other business the House is adjourned until tomorrow 
morning.  
The House rose at  2:53p.m. 