February 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 20th February , 2018  
The House met at 2 :43p.m. 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Deputy Speaker : Have your seats. Yes Clerk.  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
Yes Hon.  Charles Kitula . 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I beg to give Notice of  the 
following Motion ; 
 
THAT AWARE that once landlords install electricity in their houses, it is their obligation 
to ensure that security lights are also installed;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that security lights provide numerous benefits to the locals in the 
residential areas which include but not limited to safety of the proper ty, passers  - by and 
the neighborhood ; 
 
CONCERNED THAT in many areas within the County  where there are no street lights 
the security lights  are also not installed or switched on at light;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to resolve that:  
 
The County  Government to compel landlords to install security lights in their properties 
and ensure that the requirement that they are switched on is strictly enforced.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir I seek leave to be gra nted that this Motion  be debated today.  
The Deputy Speaker :  Okay Hon.  Members , I now propose a question that this House 
grant s leave for the Motion  to be de bated in this House as proposed,  
 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 
Next order?  
 
MOTION  
 
Yes Hon.  Charles Kitula . 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula): Mr. Speaker  sir, I beg to move the following Motion . 
 
February 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 (Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) moved the Motion)  
 
THAT AWARE that once landlords install electricity in their houses it is their obligation 
to ensure that security lights are also installed;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that security lights provide numerous ben efits to the locals in the 
residential areas which include but not limited to safety of the property, passers -by and 
the neighborhood;  
 
CONCERNED THAT in many areas within the County  where there are no street.  
I therefore urge this Assembly to resolve tha t: 
 
The County  Government to compel landlords to install security lights in their properties 
and ensure that the requirement that they are switched on is strictly enforced.  
 
I would like Hon.  Moses Ara n to second my Motion . 
 
(Hon.  Moses Ara n bowed to secon d the Motion ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker : I now propose a question that  the Motion  by Hon.  Kitula be 
debated in this House. Yes Hon.  Kitula . 
Chief Whip  (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii na 
vile vile  ningependa kuweza kufahamisha N yumba hii kwamba M jadala ambao uko mbele yetu 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu na Mheshimiwa Spika ni kwamba safari hii kumeweza kutokea kesi 
nyingi mashinani kwamba watu wanakatiwa katika madirisha yao na kuweza kuibiwa wengine 
hasa kuibiwa kwa simu na stakabadhi muhim u kup itia kutokuwa na taa za usalama katika 
nyumba hizi. Vile vile kumekuwa na mgogoro baina ya majirani katika nyumba za hapa maeneo 
ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa kwamba jirani akiwa amewasha taa yake ya mlango  wa nje jirani 
mwengine hajawasha taa ile inakuwa mgogoro mkubwa ya  kuweza kuwa kwamba inaleta kesi 
katika mashinani.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tungependa kwanza kuweza  kufahamisha kwanza kwamba jukumu 
hili ni  jukumu la kila mwenye nyumba ambaye ameweza kujenga nyumba hii kuweza 
kuhakikisha kwamba  nyum ba yake ameweza kuweka  taa za usalama ili kuweza kuhakikisha 
kwamba  mitaa na vichochoro imeweza ku ng’ara ili kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba uwizi mdogo  
mdogo unaoendelea mash inani umeweza kuisha katika mas uala kama haya. Mheshimiwa Spi ka 
pia nafa hamu  jukumu letu sisi kama  Serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa kuweza kuw eka taa za 
barabarani lakini leo hii mimi nazungumzia taa za usalama katika nyumba hizi zetu ambazo 
tumeweza kuzijenga , vile vile sehemu za biashara kuhakikisha kwamba wameweza ku weka taa 
za usalama katika kila nyumba ambayo ina  umeme. Mheshimi wa Spika ningependa kuwahimiza 
Wabunge wenzangu tuweze kutilia mkazo katika Hoja hii ili  tuweze kuhakikisha kwamba 
nyumba zetu ambazo zina  umeme wameweza kuweka taa za usalama ili kuweza kutokuwa na 
mgogoro  katika maeneo yetu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker : Yes Hon.  Fahad . 
Hon.  Fahad Kassim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ningependa kimaono yangu 
kupinga Msw ada h uu. Kwa sababu watu w etu ni mas kini tukiwalazimisha waweke taa itakuwa 
ni tak hlifu kwa sababu bili za shirika la umeme kama sisi wenyewe zinatushinda sijui mtu 
maskini  kutoka Kisauni atalipa vipi?  
February 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Kwa hiyo kitu nitaomba Waheshimiwa wenzangu m sichukue uamuzi kwa niaba ya 
wananchi kwa sababu tumetumwa hapa kuja kuwatetea na kuangalia  maslahi yao. Watu wetu 
wako na matatizo , kuna sehemu ambapo hakuna hata taa kwa hiyo tukisema tunataka kuleta taa 
ama mwenye nyumba alete taa ndio tulete usalama hilo si  suluhisho ! Suluhisho ni Serikali ya 
Kaunti ya Mombasa iwajibike iweke taa za barabarani z iwake na mataa mashinani yawake…  
 
(Applause)  
 
...Na ni kitu naamini kuwa tunaweza tukiwa na kiongozi wetu Bwana Gavana. Kuna fitna 
nyingi zinatokea lakini mimi namuunga Gavana ila tuko na matatizo hapa chini na sisi 
tukishikana tutarekebisha. Tuko na matatizo B wana Spika tukisema tutaambia wananchi 
wawashe taa basi sisi tumeshindwa kama Serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa.  
 
(Applause)  
 
...na mimi kama kiongozi wa Mjambere ninaka taa Msw ada huo na  ningeomba 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu tuwajibike ili Serikali ya Kaunti tuko na kiteng o cha Usafiri na miundo 
msingi tuko na kitengo cha kuwasha mataa iwajibike ifanye hiyo kazi. Kuna mafundi sita kila 
Gatuzi dogo ambao kazi yao tunawalipa mshahara kila mwezi kuzunguka  na kuwasha hizo taa 
lakini hawaonekani mashinani . Kwa hiyo ningeomba Mhe shimiwa, Waheshimiwa wenzangu 
tuweze kupiga Mswada  huo na tulete Mswada  wa Serikali ya Kaunti ama kitengo husika 
kiwajibike la si hivyo waende nyumbani. Ahsanteni sana.  
 
(Applause)  
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Samba:   Point of Order Mr. Speaker!  
The Deputy Speaker : Yes Hon.  Tobias . 
Hon.  Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for according me this chance. Under Standing 
Order 41(2), I think before any Motion  being tabled on the floor of the House  Members ought to 
have got the Order Paper, last week on Thursday .  Now y ou want us to debate upon the paper we 
have seen it here ! I think if you go to Standing Order 41(2) it states very well that the Majority 
Leader ought to have tabled any Motion  that is there for the Members at least to get prepared so 
that we may  discuss and w e may debate upon it  very well . 
 
(Applause)  
 
If also you go to  order 35(2) it is also state d at least we should be g iven one hour ; Order 
paper one hour prior but that has not be the norm in this House. I am requesting this House as 
from today we should do busin ess the way it is supposed to be done. When we are havin g an 
Order paper that is when at least we can do some research so that we might debate well in this 
House. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.   
 
(Applause)  
 
The Deputy Speaker : Yes Hon.  Shomari . 
February 20, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi ningependa kumuunga 
mkono Mheshimiwa Fahad kutokana na Msw ada wake aliozungumza. Hili  Suala la mataa mimi 
napinga Msw ada wa Bwana Kitula kwa sababu watu wetu kweli hali zao si nzuri za  kimaisha na 
pia kutokana na usalama k una kitengo cha Usafiri na Miundo Msingi hao ndio wanaohusika…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker : Yes please . 
Hon.  Samba:  Yes Mr. Speaker I have just raised the concern and I am waiting for your 
direction for us to proceed. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker : Thank you Hon.  Samba but I think the House Business 
Committee sat and it is the House Business Committee that brought the business of the day so as 
you say you wan t us to move as per the Standing Orders . I am sure we are moving as per the 
Standing Orders but coming businesses of next week will be going as per what you have said 
Hon.  Samba.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Samba : Mr. Speaker not as I have said but as the Standing Orders  say. 
The Deputy Speaker : As the Standing Orders , yes. 
Hon.  Samba:  Yes. 
The Deputy Speaker : Yes Hon.  Thoya . 
Hon.  Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think I am still fresh about the event of last 
Thursday where Hon.  Fatma was raising a statement and she was stopped , lucky enough I think 
you as a Speaker who today you are the re you are the one who raise d that issue while you were 
seated there , desk number one there . So it is still fresh even in your knowledge that you stood 
there  and said  that we need to follow the Standing Orders and then because you are the one who 
move d that Motion  I think the buck stops with you . Kindly let us adhere to the Standing Orders 
because no other person raised that other than yourself , now today you are sitting as the Speaker, 
Kindly implement what you told this House  last Thursday . Thank you . 
 
(Applause)  
(Hon.  Deputy  Speaker st ood) 
 
The Deputy Speaker : Hon.  Members, as per the Standing Orders and what Hon.  
Members you  are deliberating it seems the Leader of Majority did not give the Orders or 
Businesses of this week. So the House will stand adj ourned until Thursday.  
 
(Applause)  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
...the House will stand adjourn ed until Thursday afternoon for the House, for the Leader 
of Majority to bring the business of the next week and we will move as per the Standing Orders. 
Thank you.  
The House rose at 15.00p .m. 
 