February 25, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 25th February , 2020 
  The House met at 10:22a.m .  
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  
 
(Low consulta tions ) 
(Silence ) 
 
 Yes, Clerk next order?  
 
STATEMENTS  
TRANSFER OF HEALTH O FFICERS AT SUB COUNT Y LEVEL  
  
 Yes Chairperson Committee on Health, Hon. Kibwana or any other Member on th e 
Committee on Health . Yes, Hon. Nzai p lease responds  to the S tatement . 
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand on behalf o f my  Chairman, who has gone to 
the hospit al because of flu. Mr. Speaker S ir I stand to respond on this very good statement which 
was g iven to us the Health C ommittee , “Transfer of Health Officers at Sub -County Level’  . 
Indeed transfer s is for healthy services.   
 Mr. Speaker S ir we wrote a letter to the department, although there was a mi s-forwar ding 
or rather misdirecting of th e letter ; we sent our letter  to the Chief Officer  Medical S ervices , but 
the answers  they gave us is that the letter was to be referred  to the Chief O fficer P ublic  health .  
 Yester day we had a meeting with all our  Committee M embers an d we resolved and 
directed our C lerk to write to the  Chief Officer Public Health S ervices and we are waiti ng for the 
respons e anytime this week , so maybe as from next week we shall be in a position , to respond to 
this very important statement . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nzai . Yes, Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Than k you Mr. Speaker for giving me  this opportunity.  

February 25, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Members I don’ t know whether we  heard the Hon. Member when he was giving the 
response , that  they wrote a letter  to another wrong department , it took them also time to  redirect  
the le tter to the relevant department . I don’t find that one to be somehow convincing , a whole 
Committee of whole Hon. Members of eight , not less than  eight M embers sit ting down and they 
don’t know whoever to address Hon. Speaker ... 
  
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Fadhili are you on a point of order?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the Hon. 
Member is misleading this House by saying that  a whole Comm ittee brought to  a different 
department. Mr . Speaker we wrote to the same department , Health committee , but we wrote to 
the Chief O fficer Medical Services not the Chief O fficer Public Health , so th e Committee sat and 
directed that we redraft the letter and send it to the same departm ent but differen t Chief O fficer , 
thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I wish he could have listen ed first, but since he  is also a 
Member of the Committee  now I know they will come up flaming . I wish they had flames befor e 
they gave us this response , whenever  a Member seek s for a statement Hon. Speaker , it is upon 
the Committee and the Chair  person ally to do follow up. Last  week there was a Member who 
requested for a statement to the department of YGS , we did it and we took the r esponsibility to 
do follow up and right now as we are talking , the response is here with us. Hon. Speaker 
whenever a  Member request for a statement , today he was supposed to respond and then we are 
getting another excuse , coming next week it will be anoth er excuse .  
 Hon. Speaker we need to set a good precedent  in this House ; we need to sta te once they 
have failed , maybe if the Chair and the Committee has failed , they  need to tell this House that we 
have failed  instead of saying now they are requesting for another next week . It is not even 
specif ic, let them give us specific date  to respond to this or else they admit of their failure , then 
we see on what to do as a House . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Tobias . Yes, Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker . I have heard my colleague,  but it  is true indeed 
sometimes you can be a student but not a student in class , it’s true  there are online studies . Mr. 
Speaker  to come back to the matter the statement says , 'Transfer of Health Office rs at Sub -
County Level’ , indeed before even devolution , we understand there w ere Health officers in 
various Health centers , some have stayed over year s but indeed Mr. Speaker  it needs good time 
to know who has overstayed these years in that specific centre or  what and it is not something 
which can be brought in this House just verbally or from nowhere .  
 That is why we wrote a very detailed letter requiring the rea l specifications and time that 
a Health officer has been serving in  that Health c entre. Indeed some he alth officer s; the reason as 
to why it is important to have the transfer  is that  some have become or rather grown horns and 
beco ming rude and we want to do a very  good work  so that when these transfers are being 
effected , then nobody can amend or rather  complain of biasness .  
February 25, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is f or information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  So I would  urge my colleague  to atleast give us ti me as in its really the Health Committee 
which is doing marvelous regarding health services and whatever .. thank you Mr. Speaker .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you Hon.  Nzai . Hon. Nzai you did  not exactly  tell us 
when you will have the statement?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  I have stated Mr. Speaker that  because the letter  has been disburse d yesterday  
we are giving the benefi t of doubt , for the Chief O fficer maybe to go thr ough it , maybe this week 
she will be doing her work s, so we are expecting the result as from next week  so that  maybe in 
the next business session we shall be  in a position to fix it in the business identity paper for a 
very good answer in the House . Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you Hon. Nzai . So next week we will b ring the 
response in the House Business then we will schedule for the House . Yes, Clerk next order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesda y 25th of February , 2020 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10:35 a.m. 