February 19, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hans ard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
  
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 19th February, 2019  
The House met at 2:40p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated.  Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTIONS  
OPERAT IONALIZATION OF PERFOMANCE CONTRACTIN G IN THE COUNTY GOVE RNMENT  
 
 Yes Hon. Faith Mwende can you please move the M otion?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance. Mr. Speaker I 
would like the House to pass the M otion on operationalizat ion of perform ance contracting in 
the County g overnment bearing in m ind the County Government Act  gives us mandate to 
approve all the appraisals which are ma de by the County Executive Members. Mr. Speaker ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mwende you need to move the M otion first.  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  I am sorry Mr. Speaker I thought I moved it on Thursday.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  No that was t he N otice of M otion the one you did so  
this one you need to move the M otion first.  
 
 Hon. Mwende:   Okay thank you. Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to move the following 
Motion: - 
 
WHEREAS  the County Government Act enshrines performance contracting in 
County Government in Kenya in Section 47;  
 
WHEREAS the County g overnment of Mombasa is therefore obligated to 
operationalize performance contracting as provided for in the law;  

February 19, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hans ard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 WHEREAS  it has been observed that the performance of the departments and staff is 
not subjected thoroughly to performance contracting standards;  
 
WHEREAS  it is a matter of great concern that t he failure to enforce the provisions on 
performance contracting is a serious and fragrant violation of the law and may in 
consequence thereof lead to losses in terms of man hours and development due to 
non-performance and under -performance;  
 
Now therefore,  be it RESOLVED by the County Assembly of Mombasa that  all 
departments of the County g overnment of Mombasa be subjected to p erformance 
contracting and all Chief O fficers to sign performance contracts on behalf thereof.  
 
Be it further RESOLVED that all Depa rtments and staff in the County g overnment of 
Mombasa be subjected to performance contracts and annual staff appraisal.  
 
Be it further resolved that reports on performance contracts and annual performance 
appraisal be submitted by  all departments to the Co unty A ssembly for consideration.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Faith Mwende.  Who is your seconder ? 
 
 Hon.  Mwende : Mr. Speaker I woul d urge Hon. Thoya to second the M otion.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya.  
 
(Hon. Renson Thoy a bow ed) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. R enson Thoya . Yes Hon. Faith Mwende  
the floor is open . 
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Mr. Speaker I woul d like the H ouse to k now that as per the Act  the 
County  Executive C ommittee is supposed to design a performance man agement plan to 
evaluate the performance of the  County Public S ervice and the implementation of the County 
policies, whereas  the plan should provide  the following;  one is objective, measurable and 
time bound and performance indicators . 
 Mr. Speaker al so the County Government Act  tells us that it should include the 
linkage to mandate  annual report, citizen participation in the evalua tion of the performance of 
the C ounty government and public sharing of the performance progre ss  report and therefore 
being ta bled to the County Assembly.  
 Mr. Speaker as we can see  in our County g overnment the wa ge bill is too high and the 
productivity is not seen despite that, so it  is high time we the legislatures to  make the CEC s 
work or perform as per the l aw. S o Mr. S peake r I would urge the Whole H ouse to pass this 
Motion so that we may see the productivity on the ground  and also to appraise t he workers 
who are hard working. T hank you  Mr. S peaker.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ) exited  the Chair and Hon. Bwire assumed C hair)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. M ember. Honourable  
House I now put a q uestion;  I think i had already opened the floor  and she had already started 
debating, I had not consulted over the same, am sorry for the misinterpretation.  
February 19, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hans ard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3  Now Hon.  Members the floor is open for the contribution from the Hon. Members 
over today’s Motion; is the question contradicting or M embers do  not understand? Yes Hon. 
Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti naunga mk ono Mheshimiwa wa Kipevu  ya kuiwajibisha serikali gatuzi hususan 
katika swala nyeti la uwajiri wa wafanyi  kazi kuwajibikia majukumu yao. Wasiwasi wangu 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti uko katika idara hiyo hiyo ya 47 sehemu ya pili (e) ambayo 
inashurutisha wananchi kuchangia na kutoa maoni yao katika ripoti ya utenda  kazi k abla ya 
hayo mengine kuwajibikiwa.  
 Mheshimiwa Kaunti yetu ina  uwoga, ama serikali gatuzi yetu ina uwoga kupeana 
nafasi kwa wananchi wetu kuchangia, na hili limekuwa likidhihiri katika maswala men gi tu 
ambayo yanahitaji maoni na uwajibikaji wa wana nchi katika kutekeleza, sasa hapa kwa hili ni 
hoja nzuri , naiunga mkono lakini  naiunga mkono lakini najua kipengele hiki Mheshimiwa 
Spika kitakwepwa, watu watakikwepa watekeleze yale wanayoyataka na kuji amulia pasi 
kupeana mwananchi wa kawaida n afasi yake. Na tunapozungumzia u gatuzi Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti mamlaka yote na malengo na shabaha ya suala li likua liko kwa wananchi lakini 
serikali pekee ambayo haithamini na kuhes himu mwananchi maoni yake ndio s erikali yetu ya 
Kaunti ya Mombasa.  
 Mheshimiwa inasikitisha japo kunayo sheria il iopita katika Bunge hil i 
inayozungumzia jinsi gani ya s erikali ya Mombasa itatekeleza kama itaweka vikao vya 
kuchukua maoni ya wananchi lakini hata sheria hio Mheshimiwa Mwenyek iti naona 
haifuatwi ambayo inasema wazi ni kina nani watatekeleza hayo na ni wapi yatakapo 
tekelezwa lakini kwetu sisi Mheshimiwa kuna walakini. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa nakuomba 
kwa mamlaka ya Kiti chako tutakapopitisha hoja hii basi uhakikishe Bunge hili na heshima 
ya Kiti chako itasimama kidete kuhakikisha yametekelezwa haya makusudio katika hoja hii 
kama inavyostahiki na wala sio tu kuendeshwa kishkaji kishkaji, kiujamaa ya kwamba ni nani 
anapewa pongezi na kupand ishwa hadhi katika nyadhifa ali onayo na weng ine kuhudumu 
katika nafasi zile miaka nenda miaka rudi. Iko mifano hai Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuna 
watu wamekuwa wakishikilia nyadhifa za utekelezaji...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order Hon . Members!  
 
 Hon.  Athman Mwam wiri: Kwa mi aka mitatu bila kuhakikiwa nafasi zile kila 
ukimuendea anakwambia mimi ni Acting Director , kila ukimuendea a nasema mimi sina 
mamlaka ni Acting Deputy Director  kwa miaka na mikaka ambayo kwa mipangilio hii 
tunajua mtu anaweza kuwa acting  kwa miezi miwili na  kua confirmed  ili Serikali Gatuzi na 
huduma kwa wananchi iweze kuwa barabara na kusonga mbele. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Kizito Opeya . 
 
 Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speak er. I also rise to support the M otion by Hon . Faith 
Mwende, I think performance contracts are something which are  vital and it is also quite 
shocking that we have not introduced it in our County . It can be used , as our fellow M ember 
said in gauging the promotions , those who get fair and unfair promo tions and also giving 
morale to our workers. But if somebody is just in an office and there is nothing to gauge his 
performance, then how will we even know he has done well or not at the end of the year?  
February 19, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hans ard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  So this is a M otion I support and I think and the County must move fast and make 
sure that all the officers including even the County Executives not only the Chief Officers but 
also the County Executive must also sign this. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon . Member , yes Hon. Tobias?  
 
 Hon.  Samba : Yes Hon. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. First Mr. Speaker I 
would raise a concern ; can we be provided with drinking water?  Okay as I contribute to the 
Motion I beg to support th e Motion by Hon. Faith Mwende f rom Kipevu.  
 Hon. Speaker as the world is now turning in running towards the digital generation 
everything should also face that direction. It is only in our County where we are almost 
perfecting the act, we are justifying the wrong and we are afraid to speak t he truth. And Hon. 
Speaker it is only in our County where we are afraid of saying the truth and it is the truth that 
is turning to be the wrong and the wrong turning to be the right.  
 If you happen to go to these offices Hon. Speaker you will not find any body who is 
answerable they will tell you that the directive is coming from above. Hon. Speaker the above 
directive seems to be into existence when President Moi was removed from power if you go 
to all these offices nobody is accountable, as a result of th at you can even confirm to that as 
far as the bursary is concerned ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. M ember Mwam wiri is on a point of 
information are you ready to be informed Hon . Member?  
 
 Hon. Samba: Yes. 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: I wish to inform him that Mzee Moi was not removed 
from power but he resigned so I should respect that he retired .  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You are also wrong, he retired.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I thought he was informing me on somet hing that will 
benefit the H ouse, he just wanted to interrupt me . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Go on Hon. Member . 
  
 Hon.  Samba:  When the performance contract shall be reduced I think each and 
everybody will be responsible and as per that will ; see the result of it  we are a frustrated lot as 
MCAs as we have been subjected to a performance contract kind of that is after five years , if 
we do  not perform we will have to go home , why can’t  it be applied not only to the 
Executives even to the last man standing because the bulk of  the work force lies to the 
layman and if we can introduce the performance contract thing I think we will realize our 
dream . If we to go to Coast General Hospital it is pathetic but because of the performance  
contract the infras tructure is  good , the facilities are there but the service is very poor and 
Honorable ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
February 19, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hans ard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members we have more than one 
Speaker , Hon. Samba is on floor kindly give him time to speak so many people ar e speaking 
out there .  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Because when the M otion was introduced no one could understand the 
meaning so maybe others are still in darkness still  digesting so Hon . Speaker I beg to move 
the Motion to that the C ounty should adopt  the system of per formance . Thank you so much 
Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Hon Nzai.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii . M imi 
Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kuping a hoja hii kwa sababu zifuatazo;  ugatuzi ni swal a nyeti 
nchi nzima, vile vile tunasema kusoma ni kila si ku lakini pia ni tuseme kwamba M gala muue 
na pia haki yake mpe .  
 Tukianza nyuma toka ugatuzi ulipoanza Mheshimiwa Spika Bunge  letu la kwanza 
lilifanya vizuri kwa kadri wa uwezo wao, Bunge  hili la pil i lilipoingia Mheshimiwa Spika 
Mawaziri pia waliochaguliwa wakagundua kuna kitu kimoja wenzi wao waliwatangulia 
walikisahau, kitu kilikuwa kinaitwa  Policy paper document,  Policy paper  ni karatasi ambayo 
ina mwongozo wa kila  kitengo  wataanzia wapi shughuli  zao na zikome wapi . Kitu hicho 
Mheshimiwa Spika kilikuwa bado hakijatiliwa mkazo lakini nash ukuru Bunge  hili na 
Mawaziri walioko wamekiangazia na sa a hi i tunaona kazi inaende lea kikweli . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika tukiangalia mfano wa upande wa  uchukuzi  leo kuling ana na 
policy paper  unakuta kila sehemu sa a hii zimea nza kuangaziwa , kuguswa guswa amba yo ni 
mambo tunasema ni mweleke o na pia hivi majuzi tukafungua mtandao u liokuwa pia 
unapot eza pesa nyingi za kuingia kwa K aunti yetu ya Mombasa ili tupate uzalishaji mwi ngi 
wa huduma ukaitwa E-parking , hio nayo ni maendel eo ambayo sa a hii tumeingia katika 
digitalization .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika inastahili tuone kwamba  Wizara  ile imetoka sehemu f ulani na 
imepanda sehemu f ulani;  hivi leo pia  tukija kwa  Wizara ya Ardhi  mimi siku patikana katika 
hicho kitengo cha asubuhi kwa sababu Soroveya  wote wa Kaunti wako kwangu Kadzandani 
ambao wanajulikana ni mask wota watupu na tumefanyiwa survey  na hivi karibuni pia hati za 
ardhi  zinatoka , inaashiria kwamba kazi zinafanyika Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Tukija kwa ukulima  juzi naona Kamati  ilichukuliwa retreat  na wakaenda fundishwa 
policy document  ya ukulima  ikiongea juu ya nin i na itafanya kazi namna gani? Hayo ni 
maendeleo na ni utenda kazi unaendelea . Roma haikujengwa kwa siku moja na nina imani 
kwamba Kaunti yetu sasa  ya Mombasa imeanza kui nuka mahali na tunaelekea mahali fulani. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Nzai, can we have gender 
balance?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Hon. Members. Yes Chief W hip? 
 
 The Majority Chief  Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa 
kuchangia maana nimekuwa nikipitia kipengele ambacho Mheshimiwa wa Kipevu ambacho 
ameweza kukiangazia katika hoja yake siku hii ya leo cha 47 .  
February 19, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hans ard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6  Kusema kweli amekifafanua lakini kuna tatizo kuli ngana na kipengele hichi 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu sioni tofauti yeyote kulingana na hoja ambayo imekuja katika 
Nyumba hii kwamba watakaow eza kutengeneza ripoti hizi ni M awaziri au vile vile na Katibu  
wao lakini kusema kweli sidhani kama kutakuwa na Wazi ri yeyo te ambaye ataweza kuleta 
ripoti kuikashifu Idara yake .  
 Sasa sijaona mwelekeo mzuri kwa sababu haiwezekani Waziri  kuleta ripoti kwa 
Nyumba hii kuikashifu kazi yake , hilo haliwezekani sasa sijajua kipengele hichi kitaangaziwa 
vipi na utekelezaji pia  utaangaziwa vipi kuhakikisha kwamba idara hizi zimeweza kufanya 
kazi na vile vile wafanyi  kazi wa umma wameweza kutekeleza kazi hizi maana mahala hapa 
tukiita wafanyi  kazi wa umma tunaita yule ambaye ni mkuu zaidi , Waziri  Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Kitula. I t seems Hon. 
Members  you have exhausted your points...  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Is anybody being locked out? Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I just want to remind you th at looking at the 
mood of the House and the essence of time I think you should call to reply.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Hon. Member you are out of order ! 
  
(Laughter)  
 
 You are out of order Hon. Member. I therefore now call the Moti on Mover to reply on 
her Motion.  Hon. Faith?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika ningependa sana kushukuru 
Waheshimiwa kukubali M swada niliou leta kwa s ababu chenye tunataka ni utenda kazi na 
haki kwa wafanyi  kazi wanaojituma zaidi kuhakikisha Kaunti yetu imen g'ara. Mheshimiwa 
Spika hapa si hoja na Wizara  fulani ama W aziri kuja kusema Wizara  yake haifanyi lakini ni 
kuleta progressive report  kama naweza mjibu Mheshimiwa Kitula na pengine  kwa sababu 
nitangulize kubadilisha kwa Kiswahili nafikiri  saa hii umeelewa na najua uko na Mwalimu  
wangu Samba atakueleza vizuri kukubadilishia Kiswahili.   
 Kwa hivyo nashukuru sana kwa hiyo, hivyo basi  imefika muda wa sisi W aheshimiwa 
wa Bunge la Mombasa tuweze kuamka na tuweze kufanya watu ambao wanafanya kazi kwa 
Kaunti ya Mom basa wamewajibika kwa zile kazi ambayo wameajiriwa.  Kwa hivyo naomba 
sote tuunge mkono h uu Mswada na tuu fuatilizie isiwe tu tume leta na kuipitisha lakini hakuna 
jambo la kufanyiwa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you. Hon. Members I will therefore 
put a question that the Motion by Hon. Fait h Mwende be adopted by this Honourable  House 
in the same term s as moved ? 
(Motion negatived ) 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Clerk?   
February 19, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        5 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hans ard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7  
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 There being no other b usiness this House stands  adjourned until 20th February , 2019 
at 9:00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:08p .m. 
      
 
 
 