July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 16th July, 2019  
The House met at 2:45p.m.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats . 
(Consultations)  
 Hon. Members I can see there is no quorum so I will order the Serjeant-At-Arms to ring 
the quorum bell.  
(The Ser jeant-At-Arms r ung the quorum bell)  
 Hon. Members I now confirm that there is quorum. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
 (The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ) exited the Chair) 
(The Temporary Speaker ( Hon.  Bwire ) in the Chair ) 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy , Chairperson on 
Finance, Budget and Appropriations?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS HO N. MOHAMED HATIMY ON P ROJECTS /PROGRAMS OF FINANCIA L YEAR 
2018/2019 , INCLUDING MAJAONI RO AD 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika Taarifa  ilikuwa ije  Alhamisi  lakini kwa 
sababu ambazo hatukuweza kuziepuka naomba nipatiwe muda . 

July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Hii ni  kwa sababu ya transfe r zilizo fanywa kwenye Idara,  nafikiri sote tunajua kuwa 
Chief Officers  karibu wote wame kuwa transferred  kwenye Idara  nyengine kuelekea nyengine. 
Kwa hivyo nimeweza kuzungumza nao Mheshimiwa Spika wakasema kuwa wanafanya handing 
over reports  wanataka wapati we muda  kwa ile  Idara  mpya waliokuja ili wapate kunipatia hii  
ripoti. Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba muda nipatiwe ili niweze kuleta hii stakabadhi 
iliyoweza kuulizwa.  
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri  rose) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is it Hon. Athm an Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika s uala la 
uhamishi wa wafanyi  kazi kama Bunge sidhani kama kuna taarifa imefi ka katika Bunge hili 
aidha kwa K iti chako ama kwa Bunge kwa jumla na kama haijafika kwa hivyo taarifa  hiyo ya 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hatuwezi itumia kama kigezo katika Bunge hili k wa sababu Bunge 
halina taarifa z a uhamishi wa wafanyi  kazi katika Idara m bali mbali. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy :  Mheshimiwa Spika twaregea kusema kuwa Nyumba hii ni 
Nyumba ya she ria. Mheshimiwa Spika ali yetoka kuzungumza Mheshimiwa si e mwenye Taarifa , 
nafikiri twafaham u vizuri sana kuwa hii T aarifa ina mwenyewe.  Ya pili Mheshim iwa Spika 
twataka t ujue kuwa she ria…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Member! The Hon. Member has raised 
an issue which you have just responded to concerning the tran sfers of the em ployees from one 
Department to another, he is not reacting towards th e Statement;  he is after your concerns over 
the tran sfers of the Chief Officers from one Department to another. I think that is what has 
raised; s o maybe you were to respond on the same but he has not touched o n the S tatement or 
responses that you are supp osed to give.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nimekubali Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
sote twajua kuwa kuna transfers  zimefanyika , sasa kama ni Idara  au ofisi ya Clerk  haijajulisha 
Nyumba hii basi mimi siwezi kujibu kwa nia ba ya ofisi ya  Clerk  lakini sote twajua na kufuatilia 
haya mambo ni kuwa Chief Officers  wamebadilishwa kwa maofisi yao .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika na nafikiri kama kuna s uala lolote mtu anaweza kuuliza ofisi ya Clerk  
ithibitishe kama ni kweli haya maneno niliyozungumza. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika. 
 The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So Hon. Hatim y the initial Chief Officer on 
Finance ; I mean of  Department on Finance  is no longer in the office? T he one that was vetted by 
this House?  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hii  ripoti inaletwa na kila Idara  wamefanya 
nini, kila Idara  itaandika ilete wamefanya nini . Kwa hivyo hiyo ndio sababu niliyoweza kuitoa ya 
kusema kuwa wameondolewa kwenye zile  Idara  walikuweko karibu  wote Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I think you shoul d get my question … 
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. Me mbers I will just give you time.  The response was to come from the Department 
on Finance and that is why you were delegated as a Chairperson on Fina nce; so my question is 
you w ere to get the report from the Departm ent on F inance . So are you informing this House that 
the Member ; Chief Officer who was vetted by this  House as the Chief officer on F inance is no 
longer in the office and that we have a new Chief O fficer in the office?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa  nafikiri kwenye taarifa yangu sauti yangu 
niliweza kuzungumza nimesema wengi wa Chief Officers  sio wote; wengi wa ma Chief O fficers 
wameweza  kubadilishwa…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire ): …And I am categorical  Hon. Member ; I am 
talking on Fi nance Department , is she in the office or not?  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy nodded ) 
 She is in the office and why postpon ing the response? ! 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimeeleza kuwa Idara  zinapeleka reports 
kwa finance  sio finance  ndio wanao ifanya hii ripoti. 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri kati ya ripoti ambazo Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti wa Fedha anajaribu kujibu moja ni yangu ikiwa imechangany wa na hii nyengine na 
nafikiri H oja yangu ni k wamba nilikuwa nimeenda mimi mwenyewe binafsi kwa Waziri kuulizia 
ni kwa nini M wana  kanda rasi wangu hajalipwa na kwa sababu hajalipwa imepelekea barabara 
kuzidi kuwa mbaya kwa sababu alikuwa ameacha vifusi kwenye barabara na nafikiri ni mbinu 
sana sana ya Wanakandarasi kuacha vifusi kwenye kazi zao ili kuona kwamba inatatiza wapit a 
njia ndio maana walipwe.  
 Sasa Waziri akaniambia ya kwamba walikuwa wanangoja  fedha na akanithibitishia ya 
kwamba Mwana  kandarasi huyo ameorodheshwa katika zile pending bills  na wakati pesa ikija 
atalipwa. Na juzi Mwana  kandarasi wangu alinipigia simu akaniambia amepata ujumbe ya 
kwamba ameorodheshwa kati ya wale ambao watalipwa juma lililopit a na mpaka kufikia sasa 
ujumbe ninaopata ni kwamba amepigiwa tena simu aka ambiwa kwamba hatalipwa kwa sababu 
pesa ambayo imekuja sijui imelipa wenye bill ndogo ndogo.  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Sasa ndio nikawa nikauliza ni kwa  nini Waziri anapeana ahadi ya kwamba atalipa mpaka 
amuorodheshe kwa wale  ambao atawalipa kisha baadae aki uke kanuni yake na aanze kusema 
kwam ba atalipa wengine lakini si yeye. Nafikiri ni wiki ya tatu nikiulizia kuhusu Mwana  
kandarasi wangu alipwe kwa sababu hii kazi ilisimama Disemba mwaka jana mpaka sasa 
barabara haipitiki, miezi saba sasa na shida ni apewe pesa zake amalize hiyo kazi na ni only 100 
metres  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Sasa nashangaa kama Mwanakandarasi anaweza kuanza kazi na akae miezi saba 
hajalipwa, sasa sielewi  kama tunafanya kazi namna gani!  Miezi saba Mheshimiwa Spika tangu 
Disemba mpaka sasa anangoja malipo ndio amalize kazi na ha lipwi na Chief Officer  yuko, 
Waziri yuko na mimi mwenyewe nishaenda mpaka kwa Waziri na nafikiri Mheshimiwa Spika 
siku moja tulienda mimi na wewe kuulizia mambo haya. Sasa nashangaa kama mambo ya 
mwaka jana mpaka sasa tumeingia mwaka mwengine wa fedha wa k iserikali  na bado halipwi, 
sielewi mambo haya yatakuaje? Tafadhali naomba jibu ikiwezekana leo.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes I remember we were once with 
you but now my hands are tied Hon. Member. Yes The Chief Whip?  
 The Chief Whi p (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Kama vile 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha na Bajeti ya Kaunti kwamba Bunge hili ni Bunge 
la sheria na lazima tuweze kufuata sheria. Yeye ameweza kusimama kusema ya kwamba sio 
Idara  inapeleka makadiri o ya Program s kwa Wizara ya Fedha, lakini ningemfahamisha ya 
kwamba Wizara ya Fedha ndio wanalipa projects  zote katika Serikali yetu ya Kaunti ya 
Mombasa, zote…  
(Applause)  
 Sasa kila  Idara  inapo make any request  ni jukumu la Idara ya Fedha kuweza kuhakikis ha 
kwamba miradi ile imeweza kulipwa na hata kama Chief Officer  hayuko ofisini, mlipaji si Chief 
Officer  kuna ofisi maalum ya kulipa na kuweza kuangalia miradi yote ambayo inalipwa katika 
Serikali yetu ya Mombasa.  
 Kwa hivyo ni jukumu la yule Waziri la ku weza kuuliza afisa wengine ambao chini ya 
Chief Officer  walete Program zote za mwaka wa Fedha 2018/2019 ambazo walizilipa na zile 
ambazo ziko pending  tuweze kujua kama Bunge zipi ziko pending  na zipi zimelipwa ili tuweze 
kuendelea mbele kama Serikali. Laki ni kutuambia kwamba kuna mageuzi yamefanyika ya Chief 
Officers  sisi hatufahamu, na wa  kuleta hapa ripoti ni Idara ni uongo, walipaji ni Wizara ya 
Fedha. Sisi tunataka kujua pesa ngapi zimelipwa?  
 
(Applause)  
Project  zote za 2018/2019 Mheshimiwa huyu anauli za kila siku barabara yake iko hivi na 
hivi, yeye ni Mwakilishi  ana majibu gani ikiwa Wizara ya Fedha mpaka leo hawajaleta majibu 
kamili katika Jumba hili? Atawa ambia nini watu wake ambao anawawakilisha katika Bunge hili? 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti si si tuko hapa na tunahitaji majibu kamili la sivyo siku ya 
leo hapa hakuna business  yeyote itaendelea, tutavunja Bunge hili leo leo mpaka majibu ya 
2018/2019 katika Mwaka wa Fedha yaweze kuja katika Bunge hili. Ahsante sana.  
(Applause)  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  The Temporary Speake r (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Fatma Mote (Kushe)?  
 
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi sitokuwa na wenzangu 
kwa sababu kama alivyozungumza Mheshimiwa Nyiro kazi yetu sisi si kufuatilizia supplier  ama 
Wana kandarasi walipwe. Labda iwe mtu ana  kitu fulani ama jambo fulani hapo atapata. Na pia 
vile vile Mheshimiw a Spika…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  A point of information.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Sitaki kutaarifiwa tafadhali, sitaki kutaarifiwa…  
 
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speak er (Hon. Bwire) : Yes give her time.  
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh:  Mheshimiwa  Spika si kazi yetu ya kuenda kule juu kuhakikisha ni 
nani amelipwa na nani hajalipwa, n a twamshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu hivi sasa katika miaka 
mitano hii tumepata…  
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:   Point of order ! 
 
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is your P oint of order Hon. Nyiro?  
 Hon. Nyiro:  Under Standing Order 104 (Off Mic rophone ) 
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Make use of your mic rophone . 
 Hon. Nyir o: Mr. Speaker the Member who has just left the floor is misinforming this 
House…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What does it say, you kindly read it out . 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Let me read it. It talks about gross disorderly conduct by a Member .  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 (Hon. Nyiro read)  
 If the Member deliberately gives false information to the County Assembly, it is a very 
gross misorder and misconduct.  
 So Hon. Fatma is deliberately giving false information to this County Assembly Mr. 
Speaker. She is accusing me th at I am after something. Mr. Speaker I think I have said that 
whenever I use that road and the s ame road that leads to my home. I use that road ever yday and 
materials were left on the road; when I as k the Contractor he tells me that I have not been paid. 
And that is the bas is I am using to argue in this House so that my Contractor has not been paid. It 
is not that I need money from him, I want him to be paid so that he finish es the work so that I can 
use the road. Do I make myself clear Hon. Fatma ,  I do no t need money, I want him to be paid so 
that he can finish the works.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Hon. Fatma ? 
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimemnukuu vizuri sana ames ema 
Mwana kandarasi wangu, yaani M wana kandarasi ni wa kwa ke. Sasa sijui kama Kiswahili mimi 
ndio sielewi ama vipi? Mheshimiwa Spika sisi hatuna jukumu la kupanda juu kuhakikisha nani 
amelipwa na nani hajalipwa. Sisi ni kuhakikisha tu utenda kazi umefanyika. Na vile vile 
Mheshimiwa Spika twamshukuru Mwenyezi Mung u safari hii katika Idara ya Fedha tumepata 
wachapa kazi Hallelujah ! Tumepata wachapa kazi Mheshimiwa Spika…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are out of order Hon . Member!  I think 
your concern has been heard.  
 Hon. Fatma Swaleh : Sawa.  Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speake r (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Hon. Members let me first put it 
clear, I will give you time Hon. Members b ut as stated by Hon. Nyiro we were once in the Off ice 
of CEC Member for Transport; we also happen ed to have a meeting wi th the Chief Officer and 
they stated very clear ly because I am also going through what Hon. Nyiro is going through. And 
they told us that they did all the documentation and it was the work of the Department on 
Finance now to pay the Contractors. I think it  is from that stage that Hon. Nyiro brought this 
Statement to know the status of the payment of those two Contractors from different Wards. I do 
not believe he is after something as stated by the Hon. Member. It is only that you will have to 
make a follow up as Hon. Member to know what is hindering development in your area of 
jurisdiction.  
So I think we should not view it in that perspective that when you do a follow up be it a 
payment or something then you are after something Hon. Members. It is just one way of ensuring  
that things happen the way they should happen.  So I am ruling out what Hon. Fatma Swaleh has 
just said that the Member was after something, I do not think because I was also in that meeting 
we wanted to know what happened. Yes Hon. Athman Shebe?  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  Hon. Athman Shebe:  Yes thank you Hon. Speaker. I think Hon. Speaker my fellow 
Chair has just stated very clearly, Chair of Finance that this is a House of rules and regulations. 
Speaking of rules and regulations Hon. Speaker, he is claiming that he  is not in a position to 
issue a Statement today Hon. Speaker…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : The response, to issue the response . 
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Sorry the response today, as he claims that they were reshuffles to 
the Executi ve. As clearly stated, this is a House of rules Hon. Speaker; If it were as he is 
purporting I think as we speak right now  we would be  having official communication from the 
Executive but as far as I am concerned or rather as far as this Hon ourable  House is co ncerned, 
we neither have any communication nor do we know. Because he is claim ing that we know, I do 
not know, h e is the one who knows ever ything. A nd as far as  I am concerned I do not know if 
there is any reshuffling because as far as I am concerned we mu st see no official communication.  
So Hon. Speaker, this response Hon. Chair last week we asked the same question and told 
us probably next week w e will be in a position to know; y ou can imagine Contractors have not 
been paid and ev en the order from the Na tional g overnment, all those Auditors, those County 
pending bills ought to have been already been audited as they are supposed to be paid by now 
becaus e we are entering into another b udget year. So I think my fellow Chair is beati ng around 
the bush for too  long, h e must come out clearly and give us  a response or else I thing we are sick 
and tired for being taken around in circle s. Thank you.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
 Hon. Samba: Yes thank you Hon. Speaker . I just have a genuine c oncern;  Hon. Chair for 
Finance has just stated that there is reshuffle that has happened of which we are not aware 
because there is no official communication but I would just wish maybe he clarifies whether in 
the Departments there are categories of the le adership structure, we have CEC’s, we have Chief 
Officers and Directors whereby in the absence of maybe…  
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members you consult in a low tone 
please.  
 Hon. Samba:  Maybe in the absence of Chief Officers,  the Directors are there to respond 
to any query. So can he tell us that without the presence of Chief Officers there is nothing that 
can happen? Secondly, I am aware that when the reshuffles are done, they d o not carry the 
reports of the p rogram s with the m to go to the other Departments they are left the re… 
(Applause)  
 So I think the Chairman should come clear on that. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Member from Mikindani Ward . 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am rising to put it very clear ly that the problem 
facing Hon. Nyiro today belongs to him but tomorrow it belonged to me and any other elected 
Member here. And we cannot take lightly maybe some of the sentiments and Mr. Sp eaker I want 
to put it very  clear ly we do not have sacred Chief Officers here, all Chief Officers within 
Mombasa County are equal in the eyes of this House.       
If am instructed to go to the Department of Devolution, I  will always go, let us not 
protect them today here because I believe we ha ve problems and when we touch the docket  of 
Finance  people are  perturbed  very much . Please let them go and bring information to us and in 
fact I do  not want to take this thing  lightly, that a Hon. M ember has been told that anaenda 
kutafuta kitu kidogo and Bwana Spika  I want that Hon. Member to withdraw and apologi ze. We 
cannot take it lightly because again it is going to the Hansard and that is matter  related to 
corruption, we cannot take it lightly Bwana Spika  let us discuss this until it is expunge d from the 
Hansard . Thank you.  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Taarifa Mwenyekiti.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Chief Whip is up.  
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ningependa kuarifu Nyumba hii kuwa Taarifa  ya leo 
haihusiani na barabara ya Majaoni  peke e yake bali project  na program s za financial year 
2018/2019  ambazo ni za  Wodi zote Kaunti ya  Mombasa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini 
ames ema including  Majaoni road. K wa hivyo tunataka kujua project  zote na programs  za 
2018/2019 ikiwa mimi ni mmoja n a mhusika wa  Frere town Ward. Ahsante sana . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) :  Thank you Hon. Member and that is why to me 
these were to  be two Statements; two different S tatements because we raised the issue of 
project s/programs or the status of the project of fin ancial year 2018/ 2019 was to come as a 
separate S tatement from the Majaoni issue so we could have not been discussing these two 
thing s at once. W ho do you want to inform?   Do you want to inform Mr.  Speaker ? 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker the Chair requested when  we sat  for the House B usiness, he 
requested that these two things be enjoined together because he is the same person who is going 
to respond on them so he requested that they enjoined together.  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : And that is why am sayin g that is as per the 
Chair but these were to be two different responses th ough he requested in the House Business 
Committee but according to me  these were to come as two dif ferent responses yeah because 
yours is basicall y on Finance D epartment, the other S tatement was to come across the 
Departments so I think they were to come as different responses. Yes Hon. Hatimy?  I saw Hon. 
Hatimy up, you see the seniority also matters Hon. Members.  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri Nyumba hii tunahitaji k wenda 
kusoma zaidi ili tujue tukiongea twaonge a nini?  Mheshimiwa Spika nastaajabishwa sana na 
Taarifa  ya Chief  Whip  ya kusema kuwa ana yelipa ni Finance . Nataka kumwambia Chief  Whip  
kupitia K iti chako kuwa hakuna  malipo  yoyote ambayo itafanyika bila ya appr oval ya 
Department , ni ma Chief Officers  ndio accounting  officers   na kila mtu yuko na budget  yake.  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 Mheshimiwa Spika jambo hili mimi mwenyewe nimeweza kuzunguka na kulif uatilia na 
kusema kuwa ni lazima tupate hii ripoti lakini ripoti ambayo tumepatiwa ni  kuwa  hawa watu 
wamekuwa transferred . Mheshimiwa Spika kweli kazi ziko pale lakini ni kila mmoja kwenye 
kufanya ile ripot i yake ni kuwa lazima aeleze amefanya nini , kuondoka kwenye ofisi ile na 
mwengine pia na ye atakaye ingia  atakuwa naye pia kwenye  Idara  yake pia ametoa handing over 
report ya kueleza kuwa kwenye Idara  yake amefanya nini ? 
 Mheshimiwa Spika jamb o hili limekuwa hapa leo ni two weeks  na nimesema sio kuwa 
ripoti hakuna, tuwapatie time wafanye ili waweze kutupatia hii ripoti ndio ije kwenye Nyumba  
hii na jambo la kwa Mheshimiwa Nyiro kwenye Nyumba hii tulikubaliana wiki iliyopita kuwa 
sisi tuta consolidate  kwa sababu jamb o lile linahusika, jambo la Mheshimiwa Nyiro linahusika 
na hii ripoti pia ni lazima Finance  itatuambia Idara  ya barabara itaeleza  kuwa nini imelipwa na 
nini haikulipwa, hapo ndio tuulize Finance  kwa sababu gani haikulipwa ? Lakini Mheshimiwa 
Spika ni kuwapatia hawa nafasi naomba tuwapatie nafasi ili watutengezee ripoti ili iweze  kuja 
kwenye hii Nyumba. Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Tempo rary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member how long do you think this 
response will see the light of the day ? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hilo ni s uala gumu sana siwezi kulijibu, 
wewe ndio una yetoa tarehe  sio mimi . Kwa hivyo wewe ni kusema kama ni k esho iwe ni kesho 
tukawaambie kuwa kesho wasema kuwa hii ripoti yatakikana, angalia wewe wataka kuwapatia 
siku ngapi  ndio uwapatie  Mheshimiwa Spika?  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : But Hon. Member it  is a tradition of this House 
that whenever you seek  time you are always asked when do you think you will bring back the 
response ? N ow today you have given me the mandate, I will make my own ruling                                               
and when I make r uling kindly advise the D epartment to adhere to  the ruling made by the 
Speaker of the day because I may even make a ruling of giving you five minutes we break then 
you bring the response so I was just doing an honor of asking you when do you think the report 
will be ready…  
(Interruption ) 
 The Chief Whi p (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika ahsant e sana kwa kunipatia nafasi 
hii. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti amesema kwamba Nyumba hii yataka tukasome, nak wambia 
kwamba sisi W aheshimiwa tumesoma Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti…  
(Applause)  
 Tumesoma kweli na ningependa kumfahamish a labda na ye pia hakusoma kipengele hichi 
wakati anasoma County Government Act section  149 (c) inatoa jukumu la accounting  Chief  
officer  wa Finance , nitakusomea Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti apate ufahamu zaidi ... 
(The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) read)  
  (c) Incurrin g other responsibility  imposed by section 1,  An accounting officer Finance 
shall in respect of the entity concerned shall ensure that all financial and accounting 
records that the entity keeps in any form including electronic form are adequately 
protected  and backed up ...  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti yatakiwa ufahamu hizi records  ziko katika finance , 
Department  zengine zina make  request  kwa Idara  ya Fedha , Chief  Officer  wengine wote wa 
Idara  zote kumi, tisa wana  make  request  kwa Idara ya Fedha  na ni jukumu kwa  Idara  moja ya  
Fedha  kuweza kuhakikisha zina process  zile payment  kwa miradi tofauti tofauti ambayo 
imeweza kukadiriwa katika Idara  tofauti tofauti . 
Kwa hivyo hapa sisi tunaelewa tunachofanya na tunaelewa tunachokisema ; tunataka 
mapendekezo yote ambayo ni y a 2018/2019 tuletewe katika Jumba hili ili  tuweze  kuwa na 
majibu kwa watu wetu. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim? I think you will be the last 
person.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Sp eaker for the opportunity gi ven. Mr. Speaker fir st of all 
I want to react on a S tateme nt that was given the Chair of F inance Mr. Speaker Sir... 
(Interruption ) 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : It was a response Hon. Member.  
 Hon. Omondi:  Exactly a response.  Mr. Speaker Sir when we  say that there are some 
reshuffling tha t has taken place in a certain D epartment  and therefore we are not able to access  
information from the  respective D epartment to me is like we are not serious with our work . This 
is because I know it very well that w hen an officer is an individual it  is a person, when he or she 
is transferred or taken to another D epartment the office remain s intact, we are not  transferring the 
office but we are only transfer ring an individual . Mr. Speaker Sir  and remember even as we 
discuss, even as we request for these response s or we re quest for information from the 
Department s we are not asking them from an individual, we are not saying Chairman to give us, 
we are not saying individual, we are  talking about the office, the D epartment  of Finance . So 
when we are talking about the D epartment of Finance, we are not talking about whoever an 
indiv idual or a person and therefore the information is there whether an individual has been 
transferred or not the information is still in the office and therefore we need that response Mr. 
Speaker Sir. Thank you.  
(Silence)  
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes t hank you Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . Now 
Hon. Members the Chairperson on Finance Hon. Mohamed Hatimy has asked for some time to 
bring the response and from where I seat I think Hon. Member next week but I want to be  
categorical in this.  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy the Chairperson on Finance kindly treat the issue of 
Majaoni with a lot of carefulness ; If you can bring the response tomorrow in the evening 
specifically on Majaoni that is please  then consolida te the other report across the D epartments 
and I think next week  but one will be okay with that.  
 So on t he issue of Majaoni as I ha ve said it earlier I would wish to treat it as an isolated 
case so you br ing the response tomorr ow in the  evening how far the D epartment has gone in 
terms of, I mean as far as the payment is concerned.  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  You can  then consolidate the report on the status of the project or rather the programs and 
bring back the response next week  but one. I think I  will be fa ir enough if would go by that 
ruling. Thank you . Yes Clerk ? 
 
STATEMENT  
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy , Chairperson Committee on Finance , Budget  and 
Appropriation s? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa nataka kuambia Nyumba hii mpaka leo  sijapata 
evidence nilizoitisha kwa hivyo  decision  ni yako Mheshimiwa . 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri?  
 Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri:  Mr. Speaker I think it was agreed or your ruling was th at I 
should be invited in that Committee a nd the Committee on L abour also was interested on the 
same  issue . So it was  upon the C ommittees to set a date to invite me not to submit evidence per 
individual? What if they decide ... 
(Interruption)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Member! Order ! You see are you aware 
that am the one who made the ruling?  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Yes, am aware.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : And am very familiar with the ruling I made.  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Enhe  what was it Mr. Speaker remind me?  
(Consultati ons) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Serjeant-At-Arms in the House, Hon. Member I 
directed that you li aise with the Chairperson Hon. M ohammed Hatimy and Chairperson 
Committee on Labour. You were to liaise and not to wait for an invitation, you were no t being 
invited, you were to liase since you had evidence, you were to know when were you supposed to 
be having a meeting and then bring back the responses today, so I think you fail ed on your part.  
(Silence ) 
 So Hon. Member you still have the lawyers in t he House, is it a burden of proof or 
something am I right?  
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri nod ded) 
 Yes so you still have the burden of pro of. Hon. Member you were to li aise with the Hon. 
Moha med Hatimy and Chairperson on Labour on which date you were sit f or a meeting and 
invite those hand -drivers who were once o ver taxed, then bring back the Statement today, up to 
that are we reading from the same page? Yes, you are up?  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri: Yes Mr. Speaker, I do understand and it  is upon the lead 
Committe e to schedule for the meeting because at the end of it you will not approve of the said 
meeting that was held and we cannot just make a local arrangement that I liaise  with either the 
Chair of Finance or Chair  Labour to submit my evidence without proof or witnesses  at the end of 
it. Mr. Speaker it can be altered and disappear and w ill not  be an evidence  anymore  so with due 
respect am very much willing to te nder my evidence upon the lead Committee to schedule for a 
date and invite me i f possible , officially invite me. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Mimi nitatoka upande huo  na nilikuwa 
nataka kuweza kujua kutoka kwa Kamati ama Bodi  ya Bunge hili  la Kaunti ni mipango gani 
katika kulipa wafanya  kazi wetu…  
(Interruption ) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order! Hon. Member we are on a 
Statement order number eight, we are still discussing it and I have not made a ruling, so since 
you failed .... Yes  what is it Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika Evidence Act iko wazi , akisema kuwa yeye 
kuna watu wanalipishwa kinyume na sh eria ni yeye kuleta ushahidi kuon yesha kuwa ni nani 
amelipishwa , amelipa nini ? Hapo sasa ndio ian galiwe hiyo kesi laki ni mimi siwezi kuja kwako 
nikak uambia sasa wewe njoo unipe ushahidi , wewe nilete e ushahidi  halafu Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi ilikuwa nimekuja tayari na Finance Act  iko ha pa tuangalie hivyo vitu vilivyochaj iwa ni 
vitu gani, tuangalie ni ukwel i wamecha jiwa ukweli ama ni uongo? Kwa hio  ni wewe ut ulete e 
hizo risiti ushahidi  wa kuonyesha kuwa hawa watu wamecha jiwa kwa njia ambayo si sawa sawa.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Okay Hon. Member I think I  will make a ruling 
now, you submit those recei pts now, the genuine  receipts to the office of the Clerk, let them be 
received, make a copy of the received recei pts and then again I think the Clerk will communicate 
to the Committee . Then Hon. Member possibly next week Tuesday 2:30 p.m you can now bring 
the responses on the same, so you submit the g enuine  receipt  to the office of the Clerk, yes, I 
think am now okay with that thank you Hon. Member.  
My office has no any communication of any other Statement apart from th ese two and 
make it a tradition Hon. M embers to be notifying the office of the Speaker via a session so that 
when we come we come with a full business of the day . Yes  Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nitajibidi isha twende kwa mujibu wa 
sheria. 
(Low consultati ons) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Nilikuwa nimetangulia kwamba ningependa kutaka kujua kutoka kwa  Bodi  
ya Bunge hili mipango ya kulipa wafanyi  kazi wetu wa ofisini na  kodi za ofisi?  
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13             The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Any Board Member? Yes  I have heard and it 
will be communicated to the re levant  authority, hopefully next week Tuesday.  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I appreciate but the sit uation is very dire  as much 
as maybe you are on that  seat you under stand what is going on in your Ward so make it very 
urgent before your office is closed. T hank you.  
(Applause)  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Mine has already been closed and that  is why I 
am saying I will communicate to the rele vant authority Hon. Member, it  is only that I cannot 
raise it because am on this Chair but am feeling the same, so it will be communicated hopefully 
before Friday something would have been done but am not promising . Yes Hon. Samba?  
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Spe aker am standing on Standing Order number 41(2) (c) I would 
wish to get a clarification or rather a  Statemen t (Off Microphone) . 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Be audible.  
(Interruption ) 
 Hon. Samba:  From the Department of Housing and Lands . Hon. Speaker t here has been 
a construction that has been going on, a tall building is coming up in my Ward and am afraid it 
has some cracks and I have been following  up this . On several occasions  I have engaged even 
the Waziri himself, I have engaged the Chief officers  but Hon. Speaker it seems the owner is 
very much powerful because I can recall on two occasions he has been arrested and arraign ed in 
court ...  
(Interruption ) 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire): You said you are standing on which order?  
 Hon. Samba:  41(2) (c). 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Okay .  
 Hon. Samba:  So it  is a Statement . So Hon. Speaker I just want you to give a direction or 
rather di rectives, so that the at least  the Committee concerned should visit the site because am 
even afraid, he is not even aware he will have a  septic tank and those people have been doing 
construction at night, so Hon. Speaker through your Chair kindly give a directive so that at least 
something can be done because even the residents are being aff ected . Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : That sta nds on Committee on Lands, Housing 
and Planning? Any Member? You are a Member of the C ommittee?  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Yes. 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So no w that the Hon. Member is raising a very 
sensitive issue of cracks on a very tall building that is in the lives  of the citizens of this County . 
July 1 6, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           60 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  Kindly li aise with the entire team so that you can have even a site visit to the alleged 
venue, then next week you will  tell the House what you  have seen . So Hon. Samba you will also 
liaise with the Committee so that you direct them where the said tall building is . Yes Hon. 
Shebe? I will be taking only the two of you as we wind up the session.  
 Hon Ath man Shebe:  Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nasimama kwa alama 
kiamrishi 41 (2c) ...  
(Interruption)  
 The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member just a minute you see am being 
reminded, you see we have altered our calendar and we are somehow confused, just sit down th e 
business you see tomorrow is Statement day, yes and toda y was just the response on the 
Statement s raised sometimes ba ck so why can’t we spare these Statement s till tomorrow during 
the Statement time ? With a kind request.  
 Hon Athman Shebe:   Ukisema Mheshim iwa Spika , tuko chini ya himaya yako.  
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : But are you okay with that?  
 Hon Athman Shebe:  Yes. 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim you follow suit right? 
Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Member t here having be no other business the House stands adjourned till 
Wednesday 17th at 9:30 a.m.  
The House rose at 3:37p .m.  
 
 
 
 