June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 22nd June, 2016  
The House met at 9: 10a.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Kindly have your seats Hon.  Members.  
STATEMENT  
       Hon. Khamis  Mwab ashir i. Hon. Mwabashiri maybe we can move to Hon. Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  Sir I want to  believe my friend Hon. 
Mwabashiri is stuck in a traffic jam ; there's a big jam in Nyali that's why  he is held up because I 
took mor e than one an d a half hour to cross via Wild W aters, there is a big jam so there's a 
possibility he is stuck in the jam Mr. Speaker, so defer it to the  afternoon . Thank  you Mr. 
Speaker .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Mohamed  Chiro Ndanda . 
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda : Mr. Speaker  there is no  quorum .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Clerk can you confirm if there's quorum, now which 
Standing order is that Hon. Ndanda can you direct us , was it a statement , point of  information or 
a point of  order ?  
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda : Hon.  Speaker I was consulting  with Hon . Nasser and Hon. Nasser  
was telling  me that it's as if there is no quorum  but I think the quorum  is there but the C lerk can 
confirm.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Mar y. 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir. I just want to remind him that it is the 
Standing o rder number 27 .  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda:  27, 37...  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is it Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda ?  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Mr. Speaker  I think it’s the right time that we can now look at 
some issues at least affecting our people in the areas we are representing Mr. Speaker .  
       Mr. Speaker  if you give me time and chance that I can air a little bit about what is going 
around within the villages we are representing Mr. Speaker  I shall appreciate …  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. M ohamed  Ndanda  you know you are behaving in a very 
cheeky manner because you are supposed to direct us from the S tanding Order in which you are 
starting  and remember  Hon. Mary  Akinyi is  also trying to mislead this Hon.  House  because i 
agree that she 's stand ing on Standing Order Number 27 , yes that is a totally different thing  all 
together … 
(Laughter and Applause ) 
       Because  unless you are  trying to say that this is not the best hour that this particular House  
should be sitting  because order 27 is  about  the hour we are meeting …  
(Laught er) 
       In terms of the quorum that  Hon.  Members is a different order but now  that you have 
confirmed t hat there is quorum we can continue . Hon.  Ndanda .  
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda : Mr. Speaker  I’m talking regarding insecurity and at the same 
time Mr. Speaker  we have had a lot of problems especially  the place I’ m.... 
(Interruption ) 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes c an you allow intervention  from  Hon.  Zeinab O mar 
Mumba . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Zeinab  Omar : Mr. Speaker  there is no quorum in the House under  Standing 
order number 31 . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Clerk can you help me confirm if there' s quorum?  
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
       Yes S ergeant at A rms can you ring the quorum bell . 
(Quorum bell rung)  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Mr. Speaker . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : May I act as the C hief Whip so that I can  whip the  Hon. Members.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : It is not within the mandate of the Speaker  to choose the 
Chief Whip  it is about the party and the party has to decide on the Chief Whip , they can control 
your various factors in the  House  then what  I just need is to be informed.  
(Consultations ) 
(Quorum bell rung)  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Mr. Speaker  I have an issue sir.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Mr. Speaker  I stand to give an i ssue but if I’m wrong I may be 
corrected; f our Hon. Members were suspended, two God loved  them  so much that they left us, so 
45 when we less 6, so I’ll take 45 with less 7 we get 38. A third of 38 its 12 and we are already 
12 in the House , I know you are b lind but you are not deaf you  can hear.  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  Sir but I have said I stand to  be corrected.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Ndanda how did the Speaker  see you if he’s blind, yes I 
gave you the opportunity to  talk. 
(Interrup tion) 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  It is the Standing Order . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes the consequences or the interpretation of your statements 
has pros and cons a nd if you  raised the number that you have purported that  this particular Hon. 
House should be using is 38 then automatically  false that this A ssembly needs to go  home  
because we have not  met the threshold that is required by the Constitution , it means we are 
illegally …, remember the re's issue of gender  when it comes to a C ounty , the c onstitution of the 
County A ssembly or any other parliament in this c ountry. So the quorum is  not based on the 
reduced  number , but is based on  the original intended figure  within the Hon. House . 
(Applause)  
       So the quorum always stands at that ; the onl y time you consider those who are not in to form 
part of the quorum is when we have apologies, bu t not because they are away they are not 
forming quorum no,  those who sent their apologies  are the on es that  can be considered  part of the 
quorum , unfortunatel y in this incident there are no such apologies, such apologies are not 
accept ed because it is no ordinary meeting. This is a plenary and  it stands as that, so we just have 
to wait for five  more minutes, for the bell to  be rung again and for this pa rticular  same order …  
       Hon. Mwidani : Mr. Speaker  sir... 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mwidani . 
       Hon. Mwidani : Thank you for giving me this opportunity, I think now we have a quorum, 
thank you.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Clerk can you confirm if there's a quorum .   
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 (Clerk confirmed quorum)  
       So we continue from where we left Hon . Mohamed  Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Mr. Speaker , I was initially addressing matters of insecurity, 
especially the area i present Mr. Speaker  and this is not the first time that I have called for 
assistance from this House  so that insecurity can be improved. Mr. Speaker  sir the areas we are 
living especially the areas of Ka dzandani, and most when  i may also enlighten you more, you 
have heard sometimes bodies are found in the morning, people h ave been killed, the other time it 
was wit hin F rere T own where Personal A ssistant of our Hon. Member was also killed in a 
mysterious m anner, the  other  time Ka dzandani within this month there were about three 
incident s. Mr. Speaker the security lies in the hands of the National government but as elected 
Members we cannot look at the National g overnment friendly and we are there we have to 
question the problem of insecurity.  
       Mr. Speaker i have  a place or a village called Soweto where most of those people living in 
that area sell a lot of local brew, th ese people in a day or a night we have a lot of insecurity 
within those lines , i beg that this House to make possible means that the security tea m for this 
County be informed of this and if possible i beg through your Chair Hon.  Speaker through the 
able Committee we have that we summon them so that they can also be address ed at a personal 
level to make sure the li ves of our people in Mombasa County  are secured. Hon.  Speaker this 
should not be taken as a light case b ecause our people are losing liv es and the other time i came 
here and complain ed of a place called Bombolulu just opposite Sheikh Khalifa where there are 
some ladies there doing the ir businesses, these ladies always get harrassed because of the 
insecurity sometimes after doing their businesses they are killed Hon.  Speaker i told you the 
other time …  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir Point  of information . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir with all due respect my brother should tell us which kind of 
business ; there are other businesses which are allowed by the law and there are businesses which 
are not allowed by the law so be specific which kind of business because other businesses are not 
allowed by the law Mr. Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  Hon.  Speaker it does not mean that if i do unlawful business i 
should be killed ; i swear i took oath in this House that i will serve  my people, this Nation and 
Mombasa County diligently the word was diligently and i was sworn on that day. Hon.  Speaker 
I’m representing all people living with disabilities, people also wh o are physically...  
(Interruption ) 
       ...Is interfering Hon.  Speaker protect me Mr. Speaker around that Bombolulu and this is a 
very serious matter when you go around there ladies do pack there and Hon.  Speaker we 
cannot … especially me, I cannot sit do wn looking at Kenyans losing their li ves while d oing their 
businesses I’ m not entitle d to discriminating what type of business my people are doing but my 
people  should  be secured , other things will follow later but li ves of people are very important.       
Hon.  Speaker this area called Bombolulu there are some people walking with guns....  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Serah Nyamvula . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker thank you very much for giving me this opportunity . 
Mr. Speaker i have a lot of respect for my brother Hon.  Ndanda for his work and passion for 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 women, youth and disable d. Mr. Speaker seriously what  he is saying is very serious and it will be 
more serious if it can be justified by figures ; we do understand wher e it is coming and the place 
he is talking about, there's a place but we need figures of what  he is talking about , we need 
tangible thi ngs because you see the County g overnment of Mombasa ha s done a lot of work , yes 
allow me to say in Kiswahili ‘vile vikor oboi vya kuuzia samaki vimepungua ’ because the County 
Government has put streetlights and not only street lights anywhere but it is also important for an 
action to be taken if it can be justified this with tangible information . For instance when we talk 
about Kisauni Constituency with Wakali Kwanza  it is something that is well known and it is 
tangible and it can be true but this one yes our brothers, the youth, women and disable d are 
around there and they have difficulties and the re are more than difficulti es, they are challenges 
and i would be glad to he ar Hon.  Ndanda talking about a walk way like what is being done in 
Buxton and in Links Road where pedestrians can walk, disable d can push their wheelchair s and 
so on and so on , that for me will be quite impo rtant because with the lights and the walk way will 
improve the lifestyles of women, youth s and disable d.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  Thank you Hon.  Speaker for allowing me again because i was on 
the flo or. Hon.  Speaker i con cur with her statement she is very right that's why i have brought 
this matter into this House so that it can do the findings Hon.  Speaker … 
(Applause)  
       Hon.  Speaker i may remind her because she is knowledgeable about  this; she is a very active 
Member outside there and by coming here she has also assisted me in one of my polling station s 
thank you very much and that's why when i bring a certain issue she must clarify it and make 
sure that it become s a good thing , thank you very mu ch Hon.  Serah Nyamvula. Mr. Speaker we 
have an estate called Bandari Villa just next to Bombolulu ; two useful youths were killed a week 
ago so if this House can give me time so that i can do those research through the relevant 
committee i think in that com mittee …, i don't know whether it is an Ad  hoc or what  but Hon.  
Serah Nyamvula must be there and then we will talk together because i  have just mention ed a 
week ago Hon.  Speaker two useful youths from Mbungoni in my area , so useful youths died 
because of insecurity.  One was killed in a video hall so I say security is very much important to 
the li ves of our people and honestly i may not go so far but if you allow us at least my main 
concern to this House  are the findings , okay it has emerged but my main conce rn was to at least 
bring this Security committee team of Mombasa we address this is one because it is not the first 
but the second time. Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well Hon.  Ndanda we may not...before me I’ m perusi ng the 
various documents that are here but i have just fail ed to identify such stated sentiments Hon.  
Ndanda in regards to your submissions and remember that does not mean that whatever you have 
raised is not the actual position on the ground . We would wan t to know if it is the exact thing 
happening on the ground and this House needs to have the same facts and remember when I take 
you to the Standing Order 76 (1) it is clear on how you are supposed to bring that particular 
matter . You are saying that it is expected that particular information come s as the extract of the 
main statement that you have placed before this Hon.  House because you cannot take the 
recorder audio to the relevant institutions , that is something you need to do as soon as possible 
and sa y this is what have been said in the House and also remember i also sometimes back  gave 
directives that the C ommittee in charge within the House needs to frequently meet with relevant 
departments to make sure you become protective and if you do not become protective there's no 
use of you becoming a leader . This is  because one of the primary role as an MCA is 
representation of people and those people must be alive you cannot represent those people who 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 are not with us because we don't know where they are but Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda we may not 
allow any submission on the floor in regard to that matter but i give you an opportunity to put but 
not to redraft whatever it is in a pen and paper and bring it back in the afternoon and we can see 
how best we can direct thi s so better be addressed.  
MOTION  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is it Hon.  Duncan?  
       Hon. Onyango : Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity I stand to move a privilege 
Motion under Standing Order 41 , a privilege M otion on t he Leader of M inority . 
  
PRIVILEGE MOTION  
       Mr. Speaker Sir, I rise on the same Motion and would wish to state a vote of No Confidence 
on the current Leader of Minority Hon. Maimuna Salim, over allegations of corruption case in 
the High Court.  As for the precedence set over the same position by t he predecessor Hon. Karisa 
Nzai  who had corruption allegations h e was forced to resign based on public Officers and 
Integrity Act Chapter 6. I hereby therefore wish to move a Motion to move her out as the 
Minor ity Leader office  holder . I therefore beg to move the M otion and Hon.  Riziki Fundi to 
second the M otion. Thank you very much.  
       Hon. Fundi : Mr. Speaker Sir i second.  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You know Hon.  Duncan and Hon.  Riziki Fu ndi ha ve you just 
listen ed to the content of that particular Motion ; one you need to place that with the Hon.  
Speaker himself and two i have considered this now i know that you trying to us e Standing Order 
49 which is M otion , which should be moved without a notice . If you look at part (e) on that 
particular Standing Order  it is talking about suspension of a Member but the one that has been 
read by Hon.  Duncan Onyango  is talking about removal, this is about the suspension and the 
removal and then Hon.  Duncan  has raised a concern and has gi ven out a case study that is one 
Hon.  Karisa Munyika Nzai who had the same case but remember in your speech Hon.  Duncan 
you have made clear in the House that Hon.  Karisa Nzai was made to resign therefore he has the 
best oppo rtunity and the best way if the same person can also be asked to resign the better 
because you will take to that particular individual . It means that we may also not give the same 
person what Article 50 of the Constitution  as it states the fair hearing bu t i want to believe we 
are not in a hurry to determine that matter right now right here but i would urge that you consider 
those particular aspects ; in fact even at the Committee level you can raise that because anyway 
out rightly we do not have  Minority p arty in the House and I have said it many times that we 
don’t have minority party in the House. These are all applications because the others 
have ...(Inaudible)  we were to do something and move , you know we can never be captives of a 
situation that was for ced to us or on us by the people . The power of the people dictated that you 
become one party in th e House , infact even having the Leader of M ajority was created by the 
fact that we moved that Motion to have a Leader of M inority because if you do not have l eft we 
cannot have right, if we don't have front there's no backward, if we do not have top we cannot 
have bottom so those are the issues that we consider as a Hon.  House , so you can  try to handle 
that within the C ommittee  and if the C ommittee fails we can  try the same person, individual, if 
that individual doesn’t see the sense then you can bring that forth unless we have different 
opinion. Yes Hon. Duncan . 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6        Hon. Onyango : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika natumaini wewe ni kama 
refa ambaye a nafaa kusimama kati kati na kutetea haki za kila mchezaji. Mheshimiwa Spika 
nikirudi hapo awali kama vile alivyotaja  mwenzangu ambaye anawakilisha Wodi ya Jomvu K uu 
nafikiri ni wewe ulikuwa umekaa kwenye kiti hichi wakati akiondolewa hakuwa kwenye Bunge 
hili. Tena ile mbaya zaidi barua yake alifu atwa nayo kule kule korokoroni wakati alikuwa 
ameshikwa, wenzangu walitengeneza barua na kumpeleka kule kortini, hawakungoja aje ajitetee 
wala hakupewa muda kamili wa kujitetea. Sasa leo Mheshimiwa Spika nashangaa y a kwamba 
tukio kama hili la Kenya nzima linajua lipo magazetini zaidi ya kumi na ninalo hapa moja 
Mheshimiwa Spika kama utanipatia ruhusa nikimbie nikuletee mahali mwenzangu ninayemtaja 
ameshikwa na maafisa wa kupigana na ufisadi nchini.  Mheshimiwa Spika n i jambo hata ambalo 
tuliliona hata kwenye  runinga na kila mmoja katika K aunti yetu ya Mombasa anajua ya kwamba 
Mheshimiwa niliyemtaja hapo yuko na kesi ya kujibu kortini.  Mheshimiwa hili ni J umba la 
sheria na tunataka kuwekwe mfano mzuri wa kizazi cha leo na hata kizazi cha kesho. Kwa hivyo 
mimi ningekuomba kupitia kiti chako kama vile mwenzangu alivyoondolewa akiwa yuko kule 
ameshikwa, Mheshimiwa Spika nakuomba usiwe na nafasi ya kumpatia Mheshimiwa aje ajitetee 
maanake kama ni kujitetea atajitetea kule ko rtini na iwapo atashinda kesi basi akirudi tutaangalia 
ni namna gani tutaweza kumregeshea kiti chake. A hsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Riziki Fundi . 
       Hon. Fundi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , kama nilivyot angulia kumuunga mkono h oja 
hii ambayo imeletwa katika Nyumba hii. Mheshimiwa Spika lazima tuwe wa kweli, sheria ni 
msumeno;  ikienda mbele ikate, ikirudi nyu ma pia ikate, i siwe kama ambaye kwenye Nyumba hii 
kuna wengine ni bora zaidi kuliko wengine.  Mheshimiwa Spika, wakati nilip okuwa 
nimepatikana na yale majanga Mheshimiwa wa Jomvu Kuu Karisa Nzai siku ile ile 
ilipotangazwa kwamba yupo kwenye matatizo, siku hiyo hiyo iliandikwa barua kwamba yeye 
atoke mamlakani,  na kweli ilifanyika hivyo na hata ndani ya Nyumba tukaikubali bila k umpatia 
nafasi Mheshimiwa Nzai kujitetea kwa njia ya aina yoyote iwe kwa mdomo ama kwa maandishi. 
Mheshimiwa Spika isionekane kwamba Bunge hili linawapendelea wengin e lakini wengine 
linawafinyilia, s isi wote ni wabunge wa  chama cha  ODM ambao tuko katika Ny umba hii, na hii 
Mheshi miwa Spika ni Nyumba ya sheria, i kiwa kila mtu a mepatikana na majanga kama haya  
hatupendelei kwamba ama hatuwezi kumuhukumu moja kwa moja kwa vile ni mfisadi lakini 
korti ndio yenye mamlaka ya kuweza kujua kwamba yeye ametenda swala lile ama hakutenda.        
Sisi kama Nyumba ya sheria tungefuata katiba basi lazima tu tekeleze  kama katiba vile 
inavyosema na ikiwezekana leo tupige kura hapa tuchague mwengine.  
(Applause)  
       ...Kwa sababu hatuwezi kuwa tunaendelea kuk aa katika J umba hili kila siku tunavunja sheria 
na sheria zipo wazi tunaweza kuzifuata lakini tunapendeleana. Mheshimiwa Spika hata kama 
Riziki Fundi kesho akipelekwa kortini mimi hata sitang oja kutolewa nitajitoa mwenyewe;  
Nyumba hii iwe itaweka mfano na katika sheria za  Bunge ikiwa kuna jambo ambalo limetokea 
na linatakikana litumiwe kama mfano kwa kitendo kama kile ambacho kitaweza kuregelewa 
ikiwa Mheshimiwa Spika katika Bunge la kitaifa inatumika sheria  ambayo ilitumika miaka 20, 
kama jambo fulani lilitokea miaka 20 Spika anaweza kutumia sheria zile ambazo zilitumika 
wakati ule kutumiwa ule wakati ambapo inatakikana . Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasema 
Nyumba hii watu wote ni sawa na ninaregelea tena kwa mara nyengine, mimi singependelea 
Nyumba hii iwe kama lile sham ba la wanyama wengine ni bora wengine si bora, sisi sote ni 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 sawa, tuna majukumu sawa, sheria inayotulinda ni sawa. Kwa  hivyo sheria ifu atwe Mheshimiwa 
Spika, a hsante sana.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Nzai . 
       Hon. Nzai:   Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nataka kwanza nichukue nafasi kushukuru Bunge  hili  kwa sababu ni Bunge ambalo linapenda 
kufuata sheria. Bunge hili la Mombasa lilionyesha mfano mzuri wakati tulipokuwa kun a tetesi  
juu yangu sheria ik afuatwa na nikapata nafasi ya kuachilia nafasi ingine, uchunguzi ufanyike na 
mambo yaendelee sawa sawa. Mheshimiwa Spika lakini mimi kama Karisa Nzai ningependa 
kama sheria inavyo  kata mbele na nyuma, sheria ifu atwe.  
(Applause)  
       Lakini Mheshimiwa Sp ika nataka kutoa neno lakini, lakini yangu Mheshimiwa Spika naitoa 
asubuhi ya leo ni kwamba maisha ya mtu ni muhimu, ni juzi Mheshimiwa Spika tulipokuwa 
hapa tulikuwa tunafara kana, tulikuwa tunataka kuweka mambo yetu katika Nyumba yetu sawa 
sawa na tukaona  Mheshimiwa niliyemtaja hali ambavyo ilikuwa ...  
(Applause)  
       Mheshimiwa alizirai na kiasi cha kwamba tunayapenda maisha ya mtu kuliko vyeo n a 
Mheshimiwa Spika langu ambalo  shauri ambalo ulikuwa umelitoa nimeliona ni shauri la dhati , ni 
shauri la kulipatia muda na liweze kuzungumziwa. Mheshimiwa Spika hivi tunavyozungumza 
asubuhi ya leo, Mheshimiwa tunayemtaja ameweza kupoteza ndugu yake, sasa amepoteza ndugu 
yake n dio ana mipango ya kumtoa pale C oast general alikuwa chumba cha wagonjwa mahututi 
yaani Intensive Care Unit ( ICU). Mheshimiwa Spika ni ukweli kabisa sheria if uatwe, lakini 
ningeomba Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia kiti chako ambacho kina nguvu umpatie muda, mumpatie 
muda, iende kwa  Kamati  hata kama kuna wakati inaweza kuzungumzwa ni lazima lakini 
Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia kiti chako ambacho kina nguvu uweze kumpatia muda.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you allow intervention from Hon.  Duncan…  
       Hon. Onyango : Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa ufafanuzi zaidi kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa 
wa Jomvu kama s iku hizi anaishi na Mheshimiwa Maimuna maan ake swala hili hata wakaazi wa 
Kisauni wengi wake hawana habari yoyo te kama Mheshimiwa Maimuna alifiliwa sijui hizi 
habari alizito a wapi. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes are you on  the same P oint of orde r. Ndanda, okay then 
after you have finished the submissions .  
       Hon. Nzai:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kama k iongozi shupavu na kiongozi wa J omvu eneo 
lote la mji wa Mombasa, ni jukumu langu Mheshimiwa Spika kujua maisha ya kila mmoj a na 
ameamka vipi? Husika Mheshimiwa Spika na katika hali husika asubuhi ya leo, nikiuliza 
Mheshimiwa Maimun a ameweza kuniambia maneno haya.  Kwa hivyo si maneno ya kusingizia 
kifo Mheshimiwa Spika huwezi kusingizia na hakuna  sababu yoyote isipokuwa niku uliza kama 
yuko na nafasi apewe nafasi wakati mwengine.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon. Mohamed  Ndanda .  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker s ome of us were leaders in 
this A ssembly and as it has been said that sheria ni msumeno,  then I have no objection about 
that. Hon. Speaker when you lead we expect not only smooth but sometimes rough, so the 
conditions of both are there to be maintained  and have this or any other masses will go as per the 
constitution we’ll still st and. Hon. Speaker we are asking humbly through your C hair that the 
cases mentioned are of great concern, in fact we don’t discuss something outside that’s why you 
might say you took so long, but if an issue has been raised in this Hon.  House, it has to be 
tackled accordingly . Mr. Speaker if you give chance Hon. Speaker and already this House has 
been informed by Hon. Riziki F undi that there are cases where by we can defer even when we go 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 to the petitions sometimes we are given petitions judged in 1972 that t here was such a case and 
this case was concluded this way, then the judge now stands and says this one will also follow 
the way. Hon. Speaker I think this House should not lose its way ; yesterday I told you that when 
this House loses its way, it’s not as p er the first person to be blamed by the Mombasa people, and 
the people of Kenya shall be the Hon. Speaker of Mombasa County Assembly. Hon. Speaker if 
this matter was here of the same nature Hon. Speaker let us follow the procedure. Thank you 
very much.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Patrick . 
       Hon. Wangudi : Thank you Mr. Speaker two wrongs don't make a right unfortunately what 
happened to Hon. Nzai was a wrong,  
(Laughter ) 
       ...and what am saying is that we are innocent until proven guilt y, we don’t say that Hon. 
Nzai . 
(Laughter ) 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Kasangamba.  
       Hon. Kasangamba: Mr. Speaker according to my fellow Hon. Member  he said what 
happened to Nzai was wrong,  does it mean that the current Leader of Minority  is on the seat 
illegally Mr. Speaker , is he justifying that?  
       Hon. Wangudi : Am not justifying anything but am talking about matters of law , everybody 
is innocent until proven guilty. .. 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Point of information . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  Mr. Speaker sir there is something that we 
call precedence law so let’s just go down to the precedence law, we have been following. ..  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You have point of information?  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda:  Yeah I am on point of information. Hon. Speaker, the NYS saga, 
that Hon. Lady CS Waiguru, it was just suspecting, she was sent, investigated and other  things to 
follow outside the office , Hon. Speaker when you are now guilt you will go to Shimo la Tewa 
but you have to vacate that office thank you.  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Patrick . 
       Hon. Wangudi : Mr. Speaker, what am tryi ng to say is that a matter that is in court, that 
...(Inaudible)  everybody to hold accountable should leave the office even if you want to stand as 
a member of...  
(Interruption ) 
        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Riziki on a point of information . 
       Hon. Fundi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumfahamisha kwamba hata leo hivi 
tunavyokaa hapa ile kesi ya Mheshimiwa Karisa Nzai haijakwisha, lakini yuko nje ya kiti.  
       Kwa hivyo tunasema sheria ifuatwe na vile alivyosema Mheshimiwa Mary,  there are 
precedence to  be followed in this House Mr. Speaker .  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon. Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker what am trying to say is what is communicated by our House ; a 
notice required to be followed, w e need to give this House a proper direction according to the 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 constitution of Kenya, that it says someone is innocent until proven guilty. W e should not judge  
and Mr. Speaker secondly matters of majority, minority, any leadership because it is said 
majority of certain party , minority of certain party, these are issues of party and as you have 
given early the direction that these  issues can be handled in the committee room , both the 
House ...  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon.  Fundi : Point of information . 
       Mr. S peaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon. Riziki . 
       Hon.  Fundi : Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa ambaye yuko katika ukumbi namshangaa 
sana, ni kweli matters of leadership of this A ssembly lies with a party withi n the A ssembly which 
is called the PG a nd here we don ’t have a single M ember from an opposition party, so we 
formulated that post and we are the ones to control who to s it on that post or not Mr. Speaker .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker even the Leader of M ajority can testify to that; when it 
happened there were some consultation s within the party and he voluntar ily resign ed Mr. 
Speaker if we sit as a party...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Caro . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mr. Speaker th e Hon.  Member who is talking r ight now is confusing the 
House;  he is misleading the House , let him give us the correct words or the correct information 
that he has because the way he  is trying to put these  words , it’s as if he’s misleading, 
misleading ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Please can you sit and think twice whatever you are giving out to the Hon. Members.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Paul Onje . 
       Hon. Onje:  Thank you Mr . Speaker sir, mine is just  a P oint information, I just wanted to  
ask my Hon. Members to tell me  today I just wanted to know who is the party, because every 
day we keep on talking about party , to me I know the party itse lf is the Hon. Members in this 
County A ssembly.  
(Applause)  
       We are the party because we are the sa me ODM, we are members of ODM party. So I want 
to  urge this members do not try to divert our attention in this House we are all ODM members. 
thank you.  
(Question proposed)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now before we continue with this  I can see the level of 
interest in this matter is very high, it is important that I now propose  this question and see what 
the Hon.  House has and that you see whether you can make those submissions you have been 
making out of context of this particular motion that has been tabled by Hon.  Dunc an and now 
may I see the concern  of the House by proposing that this particular Privilege M otion of the 
position of  the Minority leader be considered by this Hon.  House . 
 (Question proposed and agreed to)  
       Yes Hon. Patrick Si minyu.  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker I think you have to allow me, this intervention of M embers at 
least I can put out as to why because the intervention I don’t think if they are addi ng waters. Mr. 
Speaker what am trying to say majority a nd minority  are party issues and any person that is 
representing a party has to have a mandate from the required party th at is representing in the 
House , as we understand the party...  
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 (Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon. Mwabashiri . 
       Hon. M wabashiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. M imi nimesimama kwa Point of 
information . Jambo alilolizungumza ni kweli kwa masuala ya Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi na 
Walio W achache ; ni masuala ya chama lakini Mheshimiwa Spika kuna vitu fulani, kwanza 
katika Kaunti ya Mo mbasa hakuna Walio W achache hapa ni wengi tu hakuna Walio W achache 
hamna.  Tuelewane, tumezungumza hapa chama cha Walio Wengi na Chama cha Walio 
Wachache; hivi ni vyama M heshimiwa Spika na hapa chama kilicho na wengi ni chama kimoja 
ni chama cha ODM na cha wachache hakuna mchache hata mmoja. Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika 
masu ala ya chama k atika Bunge hili ni maswala ya Walio Wengi pekee yake, Walio W achache 
nafikiri katika Bunge hili tusisahau, tulipitisha she ria hapa kuwa yule atakayekuwa M wenyekiti 
wa Kamati ya  PIC yeye ndiyo  ata kuwa  kama Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache Bungeni , atakuwa 
kama  Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache Bungeni  sio Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache Bungeni  hakuna  
kiongozi huyu .  Hivyo basi Mheshimiwa Spika masuala ya chama ni masuala ya upande mmoja 
Mombasa upande mwengine , ni masuala ya Bunge kwa sababu  sheria hutengezwa hapa Bungeni 
na ni sisi wabunge nd io tutakao amua nani ata kuwa kama Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache 
Bungeni  katika Bunge hili kwa sababu hatuna Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache  hapa. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimi wa Spika nashangaa na wanaosema eti ni maswala ya chama sijui Kiongozi wa Walio 
Wengi na Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache  hapa hakuna Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache kwanza.         
Pili Mheshimiwa Spika sisi wa walio wengi  tumekubali lakini ni makosa kwa upande mweng ine 
samahani hata kule Bunge kuu Nairobi walipokuwa wanataka kumtupa Mheshimiwa Mng’aro 
kuwa kinara wa Bunge, kiongozi wa chama hawakuandika barua kwa Bunge kuu kusema kuwa 
huyu  M heshimiwa Mng’aro simtaki tunamuweka  mtu mwengine alikuwa na uwezo huo lakin i 
hakufanya hivyo, aliita kikao cha parliamentary group  Wabunge wote wa Bunge kuu na Seneti  
na Seneti  wakakutana pamoja akiwa yeye kama Mwenyekiti wao wakafanya mkutano wakaamua 
kwa sauti moja wambadilishe Mheshimiwa Mng’aro kuwa kiranja wa Bunge wakamueka  
Mheshimiwa Mwalegu.  
       Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika  masuala haya tusiambiwe eti sijui ati ni chama hivi ; vyama 
kama vile Mheshimiwa O nje Mwakilishi wa Bunge eneo la Junda kwani chama ni nani?  Wajua 
hapa sasa watu wanaon gea chama kwani chama ni nani? H uyu chama ni  mnyama gani?  ODM 
ndio nani?  S isi ndio  chama cha  ODM Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna mwengine hapa Mheshimiwa 
Spika . Hivyo basi masuala ya Bunge hapa Mheshimiwa Spika ya kusema ODM ni kama watu 
wengine watuamulie sisi viongozi wa shughuli za hapa ndani  ya Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika hiyo 
sio sawa. Mheshimiwa Spika...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes allow an intervention from Hon. Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  Is he inform ing the House or contributing, i' m seeing he’s also 
mislead ing the House , what is the point Hon. Speaker but I think he wants to confuse the 
House ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Patrick . 
       Hon. Wangudi : Mr. Speaker everyone w as given a chance to contribute.  Mr. Speaker why 
don't the y give me the opportunity to submit what I have then when someone is trying to 
contribute they interrupt ! With all these interruption it is eating my time Mr. Speaker Sir,  I beg 
you sir to protect them from unnecessary intervention , what i' m trying  to say an d they argue all 
the time about … 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is it Hon. Ndanda . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda:  Thank you Mr. Speaker but I just want to inquire from your chair  
if we have unnecessary interventions In this House, according  to me, all the contributions are 
valid and very important, but the Hon. Members  is saying that unnecessary intervention. Thank 
you. 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon. Patrick Siminyu can you have the last opportunity, now 
make sure that you don't s tep on others so much so that they don’t interject or interrupt your 
session.  
       Hon. Wangudi : Mr. Speaker i' m not stepping on anybody’s toes . Mr. Speaker some people 
here have a fixed mind today we want to do something here in this House, s o I cannot stop th em 
from feeling like that ; what i'm trying to say is that we are M ember s of a party which we 
represent whether you like it or not but we have places where we can talk party matters in a 
Committee room and i' m not saying that somebody should be broug ht out of that chair , removing 
issues are of the party in this House but in the committee we have more time to contribute and to 
discuss issue to do with party , Mr. Speaker Sir i beg because it's not the House which dete rmines 
who will be the Majority or M inority it is the party. Let us have a party meeting to discuss and 
whether to vote as a party Mr. Speaker Sir  yours is to give direction and from the communication 
from the party so that we can have the majority or minority. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon. Nyamvula . 
       Hon. (Mrs .) Nyamvula:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker since we opened this session we have all sort s of issues coming  out, this is not a bad 
thing it also shows that we are Hon. Members but that we can debate but we can have 
differences. Mr. Speaker in a Kamukunji I recently said quit e Hon.  things Mr. Speaker to ensure 
that we have harmony. The harmony is here ... 
(Applause)  
       But Hon. Members what we did we opened what the Wazungu  call 'pandora box ', we 
opened a can of worms  as they say. We have opened,  allow me sir, mkebe wa mabuu, mabuu ya 
kipesa ; yakitoka nje hayaezi rudi,  and this is where we are at a crossroad. As a Chair for Youth 
Gender and Sports I hear  sir through Hon.  Mwabashiri , I hear him say what he says about the 
minority seat, i' m here standing to find that position please Hon. Members hear me clearly am 
defending that  position because we fought for it and we were not even ashame d when we fought 
for it. Hon.  Karisa Nzai a good brother of mine when the vacancy came in I did not see that it 
was good that we met , for me it was a position that we had created all of us and  it was given to a 
man, a Hon. Man, a senior man in this Hon. H ouse coming the second time but we went and said 
that now that we have an opportunity we will take this position  and make it a Hon. 
Representative of the Hon. House. My wish whatever the case and am repeating myself not 
defending anything because we have g one, I wish this had happened two years ago because now 
we have not removing the minority no, b eing Hon.  and  going by law ... 
(Applause)  
       ...Because now we have started deciding to follow the law for one reason or another, I once 
said msumeno utatuka ta sote huku mbele na nyuma , because we opened a can of worms  but my 
plea at this position is to ensure that which we are now being told is acting positions to remain a 
seat on Hon. Members of this House. .. 
(Applause ) 
       We cannot afford to do that we  must maintain and we must never go backward. That is my 
submission Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much.  
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim . 
       Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim:  Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwa  kunipa wakati 
huu mimi p ia nichangie mawili matatu. Mheshimiwa Spika mwanzo ningependa kuwakumbusha 
ndugu zangu kwamba huu ni mwezi mtukufu wa Ramadhan.  
(Laughter ) 
       Na pia vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika tunajua sheria ya katiba yetu ni kwamba mtu huwa hana 
hatia mpaka korti it akapoamua ako na hatia.. . 
(Applause)  
       Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kutoa mfano si wa MCA lakini ni wa Raisi wetu na wa 
Naibu wa Raisi walipokuwa na kesi yao ICC Mheshimiwa Spika sikuona na jambo la kwamba 
wame toka kwa  ofisi zao za Uraisi na Unaibu wa Raisi...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ndanda . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  I just want to inform the House as the Hon.  Chief Whip is saying 
that when Hon.  His Excellency the President of this Nation Uhuru Kenyatta when he was g oing 
to the Hague i think you heard and saw on the Television ...  
(Applause)  
       He called his Deputy and said this country is on you until i come because he knew anything 
can happen you cannot have those hours when you are going as a President you cann ot hold 
those powers when you go to the Mombasa High Court as the Minority Leader of this House ...  
(Applause)  
       Before i sit i propose Hon.  Serah Nyamvula to replace the seat ...  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim . 
       Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim:  Mheshimiwa Spika twajua Raisi alivyoondoka twajua alimuachia 
pale...  
(Applause)  
Lakini aliporudi Mheshimiwa Ruto alirudi kwa Uraisi ama Mheshimiwa Uhuru ndio alirudi kwa 
Uraisi ndio tusiamue kama korti haijaamua ... 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon.  Kasangamba . 
       Hon. Kasangamba:  Mheshimiwa Spika Raisi alivyo tolewa mashtaka  ndio akaregea kwa 
kiti chake kwa hiyo akiregeshwa ndio tutaona vile tutakavyomregesha .  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim . 
       Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim:  Mheshimiwa Spika sidhani kama Raisi ali tolewa mashtaka kwa 
siku moja  kwa sababu alienda na akarudi vile vile . Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika lazima tujue ya 
kwamba ni jambo la chama na sisi kama waheshimiwa hata kama ku metokea kosa hatuwezi kuja 
tu Bungeni na jambo fulani kwamba tulilizungumza tu katika Kamati kama chama tujipe 
mwelekeo halafu tuje katika Bunge ndio tuweke jambo kama hili . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi 
ningependa kuomba uongozi wako kwamba utafute Kamati pia vil e vile ya watu fulani 
utakaochagua kwa mapenzi yako wakae kando walijadili jambo hili kwa niaba ya chama halafu 
ndio turegee kwako ndio utupe mwelekeo ama uongozi Mheshimiwa Spika. A hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Any other comm ent? Yes Hon.  Abdallah Kasangamba . 
       Hon. Kasangamba:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kwanza nitasema kwa maneno machache 
kulingana na korti maana neno precedence  liko kulingana na sheria.  Mheshimiwa Spika maana 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 ya neno legal precedence in common law legal syst ems a precedence for authority is a legal case 
that establish our principals on a law.  The precedence or a rule is then used by the court or 
other judicial bodies when deciding later case with a similar issue Mr. Speaker.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika labda isionekane vibaya lakini kwa sababu hatuna budi kwa Mheshimiwa Nzai alivyotoa 
uwazi wake ama zile hali alizopitia Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa Nzai 
alisema vile  alivyoyapitia kwa misingi h usisitiza kwa sababu ya misingi ya Jumba hili, kila lile 
jamb o linalotokea basi lazima lifuate mkondo ule ule kwa sababu ya sheria na tufuate nidhamu 
na tufuate misingi kwamba Jumba hili ni Jumba la kisawa na ni Jumba la kutenda kazi 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika waheshimiwa wengi wamesema kwamba wembe ni ule 
ule na wengine wakasema n i msumeno wakata mbele na nyuma . Mheshimiwa Spika siku moja 
nitatoa mfano sisi watu wa Likoni tunapenda kusema historia tulizoelezwa na babu zetu kwa 
sababu kule mababu wako na dondoo lazima tupewe Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika  
babu yangu aliniambia kwamba simba akila mwendazimu huwa anatakikana auliwe kwa sababu 
ukimuach a atakuja kumla mzima mtoto wa C hifu, Mheshimiwa Spika simba aliyemla 
Mheshimiwa Nzai ndiye yule atakayemla mtu mwengine ...  
(Applause)  
       Na sio kuwa Mhesh imiwa Nzai tulimtoa kafara kama mwendawazimu samahani kwa 
kutumia neno hilo Mheshi miwa Spika lakini leo mtoto wa C hifu kuliwa na simba hatutaki lazima 
tukubali simba yule yule atakula mtu yeyote hata kama ni kiongozi Kasangamba akipatikana na 
matatizo basi  simba yule yule niko tayari anile Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
(Applause)  
       Kuongezea kwamba kulingana na hili Jumba letu hoja ililetwa hapa tukakubaliana kwa 
pamoja kwamba Kiongozi wa Walio  Wachache kwamba atakuwa kama Mwenyekiti wa Kamati 
ya Public Investme nts Committee (PIC) ndio ata fanya kazi  kama  Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache 
Bungeni.  Mheshimiwa Spika nikikumbuka tulikuwa na mzozo mkubwa mpaka uamuzi ukaamua 
hivyo kwa sababu ilikuwa lazima kuwe na  Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache Bungeni .       
Mheshimiwa Spika tu mekubaliana nalo hilo na baada ya muda ilivyokuwa Mheshimiwa Nzai 
akafurushwa katika ofisi vile vile kina mama walikuja na wakasisitiza kwamba kiti cha Walio 
Wachache Bungeni  wapewe wao ndio mjadala tuliopitisha katika Bunge hili , mimi sina upinzani 
nao kw a hiyo nafasi hii twawapa rasmi kina mama pia napendekeza kutetea hadhi ya kina mama 
wapate uwakilishi wao katika Bunge hili ...  
(Applause)  
       Basi ningependa kuwaachia wao Mh eshimiwa Spika wana ile yaitwa Women caucus  
Mheshimiwa Spika wale watatuletea  kiongozi atakayekuwa ...  
(Applause)  
       Ni kiongozi wa sawa katika Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika wachaguane wenyewe 
Mheshimiwa Spika ...  
(Applause)  
       Mheshimi wa Spika watuletea kiongozi wa W alio Wachache Mheshimiwa Spika...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Duncan .  
       Hon. Onyango : Mhes himiwa Spika naona Kiongozi wa W alio Wengi ananipokonya hoja 
yangu Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi ombi langu ilikuwa ni kufanya  mabadiliko  hapa hapa ... 
(Applause)  
       Kwa kuwa ya Nzai hakukufan ywa caucus  hapa kwa hivyo twakuomba uamuzi tutaufanya 
hapa hapa mbele yako na usawa uonekane hapa hapa kama kila mtu anaona. A hsante.  
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes are you on a Point of order or on a P oint of information? 
Because Hon.  Abdallah Kas angamba is still making his submission. Yes continue Hon.  
Kasangamba . 
       Hon. (Mrs.)  Prischillah  Mumba : Point of information Mr. Speaker . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Prischillah Mumba yes allowed . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Prischillah  Mumba : Mhesh imiwa Spika a hsante sana kwa kuniona sehemu 
ambayo niko kwa sababu nimeshukuru kusikia kuwa Mheshimiwa Kasangamba amesema sisi 
ametupa privilege  Waheshimiwa kina mama tuweze kukutana sote na tuweze ku peana  jina 
ambalo sisi tumelipendelea ambapo ni wajibu w a hichi kiti tulipewa kwa sababu ndio tunajijua 
tuko chama kimoja hapa lakini tulisema kina mama kwa sababu ndio tuko wachache tukawa 
tumepewa hiyo fursa...  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you allow intervention from Hon.  Mary .  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Kasangamba:  I have a point of information . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Okay that is allowed but can you allow intervention from 
Hon.  Mary before you continue with your submissions. Yes Hon.  Mary .  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba 
utupatie tu dakika tano …  
(Applause)  
       Waheshimiwa wa mama tutoke pale nje tuje …  
(Consultations ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Enock Mwinga i have given directives that i just allow 
two directions then you will contribute thereafter .  
       Hon. Mwinga : It is a point of information . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Okay if it is a point of information .  
       Hon. Mwinga : Mimi sikubaliani na Mheshimiwa ambaye amesimama sa sa hivi akion gea ya 
kwamba W aheshimiwa wa mama wakutane sasa hivi ili waweze kupendekeza ni nani?        
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kwa maoni yangu naomba kiti hichi ambacho kimekuwa Kisauni na 
kikaweze kurudi Kisauni . Mheshimiwa Spika maoni yangu mimi ni kwamba...  
(Interru ption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you allow Hon.  Kasangamba ...  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Onyango : Point of information Mr. Speaker . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You are out of order ; both of you Hon.  Prischillah and Hon.  
Duncan , can you  resume your seat. Yes Hon.  Kasangamba . 
       Hon. Kasangamba:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ombi langu la kwanza ilikuwa kuwa 
turuhusu kina mama wachague lakini mpaka ieleweke Kiongozi wa W alio W achache ataongoza 
Jumba lote. Mheshimiwa Spika wao walikuwa  watoe mtu mmoja na  sisi kama wanachama wote 
tuna haki ya kupiga kura kwa sababu tunaona katika Katiba yetu hata yule Kiongozi wa akina 
mama  anapigiwa kura na wananchi wote na sio kina mama, vijana wala walemavu  pekee yake ili 
kumfanya huyu Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache awe kiongozi wa Bunge letu . Mheshimiwa Spika 
labda majina yapendekezwe kutokana na waheshimiwa kina mama wenyewe kwa sababu ni 
nafasi yao halafu sisi waheshimiwa wote tutapiga kura …  
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15 (Applause)  
       Halafu yule atashinda Mheshimiwa Spika ni k iongozi wetu sote na si wa  kuwahudumia 
jinsia moja pekee yake sisi wengine tutakuwa wanyonge kwa kumchagua kiongozi yule. 
Ahsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  You have made your submissions Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim, yes 
Hon.  Prischillah …  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon.  Prischillah is on the floor .  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika naona hapa ilikuwa 
navamiwa na ma neno yangu ilikuwa sijayamaliza; ah sante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kunitetea manake pingamizi zilikuwa nyingi sana ha pa sasa vile tume zungumza hapa 
waheshimiwa wenzetu wametupatia mwelekeo mzuri manake kivyovyote kiti hiki ni cha 
wamama mupende musipende … 
(Applause)  
       Mheshimiwa nampenda sana lakini na aniache kidogo tu nimalize … 
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Nasser, can you resume your seat Hon.  Prischillah .  
      Hon. Nasser  Rashid : Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiria Waheshimiwa ambao wako hapa we ngi 
ni wanaume na wametoa kiti hichi kwa heshima kwa wanawake wa Nyumba hii … 
(Applause)  
       Na ningependa Mheshimiwa aliyeongea hapa asiseme hivyo kwa sababu tunaweza chagua 
hapa na tukapiga kura hapa...  
(Applause)  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Hon.  Speaker  i withdraw Mr. Speaker is it equal now i 
withdraw...  
(Loud consultations)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order! Order! Hon.  Prischillah . 
       Hon.  (Mrs .) Prischillah  Mumba : I withdraw Mr. Speaker . 
(Laughter ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now can you allow both Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim and Hon.  
Kasangamba to place a point of order or a  point of information in that manner then to allow Hon.  
Prischillah Mumba to proceed thereafter. Yes Hon.  Abdallah Kasangamba . 
       Hon. Kasangamba:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kutokana na yale yaliotokea baina 
yangu na Mheshimiwa Fatuma Kushe kwa kuon yesha upendo zaidi mimi ninge pendekeza  
Mheshimiwa Fatuma Kushe awe Kiongozi wa Walio W achache … 
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim .  
       Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika....  
(Interruption ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes what is it Hon.  Nasser . 
       Hon. Nasser  Rashid : Kwa kuwa pendekezo  limetoka na ni lazima iambatane na kuunga 
mkono  basi nam uunga mkono  Mheshimiwa wangu Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni…  
(Laughter ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You can't bring another motion in a motion. Yes Hon.  Ahmed 
Ebrahim . 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
16        Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri katika makubaliano ya Bunge hili letu 
ni kwamba ikiwa yule ambaye atakuwa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya PIC ndio atakuwa Kiongozi 
wa Walio Wach ache nafikiria hivyo sasa nashangaa sisi itakuwa tumefuata  utaratibu . Kwa hivyo 
sijui kama ndio tutaamua nani ndio Mwenyekiti wa PIC hapa ndani ama Kamati?  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes can you allow Hon.  Prischillah to continue .  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Nakupenda Mheshimiwa Spika . 
(Laughter ) 
       Samahani a hsante Mheshimiwa Spika wajua ukimpenda mtu roho yapetapeta lakini 
nakupenda Mheshimiwa Spika kwani ni nini?  
(Applause)  
       Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunitetea ; anitetea manake ilikuwa mwanipinga 
nisisimame kuzungumza na amenipa nafasi hii kama mkubwa  wangu kwa hivyo nimesimama 
kusema taarifa  yangu kwa sababu ilikuwa mwapinga pinga hamtaki nizungumze yale yangu na 
nime itoa nikamuomba Mheshimiwa Nasser msamaha na ikiwa  nimemuomba Mheshimiwa 
Nasser msamaha basi mambo yanatakikana yaende vile inavyotakikana …  
(Applause)  
       Na sasa sisi twaendelea kusema kuwa twashukuru waheshimiwa wenzetu walitupa hiyo 
privilege ya kuwa hichi kiti kikae na waheshimiwa wa kina mama na tunawaomba waheshimiwa 
wenzetu ambao ni wenzetu wanaume watupe fursa hii kama vile Mheshimiwa Mary alivyosema 
twende nje kidogo manake jam bo hili hatuwezi kulifanya hapa.  Mheshimiwa Kasangamba 
amezungumza vizuri nimewapa nafasi tena yeye ames imama na kusem a nam pendekeza  
Mheshimiwa Kushe sasa Mheshimiwa Kasangamba wanikoroga tuwaache wenyewe twende kule 
nje twende tukafanye mapiku yetu tukirudi hapa turudi na Mheshimiwa wetu tafadhali 
Mheshimiwa Spika na yuke sisi tutasema kwa sababu itakuwa ni pendekezo let u sisi sote 
tumependa tungependa hata sisi mutuheshimu muchukue yule ambaye itakuwa tumewapa 
manake itakuwa tumewapa mtu ambaye tutajua kuwa tunaweza fanya kazi naye sisi hatutaki 
kuleta fujo wala sitofahamu  tena tunataka hii kitu  iishe  ili hili Bunge liru di pahali pa usawa na 
tuendelee na kazi zetu. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Duncan .  
       Hon. Onyango : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika tena narudia kama mwenye Mswada  
ningekuomba kwa heshima na taadhima jina  moja tayari lime pendekezwa  ningeomba 
upendekeze  jina la pili tuwapatie nafasi kina mama wawili watoke nje ikiwa maelewano 
yatashinda basi warudi tupige kura hapa hapa. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Paul Onje .  
       Hon. Onje:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I also stand here to propose my candidate … 
(Laughter ) 
       Hon.  Speaker my candidate because i still love Hon.  Maimuna and because now Hon.  
Members have decided that she has to vacate the office and am n ow proposing Hon.  Lucy Chizi 
Chireri …  
(Consultations ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Suleiman Omar Boma . 
       Hon. Boma:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii mimi napinga moja 
kwa moja kwa  Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache  kuondolew a… 
(Laughter ) 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
17        Ukikumbuka wakati tulikuwa na mzozo Mheshimiwa wetu ambaye ni Kiongozi wa Walio 
Wachache  alizirai akiwa hapa hapa …  
(Laughter ) 
       Na hivi sasa Mheshimiwa amefiliwa na tukisema twamuondoa huenda akapoteza maisha … 
(Laughter and applause) 
       Na mimi singependa tumpoteze Mheshimiwa kama huyo na ilhali tulipoteza waheshimiwa 
wa kike wawili nawaomba kwa heshima na taadhima mwezi huu tusipoteze Mheshimiwa 
mwengine wa kike …  
(Laughter and applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi nimesimama na kati ya wale watu wa mwisho wa kuzungumza kwanza zaidi nikuweza 
kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu ameweza kutupatia wewe kama kiongozi wa B unge hili na mara 
kwa mara ninaposimama hua na pongez a zile busara ambazo Mwenyezi Mungu ameweza 
kutupatia kutuwezesha kufika pale mahali ambapo tumefika leo pale na mawimbi mengi ambayo 
yalikuwa hapa lakini mara nyingi mawimbi yale umekuwa ukiweza kuyahim ili na kuongoza 
Bunge hili kuhakikisha kwamba amani imeweza kupatikane.  Kwa hivyo zaidi ni kuweza kuomba 
Mwenyezi Mungu aweze kukuj aalia busara zaidi ili kuhakikisha kwamba uongozi wa Bunge letu 
la Mombasa unaweza kutulia na kuwa imara ili kuhakikisha kwam ba wakaazi wetu wengi wa 
Kaunti ya Mombasa wanaweza kupata huduma bora ambazo zinatokana na sheria katika 
muongozo ambao unatoka kwa kiti chako. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Zainab Omar Mumba you were up …  
(Silence ) 
       You are okay, right now i call upon the motion mover that is Hon.  Duncan Onyango to reply 
to those particular comments, and I  give you a chance to reply to the M otion .  
       Hon. Onyango : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika mape ndekezo yangu 
kama nilivyosema awali kwamba tuto e majina ya waheshimiwa wawili halafu tuamue kwa 
pamoja atakayekuwa Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache Bungeni  na jina moja tayari limeshatajwa la 
Mheshimiwa Serah Nyamvula tulikuwa tunangoja jina lengine kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Onje 
amemtaja Mheshimiwa Lucy Chizi na hayuko Bungeni ningeomba tu simpatie mtu ambaye 
hayuko ndani ya Bunge ina maana hana haja na kazi. Kwa hivyo ningeomba jina la pili wataje 
halafu tupige kura kumchagua Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache Bungeni . Ahsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes what is it Hon.  Riziki Fundi . 
       Hon. Fundi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nafikiria unipatie nafasi kuweza 
kupendekeza  mtu ambaye anaweza kuwa  Kiongozi wa Walio Wachache Bungeni mimi 
ningependelea Beat rice K ai achukue kile kiti.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Hudson Karume . 
       Hon. Karume : Mheshimiwa Spika mengi yamesemwa na kwa kweli mumewapa 
waheshimiwa kina mama ruhsa ya kupendekeza  jinsia ya o lakini sisi pia kama waheshimiwa 
wenzao pia tunaweza pia kuwa pa ushauri  na na  kupendekeza  Mheshimiwa Beatrice Kai.  
(Applause)  
       Hon. Onyango : Mheshimiwa Spika....  
(Interruption ) 
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
18        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Duncan you know I have  given you the last opportunity 
and you are violat ing your own rights by not getting your act together . You need to make your 
submissions so well and you have made your subm issions based on these submissions  and i have 
heard your concerns and those concerns there  is the issue that ha s been address ed and i  also 
agree with you that once issue s have been raised that are touching  on one’s integrity the most 
Honorable  thing to do is to have a peaceful investigation without bringing any chaos . It is also 
important in informing M embers that we had such a similar case before this Honorable  House 
and it was also seen in this House the manner which was not frustrating a Hon.  Member , i know 
as per your feelings it is that this matter is overdue but it is important for us as much as we move 
to make certain decisions we  need to consider so many factors that surrounds the same matter 
and many issues have been raised , if there  is the said Hon.  Members need to be informed.       
This is due to the fact that there  are allegations that the said M ember had accepted to resign t hat 
cannot be approved by any other Member in this House;  two, the women caucus would have 
loved to be given an opportunity by this Hon.  House to make their own decisions so that they can 
later on bring the name in the Hon.  Assembly, three the number that has also been raised and 
touchy on this Hon.  House is that the sa id Member that is being referred to is currently mourning 
and again we were to receive an official communication to that effect, the fourth factor or point 
that has been raised is that becaus e the current office holder is from Kisaun i there's a support or 
proposal  that this particular decision be given the Hon.  Members from Kisauni …  
(Applause)  
       The fifth point ladies and gentlemen is that two names have already been proposed in this 
Hon. House ; now having considered all the five points raised really it is in the common 
knowledge that those are factors that you may not determine instantly but to give the room for 
further consultations amongst yourselves and i also agree with the Hon.  Memb ers that are raising 
that in terms of the caucus any parliamentary which in our case is the Assembly then you qualify 
because this is the only Assembly that all Hon.  Members are coming from one party so what you 
need to do is to focus yourself and i believ e right now you should be ready to  know that you have 
infact the C hair of that caucus should be known, the secretary should be known so that when 
time we are coming to this Hon.  House all those factors that you have raised yourselves are 
already well addre ssed. For that reason therefore it will better for me to determine and propose or 
put to question the names that you have given to me that are going now to hold that particular 
office , that to me would be injustice so as i move towards the conclusion of th is matter i would 
urge the Hon.  Members to make sure that all those particular factors that are read out must be 
considered together  also having it in mind that we have also the element of the PIC in the picture 
that we don't leave anything unattended and that the proposal that have now been made b ased on 
this particular motion that now appears as a prayer is that the next Hon.  Members to occupy the 
position of Minority seat position to determine within or not more than two possible sittings ; that 
is today in the afternoon and tomorrow in the afternoon . So as it is the names you can decide that 
name anyway but not instantly when the Speaker is actually sitting in the Assembly , as it stands 
in the motion it is  in the best interest of this Hon.  House th at pursuant to C hapter 6 of the 
Constitution the said Hon.  Member to vacate the office .  
(Applause ) 
       And now i put the  question that this particular M otion be approved by this Hon.  House as it 
is. 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
June 2 2, 2016                               COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        61 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
19 (Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen this House stands adjourned until today in the afternoon at exact ly 
2:30p.m. 
The H ouse rose at 10: 53a.m. 
 
       
                           
  
 