July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 17th July, 2019  
The House met at 10:20 a.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members let us be seated. Y es Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
MAINTENANCE  OF SEWER LINES BY YO UTH WITHIN THE ESTAT E 
 
Yes Hon. Samba? Please move the Motion . 
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker I wish to move the following 
Motion on maintenance of sewer lines by youth within the estate.  
 
(Hon. Samba move d the Motio n) 
 
THAT AWARE, the National Empowerment Authority Act , 2016 provides a legal 
framework for the state to take affirmative measures to ensure youth and marginalized 
groups access employment and economic empowerment;  
 
FURTHER AWARE, that Section 3 (c) of the  Act provides a framework to facilitate 
increased employment of Kenyans in both N ational and County g overnments;  
 
CONCERNED THAT, despite the bulging youth population, job opportunities are scarce 
and lack of jobs to the youth has led to increase in crimes  within the estates;  
 
COGNIZANT THAT, there are jobs within the County such as maintenance of sewer 
lines which can be performed by the youth to reduce unemployment amongst them ; 
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  

July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 The County g overnment to pro vide empl oyment to the youth within the W ards by 
employing them to take part in the maintenance of sewer lines, unblocking and cleaning 
drainage systems within residential areas.  
 
 I request Hon. Mgwisho to second.  
 
(Hon. Hamad Mgwisho second ed by nodding ) 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members. I now propose the question that 
the Motion by Hon. Tobias Samba on Maintenance of sewer lines by youth within the estates be 
considered by the House in the same terms as moved . 
 
 (Question proposed and agreed  to) 
 
 Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker , thank you very much once again. Mr. Speaker we are 
politicians and whenever we are looking for votes, we keep promising citizens of job creation 
and it is quite unfortunate or rather it has been a  fallacy that whenever we are campaigning we 
promise for job creation and then at the end of it we end up not creating even an employment to 
even a single youth.   
Hon. Speaker and that will come to haunt us sometimes ; when you go to the estates, 
when you t ake the walk around the estate you will find that some of the blocked sewer lines 
which maybe supposed if we could be having group s that are already there just to do the services 
and daily routine checkups there are some of issues which will not arise that  are hazardous to 
health.  
We are aware that the County government also has a D epartment that should deal with 
that effectiv ely but it is quite unfortunate... l ike for my case i have got instances whereby we 
have reported the block ed sewer lines and unheal thy environment that has been caused and 
sometime back I took even some of the Members to my W ard to go and witness. Am not 
advocating for my Ward Hon. Speaker but for the whole County ; if you go around the Wards 
you will find that our sewer lines are not up to date they are the systems which were there since 
colonial times and due to the increase of population I think they need a routine service and 
maintenance and it is in that regard that I would request that instead of us waiting for 
bureaucracy and the  long process that maybe required that you go through procurement process 
and there are some of the cases that always appear to be urgent and of an emergency  nature . It is 
that effect that I request this House to adopt this Motion that we give the youth wi thin the estates 
to maintain the sewer lines Hon. Speaker.  
Hon. Speaker we know that the g overnment cannot provide jobs for all of us because the 
country grows , it is the country that is full of entrepreneur s but the little that we can do  we 
cannot stop f rom doing I pray that and I request that those youth who are in our estates and in our 
villages to be considered first .Through that at least we will be keeping our youth busy and at the 
same time they will be having something in the ir pockets,  I now reques t the House to support 
this Motion so that it may be adopted as it is Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Tobias Samba. Yes Hon. Murfad?  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speake r I stand to support the 
Motion;   It is just re cently the Chairman Council of Governors His Excellency Oparanya did the 
same from each Ward from the Constituencies where he is the Governor of that C ounty he 
employed 50 from each W ard and in fact they graduated recently I think it was Monday or 
Tuesday last week they graduated about 5000 youth and were employed so as to help in the 
Wards . So Mr. Speaker what my brother Samba has just brought in we can even turn it in other 
language kazi mtaani  with the small fund that we get kazi kwa vijana  can be change d to kazi 
mitaani … 
 
(Applause)  
 
And if we employ 50 youth from each W ard to maintain that particular W ard Mr. 
Speaker more and more things will better than being maintained by people who are taken as 
casual s and they do  not come from that es tate, they come  from a different D epartment, they are 
sent there to work and do  not disappear  sometime so they  can be monito ring those youth from 
the same W ards so that we can know exactly when there are floods these youth will be used, 
when there  is anything within that  Ward it will be easier for us to get those youth . I know the 
Department is under staffed Mr. Speaker,  the Sewer and the Storm water D epartment is under 
staffed and we know the burden that the County has but if His Excellency Oparanya could do it 
why not u s 001 Mombasa  Mr. Speaker!  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you v ery much Hon. Amur. Yes Hon. Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I do support the Motion , as my just fellow Members 
have just  uttered  that we should  have our youth from the same estate to do the sewer problems 
because they  are the ones who are aware of it and we are going to create jobs there.  I do urge like 
now when the rains have started we will b e having these problems as the D epartment of water 
and sewerage the staff are not there we give our young youth the opportunity to do these jobs . I 
think our Mombasa is going to shine , it will have too many tourists coming in because we will 
not be having the floods every time we see in the TV. I do support the Motion. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Everylne Osongo?  
 
Hon. O nsongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity you have given me today. I 
appreciate I do support the Motion in that instead of the estate the  Hon. Member could h ave 
written the Wards because there are some W ards which do  not have the estate .  
Mr. Speaker it was just a request because it will be just concentrat ing on the estates but 
not all the W ards, so me I support the Motion in that there are so many young people that do  not 
have jobs and if the Motion will be passed I think they will be happy.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  I wish to inform the Member on the floor that estate simply 
means village or a formal r esidence of a given place so the Member was right using the word 
estate because it is more devolved than the words unit.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Everlyne O nsongo?  
 
Hon. O nsongo:  I think I will check my dictionary or he can also check his dicti onary 
then…  
 
(Laughter and Applause)  
 
 Just look at the dictionary and then you can define for us what the estate is?  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you can continue Hon. Osongo . 
 
Hon. O nsongo:  I think am through , I support the Motion . 
  
The Speaker  (Hon . Khatri) : Thank you Hon. O nsongo. Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza nataka nimpongeze Mheshimiwa 
Samba kwa kuleta hoja hii muhimu ; pili niweze kuwekeza mawazo yangu ka tika kuunga mkono 
hoja hii ama Mswada huu.  Kwanz a kuna mambo mengi ambayo yanahitaji utendakazi mashinani 
ikiwemo usimamizi wa mitaro kama alivyonukuu na wakati wa nyuma tulikuwa tunajadili jinsi 
tunavyoweza kusaidia vijana tukiweza kusaidia kitengo kile cha mazingira ku maintain  
mazingira , pia kule mashi nani na pia kuna majanga ambayo tumeyashuhudia wiki za nyuma 
kama vile yalikuwa Mikindani na kwangu Bamburi majanga ya moto na majanga mengine ya 
mafuriko.  Ni vizuri tuwe na vijana kama vile Mheshimiwa Amur ameweza kueleza kwamba 
Gavana Oparanya alikuwa na  makundi rasmi kutoka kila Wodi  na wakafany a mafunzo ili 
waweze kusimamia ile mipango ya msingi mashin ani. 
Nafikiri tukiomba katika hali hiyo ni kwamba kuna hitaji hivi sasa kwa sababu vitengo 
vyetu vya Kaunti  ya Mombasa havina wafanyi  kazi wa kutosha , mbali n a hivyo mara nyingi 
kunatokea uzembe na pengine ukosefu wa vifaa huenda ukafikisha wafanyi  kazi mashinani 
wakati kunahitajika na ukiangalia kila kitengo katika Kaunti  ya Mombasa hakuna magari ya 
kusafirisha manpower  ama wafanyi  kazi kwenda mashinani . Kwa hio  ni vizuri tuwe na kundi 
maalum ambalo limetambulika na liko kule kule mashinani ambalo litaweza kujumuikia mambo 
yote ya dharura ambayo yametokea  na mara nyingi tukileta Hoja kama hizi wataalam wa fedha 
husema kwamba hakuna pesa lakini  ifahamike kwamba asilimia 100 ya bajeti yetu huwa inaenda 
kusimamia majanga na mara nyingi tunavyoambiwa ile pesa huwa ni zaidi ya  millioni 100 na 
pesa hii mara nyingi imekuwa hata ikihitajika haipatikani.  
Kwa hivyo kama kutakuwa na vikundi ra smi kule chini mashinani ambavyo vitakuwa 
vinaweza kusimamia hali kama hizi, kusimamia mitaro yetu kwa sababu hivi sasa kumenyesha 
Mheshimiwa Spika ukitoka tu nje kila barabara imejaa maji na maji haya ndio yale ambayo 
yanafurika kwenye mitaro ya maji  taka na halafu yanafurika y anaingia kwenye majumba ya 
watu . Ni vizuri kama tungekuwa na vijana ambao wataweza kusimamia mambo kama haya, na 
iwe ni mfumo rasmi ambao tumewambata ili ifahamike kwamba kila Wodi  iko na watu ambao 
watasimamia mambo ambayo ni ya si ku kwa siku katika mashinani.  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 Kwa hivyo nataka nimuunge mkono Mheshimiwa Samba, ikiwezekana tunaweza kuomba 
ule mfumo wa Mheshimiwa Oparanya ili tuwe na vikundi rasmi ambavyo vitakuwa vinahusika 
na mambo ya mazingira, ya taka na pia kusimamia wakati majang a ya dharura wakati yametokea 
mitaani . Mheshimiwa Spika  naomba kuunga mkono , ahsante.  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro . Yes, Hon. Renson Juma?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . It is one of the Motion that is not just to be 
supported but  I want to support it and see that it requires immediate implementation not just 
supporting it because most of the youth that we have are now desperate as far as employment is 
concerned.  
The cultu re and tradition in the County government of Mombasa  has b een an issue of 
contractors ; big companies being given tenders and most of our youths do not have money to 
form registered companies, do not have the necessary know how’s . So it is high time that the big 
companies and the contractors be given the technical jo bs but those jobs that are within the 
locality of  the villages  they be given our youth because again they cannot compete for  tenders 
because they do  not meet the necessary requirements .  
 As Tobias Samba has articulated very clear it was tested the previous long  range 
there were some youths that were deployed and paid minimal money of five hundred per day, it  
is doable and it is started, the onl y thing is we want to keep the Motion on so that the youth in 
Mikindani, Jomvu, Miritini and whatsoever can enjoy whatsoe ver is within their localities.   
We have seen these companies that were formed ; the so called ‘company youths’ you see 
youths in Mikindani just idle, you see people from another Ward coming to your own area, it  is 
not acceptable. We want these youths within if they are in Likoni they get those job opportunities 
directly and we should not expose to what we call like companies, contractors whatsoever, it  is 
just a tender, youth volunteer they get money in the evening. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Mwaka Bakari 
Mwalundonda?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana . Napenda kuunga mkono hoja hii iliyoletwa na 
Mheshimiwa Samba wa Wodi ya Tudor  ambayo kwamba Hoja hii ni nzuri sana ama italeta natija 
kwa sababu vijana kweli wako mitaani na ni vijana ambao wako na ujuzi waku weza kusaidia 
jamii na kuweza pia kuwaungia makundi ambao kwamba kuwaletea kazi kwa vijana. Utaona 
kwamba kama Likoni kuna vijana ambao wanafanya kazi ya diver , ambao wame  create  tu kazi 
zao wenyewe kuweza kusaidia jamii a mbao kwamba kuna fuo za bahari  kule wanaweza kusaidia 
jamii wakati wa  siku za  mapumzi ko, ambao ni kujitolea tu .  
 Kuna vijana ambao pia kunapotokea hatari za moto vijana vile vile hujitolea kuweza 
kuokoa janga lile na baada ya pale wale vijana waregea tu mtaani ndiposa nau nga Hoja mkono 
iweze kupita Hoja hii ili iweze kutusaidia pia sisi viongozi kule mashinani kwa ajili ya kwamba 
hakuna kazi kwa vijana lakini sisi ka ma Mombasa Kaunti tukiipitisha Hoja hii tutaweza nasi 
kuboresha vijana waweze kupata ajira ndogo ndogo. Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Mughazo Nyache?  
 
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa  nafasi hii ya kuweza 
kuchangia . Mimi pia naunga mkono Hoja iliyokuja na Mheshimiwa Samba ni hoja nz uri sana .   
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6  Kupitia vijana wetu na pia nataka niseme shida ya kazi sana iko kwa vijana kw a hivyo 
hiyo ni moja wapo ya ku inua vijana kimaisha na pia kikazi , kwa hivyo pia mimi naunga mkono 
vijana wetu waweze kupata kazi kama hiyo ya kurekebisha hizo sewage  na pia itaweza kuleta 
natija katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa . Pia ningependa kuwaeleza Wabunge wen zangu hapa 
ndani waweze kuunga Hoja hiyo ni muhimu sana kwa sababu hizi sewage  zetu zinafurika kila 
mara na zikipata vijana kama hivyo itakuwa vizuri sana waweze  kuzirekebisha . Nimeunga 
mkono pia mimi Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Rama Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na ahsante zaidi kwa 
kumbukumbu la jina la mzazi wangu ; mara nyingi imekuwa utamaduni wa majina mawili, la 
kifamilia na la kuzaliwa. Mheshimiwa  Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono Hoja ya Mheshimiwa 
wa Tudor, Hoja hii ni Hoja bayana na viko vigezo tekelezi ambavyo kwamba Mheshimiwa Spika 
haya yangekuwa yako sambamba na tumepiga hatua . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika kwa mujibu wa kanuni za manunuzi 2015, serikali ilipeana 
mwelekeo ya kwamba katika maswala yote ya manunuzi vijana, kina mama na walemavu lazima 
wapatiwe asilimia  30, hali  kadhalika kanuni hii ilipeana nguvu k wa idara ya fedha kuweza 
kutengeneza kanuni ama policies  ambazo zitawezesha kutekeleza majukumu huku mashinani, 
moja wapo Mheshimiwa Spika idara ina uwezo wa kutengeza kanuni ambazo vijana hawa pasi 
ya kutokuwa na kampuni, bado wanayo  fursa ya kuhusika na k upata zabuni za kule mashinani 
kutekeleza majukumu bayana ambayo iko haja kutekelezwa kwa wakati unaofaa.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika hali  kadhalika katika kanuni za ubia ya serikali na watu binafsi ama 
Public and Private Partnership imepeana nafasi na nguvu ya kwamb a serikali iwe na utamaduni 
ama mienendo kuweza kuingiliana na vikundi ama watu binafsi katika utekelezaji wa majukumu. 
Kwa hili Mheshimiwa Spika serikali yetu Gatuzi inayo fursa na nafas i ya kutambua vijana 
mashinani ima kwa kupitia vikundi au wakiwa ka tika hali ya kibinafsi kuwahusisha na 
kuwezesha kama njia moja wapo kuwapatia ajira kutekeleza kazi nyenzo kule mashinani ili 
kuona wao wananufaika na maswala ya ajira , hali kadhalika huduma kabambe inapatikana katika 
serikali ugatuzi.  
Mheshimiwa Spika , vijana ni nguzo muhimu katika taifa na hali in avyokwenda kwa 
ukosefu wa ajira  imepelekea kupoteza nguvu zake kwa sababu imewalazimu kujihusisha na yale 
yasiostahiki ikiwemo utumizi wa mihadarati katika umri mdogo kwa kutokuwa na uwajibikaji na 
majukumu tekele zi. Hiyo ni kama moja wapo ya wao kupunguza msongamano wa mawazo, 
ambao sisi tukiwa watunzi sharia tuna kila sababu kuja na mbinu mwafaka zitakaz oweza 
kusaidia kuokoa jamii hii ; kwa sababu vijana wa leo ndio nguzo ya taifa na ndio viongozi wa 
kesho . Mheshimi wa Spika  tukiwa Bunge la vijana japo tunatamb ua uwepo wa wazee wetu na 
nina imani kwa sababu ya amri karibuni wataamua tu kuwaachia vijana wengine pia wapate 
fursa ili haya yanayostahiki na yanahusu vijana yaweze kuwa na nguvu na kuweza kutekelezwa 
bara b ara. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Juma Charles?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kulingana na Hoja 
iliyoingia Bungeni leo  kwanza ningependa kuunga mkono  lakini vile vile mbali na ku unga 
mkono ningeweza pia kuweka maoni yangu kuhusiana na H oja hii.  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Kwanza Hoja hii Mheshimiwa Spika inahitaji uhusiano wa Kamati kama nne ili kuweza 
kuwakilisha ; kama Hoja hii imekamil ika kwa upande wa utekelezaji  Kamati ya kwanza ni  
Utekele zaji inaongozw a na Mheshimiwa ambaye Naibu wake yuko hapa Mheshimiwa Rama  na 
vile vile na Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Kalume na Kamati ya pili a mbayo inahusika na hoja hii ni 
Kamati ya Vijana ambaye Mwenyekiti ndio ameleta hoja hii . 
Idara ya tatu ambayo Kamati yake ni  Ugatuzi  inahusiana na Mheshimiwa Thoya na vile 
vile Kamati ya mw isho ambaye ni Mhusika mkuu ni Kamati ya  Fedha  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
ambayo kwangu mimi hapo ndio kuna changamoto kwa sababu vijana wetu wanahitaji kulipwa 
pesa zao, maana ilikuja mfano  wa mazingira  hii Kamati inayoongozwa na Mheshimiwa Shebe, 
kwamba ilikuwa hatari yake mashinani kuweza kufukuzwa katika eneo lake kwa sababu ya 
kutolipwa kwa wafanyi  kazi amba o walifanya kazi fulani katika eneo lake ilikuwa idara husika 
ambayo anaongeza yeye kama Mwenyekiti.  
Kwa hivyo Kamati hizi zikiweza  kushikirikiana kutakuwa sawa kwa sababu kama vijana 
wetu wat apata kazi, kwa ushirikiano wa Kamati hizi tatu, mw isho kabisa itaishia upande wa 
Kamati ya  Fedha  kuhakikisha kwamba wataweza kulipa pesa za o. Sasa ile itavunja moyo vijana 
wetu na tungep enda ushirikiano mkuu baina ya Kamati hizi ziweze kukaa chini kuhakikisha 
kwamba kwanzia mwanzo hadi mwisho ili kazi hizi zizidi kuendelea kwa vijana wetu 
kuwahudumia kama inavyopaswa.  
Kwa hayo machache Mhesh imiwa Mwenyekiti ningeweza kuingiza katika kumbukumbu 
za Bunge hil i ya kwamba tunashirikiana kwa Kamati hizi nne ili kuhakikisha kwam ba vijana 
wetu wanafikiwa kama Hoja inavyoangaziwa. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Mwalimu?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika pia kwa 
kutambua jina la mzazi wangu ambaye ni Mwalimu Makarani , lau angeitwa Mheshimiwa 
Mgwisho basi ingekuwa ni mzazi wake ametambulika. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimeingia 
ndani ya Bunge hili na nimeshanga a Wahes himiwa wenzangu wakiunga mkono Hoja hii , hii ni 
hujuma na dharau kwa vijana wetu kuwapatia ati kazi ya kufukua choo cha m avi...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika tutafute mbinu mbadala ya kubuni kazi kwa vijana wetu pasi na hii ya  
kufukua c hoo; lau yasemekana ndani ya  Mombasa ama magazeti yakipata Hoja kama hii kuwa 
sisi Wabunge wa Mombasa kwa  umoja tumekubaliana kupitisha Hoja ya kuw apa vijana kazi ya 
kufukua choo . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sipendi kupewa taari fa. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Juma?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Ni vyema Mhe shimiwa ambaye anaongea at uambi e kazi ni nini? Kwanza  
kazi ni nini? Aelewe kazi ni nini? Sisi tunazungumzia kuhusu kazi na kazi ni ile ambayo mwisho 
wa kuisha ut apewa pesa. Kwa hivyo atujuze kwamba kazi ni nini kwanza.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fadhili Makarani continue.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika .  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 Mheshimiwa Spika ndani ya Hoja iko wazi na uk iniruhusu niisome kwa kimombo 
imesema; Maintenance of sewer lines unblocking and cleaning drainage system , imeanza na 
sewer lines  alafu ndio ikaenda kwa maintainance ya drainage .  Mimi naomba tu aliyeleta Hoja 
hii aweze kuirudia…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
          The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes H on. Juma?  
  
          Hon. Thoya:  I think Hon. Fadhili Makarani is trying to skip this, what is employment ? 
kazi ni nini ? You are just going back to read thi s, what is employment?  Kazi ni nini?  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Juma , maybe you may answer for  him that, may be 
you may explain to him what you want to say.  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Kitu ambacho nilikuwa nimejaribu aelewe, yeye amesema hii kazi ni ya 
kufukua mavi, ni ya kutoa nini lakini kuna watu ambao hii kazi wanaifanya kila siku na 
wanapata mshahara…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ndio mimi ni kawa nataka yeye aniambia kazi ni nini na ile kazi a mbayo yeye angependa 
sisi kama Wabunge wa hapa tuwatengezee wale vijana mbali na hii ya kufukua mavi, yeye 
mwenyewe ni kazi gani kwa sababu  Samba amekuja na hii na tunaiona kwamba k una watu 
ambao ni kazi yao kila siku wanalipwa lakini yeye ameona kwamba kuna kazi ambayo ni nzuri 
zaidi pengine ile kazi nzuri zaidi ya wale vijana ni waje wakae pale katika ile meza yeye aende 
nyumbani, hiyo pia ni nzuri.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Juma I think you can withdraw those words because 
you are not the one who elected him , so please j ust withdraw those words then.  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Ninatoa, ninatoa lakini bado nikiwa ninatoa nataka asimame atuambie ile 
kazi ambayo ni nzuri zaidi.  
 
The Spe aker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Juma. Yes Hon. Charles Juma?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ta arifa pia ningependa 
kumuarifu Naibu wa Spika katika Bunge hili kwamba tunae mfano katika miongoni ya Hoja hii 
kazi hizi katika Bun ge hili Mheshi miwa Ali Mohamed Shomari alikuwa mmoja  wao wa kazi hizi 
na sasa hivi ni Mbunge wa Wodi ya Magogoni , kwa hivyo kazi ni kazi . Mheshimiwa Shomari 
ametoka katika kazi hizi na leo hii ni Mbunge ambaye amechaguliwa na wananchi kutokana na 
kazi yake kupitia Hoja ya leo. Ahsante sana . 
 
(Applause)  
 
Na nafahamishwa pia Mheshimiwa Lucy Chizi Chireri pia nae alikuwa mmoja wapo wa 
kazi hizi, kwa hivyo tunayo mifano katika Bunge hili .  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 Kwa hivyo kazi ni kazi na wote wanaotokea chini miaka ijayo inayokuja Bung e hili 
litajaa na watu wanaofanya kazi za kutoa mavi katika Bunge hili Mombasa yetu. Ahsante sana.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Makarani you may continue.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika nafurahi kusikia Waheshimiwa historia yao ambayo wamepitia katika kazi hii.  
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama kutaka tu kutoa ushauri katika Hoja hii ni kuwa   
tungetafuta mbinu mbad ala ya Hoja hii  isiwe tu tumeweka maana katika Hoja hii imeelezea zile 
kazi imeenda mahsusan kwa kazi ambazo tunataka tuwape vijana wetu. Mheshimiwa Spika 
Katiba yetu iko wazi, imeelezea ni kazi gani vijana wanastahiki kupata ndani ya Kaunti ; kazi 
ambazo hazikutajwa na kazi ndani ya Kaunti ni kazi nyingi .  
Mimi ningeomba kama Wabunge wenzangu tungesimama pamoja kuta ka kujua vijana 
wetu wa Mombasa  je wanapata kile kilicho chao na ni vijana gani wanapata kile  kilicho chao? 
Kama ilivyosema Katiba yetu Mheshimiwa Spika na vile vile kama Wabunge tusimameni kidete 
kuhakikisha kuwa chote kilicho cha vijana kiende kwa vijana na vijana wetu wanaweza kifaidi 
na sitaki Mheshimiwa aliyeleta Hoja hii aone ni kuwa ni kama na hujumu lakini ni kuwa najaribu 
kutetea hadhi ya  Nyumba yetu hii na hadhi ya Kaunti yetu na vijana wetu . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika  kuna Mheshimiwa ambaye aliondoa lakini hatujui alitoa nini , sijui 
alitoa pesa maana alisimama akasema yeye ametoa, ilikuwa twataka atoe yale maneno 
aliyotamka kwa ku sema vijana waje wakae hapa . Mheshimiwa Spika nachelea isije vijana 
wakasikia kuwa tumewafungulia kazi za kufukua choo na wengi wetu tunatoka katika mitaa ya 
mabanda, vyoo vyetu ni vile vyoo vya mashimo vyakutumbukiza ukiwa j uu unasikia chini 
imegonga chini . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika hizi sewer line s zimepita ni chac he kwa hivyo nakuomba kupitia 
uongozi wako ikiwa tutarudi tu itengeze Hoja hii vizuri ipate muelekeo katika Nyumba yetu hii 
tutakuwa ni we nye kuwasaidia vijana wetu na vijana wetu watashukuru .  Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwa sababu nimeambiwa niseme ni kazi gani ambazo natakikana niziseme, tumeona Hoja 
ambayo inakuja…  
 
(Applause as Hon. Chireri  enter ed Plenary ) 
 
Hoja ambayo Mheshi miwa Spika nafikiri mwenyewe atajua amekaribishwa kwa malengo 
gani Mheshimiwa Lucy Chizi. .. 
 
(Laughter)  
 
  Mheshimiwa Spika kuna Hoja ambayo Kiranja wa Bunge anataka kuileta ; hali ya kuinua 
michezo ndani ya Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa . Siku hizi michezo inalipa na ikiwa tutafuata yale 
ambayo Kiranja a nataka kuyaleta pamoja na hiyo Kamati yao tumesikia huko karika corridor,  
Mheshimiwa Spika itainua hadhi na hali ya vijana wetu pakubwa na vile vile tukihakikisha 
vijana wanapata kazi Mombasa itabadilika na hadhi zetu t ukienda mashinani  itakuwa ni hadhi za 
ki uhakika na za kuheshimika.  
Kwa hayo mengi nawaomba ndugu zangu tuweze kukubaliana kurekebisha  Hoja hii ili 
tutakapotoka hapa tukienda kule nje vijana wetu watakuwa ni wenye kufurahi.  Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Kha tri): Thank you Hon. Makarani. Yes Hon. Ochieng?  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I want to join fel low Members in 
supporting this Motion.  Mr. S peaker we are a ll cognizant of the fact that youth forms the largest 
constituency of the  total population of this Country ; whenever we talk of radicalization and 
violent extremism, Mom basa County is not an exemption . Mr. Speaker the rate of drugs and 
substance abuse  is also alarming in the County … 
  
(Applaus e) 
 
 All these are attributed to unemployment Mr. Speaker . Article 55 (c) states very 
clear ly that the state shall take measures including affirmative action to ensure that youth access 
employment  Mr. Speaker . So Mr. Speaker if measures are not taken, our yout h will fall prey to 
these social vices . Thank you I support.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Mwende?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Mimi nasimama 
kuunga mkono Hoja hii iliyoletwa na Mwenyek iti wangu wa vijana.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimeona 
Waheshimiwa wengi wame  focus  sana na mambo ya sewer  lakini pia Mwenyekiti wangu 
ameweza kusema juu ya drainage . Mheshimiwa Spika uk iangalia sana sana wakati wa mvua 
hata nasikia sasa hivi inanyesh a, Mombasa kuk inyesha kidogo inakuwa barabara hazipitiki na 
kama tungekuwa na vijana mashinani ambao wanasafisha hizi drainage  kila wakati haya 
mafuriko mengi hayangekuwa Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Kwa hivyo naomba Waheshim iwa wenzangu tuweze kuunga hii Hoja mkono kwa vile 
vijan a wetu wengi wanakaa maskani bila ajira na hii itawapatia kitu kidogo a ngalau  cha kupeleka 
nyumbani jioni. Hivyo basi namuunga sana  mkono Mwenyekiti  wangu na sitarajii kama kuna 
Mheshimiwa yeyote ambaye ana pingamizi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwende. Yes Hon. Mwawasi?  
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . Mimi 
nimesimama kuiunga mkono Hoja hii kwa sababu hata wakati wa kampeni tuliahidi vijana 
vibarua na ikiwa tumeweza kuleta mjadala  kama h uu katika Bunge letu la Mombasa  ni sawa 
tuunge mkono . Kitu cha kwanza kuunga mkono ni kwa sababu ukiwa uko mashinani 
hakutakuwa na sababu ya kusema ya kwamba zile kazi haziwezi kufanyika, tunazungumzia 
mambo ya hiyo mitaro lakini najua mvua ikiisha  kuna mambo pia ya takataka, kwa hivyo 
tutaingia kwa hiyo lakini hivyo vibarua lazima tuviwekee mikakati ya kwamba mvua ikiisha 
hawa vijana wataendelea kwa sababu kusafisha mji, nasikitika mimi kwa sababu wafanyikazi wa 
environment  ama Idara  ya Mazing ira wao huwa wanaangalia sana sehemu za mjini hawaangalii 
sehemu zile ambazo sisi tunazotoka kuna vijana, tunalipa ule ushuru ambao watu wa mjini 
wanalipa l akini huduma kutufikia ni shida . 
Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono kwa sababu najua watu wetu wataweza kun ufaika, 
vijana wetu wapate ajira na wapate usafi wajihisi kama wale wengine ambao wako mjini wajue 
ya kw amba ugatuzi  unafanya kazi mashinani. Hivyo basi  huu ni mfumo ambao tunasema 
huduma mashinani na vijana wetu waweze kupata hizo ajira. Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwawasi. Yes Hon. Said Omar?  
 
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 Hon. Ramla Said : Shukran sana kwa kunipa nafasi hii Mheshimiwa Spika. Nataka 
kuunga Hoja hii kwa sababu ni Hoja nzuri ambapo vijana wengi hawana makazi na kazi ni k azi, 
na nina hakika vijana hawatalazimishwa kufanya kazi kama hii, kutakuwa na mikakati ambayo 
mtu ambaye yuko tayari kufanya kazi kama hii ya kusafisha drainage  ndio akifanya, afanye 
kuwa yeye mwenyewe ametaka. Pia ningemkumbusha Mheshimiwa Spika kuwa as ilimia tano ya 
kazi kwa w alemavu ; huu Mswada  ukipita naomba tuwafikirie, kuna walemavu ambao si  sana, 
wana ulemavu wa  kusikia ama ana jicho moja haoni ndio hao kidogo wako capable  ya kufanya 
kazi kama hizi…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa hivyo tusiwasahau. Kwa hivyo nau unga mkono h uu Mswada . Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ramla. Yes Hon. Prischillah Mema 
Mumba?  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Hata mimi naona watu wanajisifu na mimi 
pia najisifu kwa sababu jina la Mema ni la ngu, lakini la Mumba ni la mume wangu na mimi 
namsifu mume wangu kwa kumtambua leo…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Niko hapa kusimama kuunga mkono kidete Hoja hii 
iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Tobias Samba na tumeshukuru sana Mheshimiwa Tobias Samba  kwa 
sababu kwa muda wa mwaka mzima ... na sisi Waheshimiwa katika Bunge la Kaunti tunajitahidi 
kufanya majukumu yetu katika Bunge hili lakini kule mashinani kuna kitengo ambacho bado 
tuliyochaguliwa kinateteleka, ambacho hiki kitengo ndio kitatugusia katika kazi hizi ambazo 
zimeinuka hivi sasa katika Mswada wa leo. Kusema ukweli ajira ni chache, ajira hakuna na 
vijana wengi walioko mashinani h ivi sasa wanatungojea sisi tuli ochaguliwa tuwabunie ajira ; na 
hii ni njia moja ambayo ikiwa huu mfano kikweli Mheshi miwa Spika ..., ikiwa kikweli  
utatekelezwa na uwezo kufaulu  hii ni njia moja ya kurahisisha njia zetu za kuweza kutamani hili 
Jumba tena hapa. Kwa sababu ikiwa grupu ya vijana itapata kandarasi hii, kila grupu haitakosa 
vijana chini ya 15 kufika 20 Mheshimwa Spika.  
 Kwa hivyo tayari hata uk ipewa kandarasi moja tu katika Wodi yako ya vijana hapa 
utakuwa umebeba zaidi ya vijana 20 ama 30 kwa wakati mmoja kufanya kazi pengine wapewe 
kazi ile ya usafi kwa mwaka mzima  itakuwa wewe wam ekupunguzia pressure  kubwa sana ya 
ajira mitaani. Na hali pia watakuwa wanaweka mazingira safi na wanaweka usafi.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika  jambo hili Mheshimiwa mwenzetu a najaribu kutusaidia 
katika hali ya kuwa ikiwa litatekelezwa hili jambo, hata pressure sisi Waheshimiwa itakuwa 
imetuishia katika kazi zetu lakini leo ukarudi mashinani na usikie vilio vilivyo kule Mheshi miwa 
Spika utatusikitikia sisi Waheshimiwa wa Kaunti . Kwa sababu kweli changamoto  kubwa hivi 
sasa tuko nayo ni ajira na vijana wengi h apa hatuwezi kuwaweka wote katika kazi kwa sababu 
wanaotoka ni kidogo wanaotaka zile nafasi ni wengi. Kwa hivyo hii itakua imetubebea nambari 
kubwa kwa haraka sana.  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa jambo hili  kweli litapita leo na ninajua Waheshimiwa 
wenzangu tutali unga mkono lipite, tuhakikishe liwe ni jambo la kwanza tulifuatilizie mpaka 
tuhakikishe tumeona limefanyika…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Hata kama ni kulivalia njuga, hili tulivalieni njuga kwa sababu tu najua umuhimu wa ajira 
mitaani ; hayo mambo mengine ambayo tunayozungu mza ya malipo, ya nini, wacha yaje baadae 
tutarudi hapa sisi wenyewe kujua tutakwangurana vipi mpaka tuhakikishe wamelipwa. Lakini 
kwanza hili jambo liwe mitaani ili tuweze kuonekana majukumu yetu. Mheshimiwa Spika niko 
hapa kum  salute Mheshimiwa Samba amet upa jambo la kuinua migongo yetu kule ambako 
tunakotoka na tunamuombea Mungu azidi kusukuma jambo hili ili liweze kufaulu. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members. Yes Hon. Mwaka Juma Zahoro?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Zahoro:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this chance . I am here 
to support the Motion. Mr. Speaker Sir you find that the largest population are the youth ; 60 per 
cent of the youth are unemployed , unblocking and cleaning of drainage system s will create job  
opportunit ies for thes e youth who are unemployed. You find that Mr. Speaker this drainage 
system will enchance clean environment and we know that, that is a basic need that every place 
and every human needs to have a clean environment.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, aware of the Millen ium Development Goals, Goal No.6 which states 
that clean water and sanitation ; you find when these sewers and the drainage systems are clean 
we will get clean environment and sanitation. You will find that Mr. Speaker also the Standard 
Millenium Developmen t Goals No.3 which talks about good health and well being, you find that 
the cleaning and unblocking of th e sewerages will enhance these development goals which 
Kenya is trying towards to achieve. So with those remarks Mr. Speaker, I beg to support the 
Motion. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwaka Juma Zahoro. Yes Hon. Juma Boy?  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker for according me the opportunity. I had no 
intention to speak but Mr. Speaker I have a concern that the Members hav e not yet grasped the 
Motion but you will give the Mover of the Motion an opportunity to respond. But I feel that the 
essence of the Motion is not actually job opportunies to the youth but actually job opportunites to 
the youth within the estates. To my co nstruction of this Motion is that the Motion provides that 
the County to pass job opportunies of maintenance and unblocking seweges to the youths that are 
within the estate.  
Mr. Speaker for instance I live in Baraka Estate as a youth, so I am supposed wher e there 
is a pr oblem on sewerage or unblocking  I should be given a first priority as a youth to unblock 
that. So that is my construction of the Motion and I think the concerns also raised by the Deputy 
Speaker that this County should shy away from passing  such Motions such that in the view of the 
public they will see that we are demeaning them. But I think it is not about the status or the 
reputation of the job as per this Motion, essentially it is on Article 10, the elements of devolution, 
that the youths  in that estate should be given an opportunity where there is a problem also to take 
part in the solution of the problem.  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13  So I think that is the main catch in this Motion that youth should be given  opportunity 
within the estates ; It suffices to say  that if I co me from Tudor as a youth I should be given the 
opportunity or it is my right to clean Mwakirunge, but this specific Motion talks about the youth 
within that particular estate. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
Hon. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Boy. Yes Hon. Oyu gi? 
Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for the first time referring me to Hon. Oyugi, 
thank you. Mr. Speaker Sir first I want to support this Motion, I am not only supporting the 
Motion, I am supporting the Motion with facts . Mr. Speaker  let us look at the essence of 
devolution, the main essence of devolution is to give opportunity to the people who are on the 
ground because it is flowing from up downwards . And therefore when we say today that we are 
giving the opportunity to t he youth who live within the estate we are actually supp orting one of 
the functions of devolution. Secondly, let us look at health, and in this sense we shall be using 
one stone to kill more than seven birds. I want to clarify myself so that I can be well  understood ; 
we have talked about devolution, I am a lso talking about the issue of health within our estates…  
 
(Applause)  
 
As you know health is very important to us and by doing that defini tely we shall be 
improving the health environment around us Mr. Spe aker. Thirdly,  Mr. Speaker it is 
unemployment ; you will find that the youths are the most affected when it comes to the issues of 
unemployment and we have been making noise in this House time and again about the 
opportunities to b e provided to the youth. So this one will be one of the ways of trying now to 
solve that problem , partly if we do that.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, another bird which will be killed by the same stone when you look at the 
population of the youths  they make up to 60 per cent of the country , and therefore by giving 
opportunity to them to do this particular work we shall be actually reducing unemployment 
issues in our country.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir the last bird that will be killed by this stone is crying an ethical activit y 
surrounding our area. ; when th ese youth are given th ese opportunities I am sure that we are 
going to cut down the rate of crying , we are also going to make these youth busy and by making 
them busy they will not find time to involve themselves in this petty u nethical crime like pick - 
pocket ing around and other issue Mr. Speaker Sir.  
I stand to support this particular Motion that it must be given time so that it c an flow and 
actualize what the Motion is about. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim . Yes Hon. Mueni Mukavi?  
Hon. Members I th ink we have some guests with us ; we have Hon. Abbas , Speaker 
Garissa and Hon. Florence , the Speaker Machakos and Hon. Wahome , Speaker Nyandarua and 
we have other guests with them as well. Hon. Spea kers welcome to Mombasa County. Karibuni 
sana.  
 
(The guests  at the public gallery  rose and bowed before the House)  
(Applause)  
 
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14  Yes Hon. Rosemary Mweni Mukavi , you may continue?  
 
Hon. Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me thi s chance to contribute in this 
Motion . Mr. Speaker I want to support this Motion fully ; yesterday I had a very interesting 
incident  when I was going home near my Ward Kongowea . Mr. Speaker, there was a sewer line 
and it rained yesterday and it had a lot of water and I fell down there and I had to seek help of 
two youthful men to lift me from that water.  Mr. Speaker they asked me a very interesting 
question ; mother why don’t you give us a job to do th ese sewer lines for you people? And I am 
so happy this has be en brought forward Mr. Speaker , I hope it is not going to be put to the graves 
of forgotten  but it is going to be Implemented . We need to do something about this Mr. Spea ker 
and I want to support this Motion fully brought forward by Hon. Samba. Than k you Mr. Speaker . 
 
(Applause)  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri ) exited the  Chair ) 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Samba? Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipatia fursa hii na mimi 
kuweza kuweka maneno yangu. Mheshimiwa Spika ya kwanza kwa ruhusa ya mwenye kuleta 
huu Mswada  nilikuwa naomba mwanzo kusema kuwa naunga mkono h uu Mswada  kwa njia ya 
marekebisho . Mheshimiwa Spika tukianga lia huu Mswada  hapa kwenye  maombi  yake anasema 
kuwa the County government to provide employment ; hii ikionekana tayari itaonekana kuwa 
tumeongeza wage bill  yetu. Hivyo basi  namuomba mwenye kuleta h uu Mswada  atafute neno 
ambalo litaingia hapa kuonyesha kuwa...maanake kusema kuwa ku employ  tayari h izi pesa 
Mheshimiwa Mheshimiw a Spika ziko za  kufanya hii kazi lakini ziko kwa njia ambayo ni ya 
contract za kupawa watu .  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa naomba a ende atafute njia ya kuileta ionekane 
kuwa…kwa sababu hii kazi inaenda kwa  msimu  na itakuwa si kazi ya  wakati wo te ama 
kuchukua mwaka mzima kuwa hii kazi inafanyika . Hivyo basi  naomba twende atafute neno 
ambalo ataweza kuweka badili ya employment  ni kupawa ka ma vijana  wapatiwe priority ya hizi 
kazi zikitokea na shida ambayo tuko nayo ni kusema kuwa vijana  wanapatiwa kampuni 
zinazofanya hizi kazi u taona mwenyekazi ni mtu kutoka Wodi  nyengine kwa mfano anatoka 
Magongo halafu anakwenda kama ameingia Jomvu anachukua watu wa Magongo kwenda 
kufanya kazi Jomvu.  
Kwa hivyo itataka kila Wodi iandikishe  vijana wake, kila Wodi  iwe ita andikisha  vijana  
halafu tuangalie tutas aidiana namna gani tena kwa sababu h uu Mswada  watu wanatafuta kuingia 
ndani ya nyumba ukiin gia kwenye nyumba unatafuta njia yoyote aidha uingie kwenye mlango 
ama disrisha ama uingie kwa sakafun i bora uingie ndani Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo 
twasema bora kazi ni kazi kama itakubalika Mheshimiwa Spika mwenye kuleta Hoja hii aende 
abadilishe ili t uweze kuendelea nayo . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . Before I call 
the mover to respond I take this opportunity to call Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri as she was 
mentioned for h er at least put an input. Yes Hon. Lucy?  
 
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 Hon. Chireri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Ingawaje nimechelewa lakini nimefika.  
Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza ningeanza kusema ya kwamba moja kwa moja mimi naunga mkono 
Hoja hii ili oletwa mbele yetu na k umpongeza Mheshimiwa aliyeleta Hoja hii , nasema shukran 
sana.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimezungumzwa ama nimesemwa kam a siko lakini kulingana na hii 
Hoja ili oko hapa mbele yetu inadhihirisha ya  kuwa nilifanya kazi na nimeingia katika daftari la 
kumbukumbu Mheshimi wa Spika ndani ya Mombasa Kaunti ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika nikikuregesha nyuma 2007 enzi hizo zilikuwa ni enzi za Council , 
ugatuzi  ulikuwa ha ujaanza ; naona Mheshimiwa Maimuna akiwa ni shahidi akiwa Mwenyekiti  
wa Mazingira  nilikuwa ba do ni  kijana , naona ile kukuambia kuwa nimeingia katika daftari la 
kumbukumbu miti yote ambayo munaiona Kaunti  ya Mombasa ile ya maua ilichimbwa katika 
mashimo ambayo yalikuwako ni saruji tupu , naona Mheshimiwa Maimuna akiongoza Council  
hapo zam ani tuliweza kuchaguliwa kama vijana  tukaingia Kaunti ya Mombasa tukapanda hii 
miti. Huwa najivunia sana Mheshimiwa Spika , nikitembea ni kiona hii miti yote ya Mombasa 
Kaunti niliipanda mimi kwa hivyo ninajivunia sana.   
Tukiingia kwa suala hili Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza tumesema  vijana, tuko na permanent  
wanafanya kazi lakini huwa tunatia msukumo zaidi tukiingiza vijana . Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kusema ukweli wale ambao wanafanya kazi umri wao pia si umri wa kuwa watakuwa 
wasukumana na yale mambo ya sewerages , wale wanahitaji nguvu mpya na nguvu mpya ni 
lazima tu kumbuke vijana wetu. Tunaambiwa ujana ni moshi huenda ukapita hata mimi nilikuwa 
kijana wakati huo sasa hivi Mheshimiwa Spika naz eeka ama nimezeeka .  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ni  lazima hawa vijan a wetu katika Wodi , maanake kazi 
hizi zitafanyika katika Wodi  zetu tuweze kuwatambua na kuwa motisha vijana wetu. Hii kazi si 
rahisi huwa inataka kuvumilia Mheshimiwa Spika k wa hivyo vijana wetu pia wanataka kazi 
ambazo pia zitawawezesha kujikimu kimaisha. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Lucy Chizi . I now call upon the 
mover of the Motion to respond after hearing the senti ments from the Hono urable Members. Yes 
Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . Let me take  this opportunity to thank all 
Members who have contributed both positiv ely and negatively towards the Motion but it is 
fortunate that majority ar e in support of the Motion . Hon. Speaker there are some issues that 
raise  concern s; it is quite unfortunate  that whenever we are debating Motions in the House and 
when the Speaker leave s the premises you see Hon. Membe rs are in a hurry going after the 
Speaker , what they forget to understand is that a Motion will b e only adopted after voting. A 
Motion cannot be adopted in the House through debates so it is high time Hon. Mem bers we are 
here to debate the Motion then at the same ti me we vote for it.  
Hon. Speaker there is a concern that has been raised to me , they are genuine beca use 
everyone is supporting the Motion or the concern s of Hon. Hatimy that I should look for a word 
instead of provide employment to youth , that  I should co me up with another word . Maybe he 
could come up with the better word because to me I thought the research that I did provide the 
better term . So maybe if we can pass  it with amendment of which I am not sure where I will get 
that word , maybe I request hi m if he had that word so th at when we are leaving this Hon ourable  
House we should know what we will replace with it.  
July 17 , 2019                             CO UNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           61 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So you are requesting that we do  not put the 
question now until you will amend that part or what is yo ur request to the House?  
 
Hon. Samba:  My request is that you do  not pose a question; you will pose the question 
after the amendment has been ma de because this is a very good Motion that touches  on the  
majority of us and what I have come to realize Hon. Speak er is that birds of the same feathers 
flock together . We all understand what we want and we are all understand where we are heading 
to so I would request that you may pose a question maybe next time provided that you shall 
allocate  time maybe in the afternoon or  the day that you shall allocate. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Samba. Hon. Members the 
question to this Motion will come in the afternoon or the voting of this Motion will come today 
in the afternoon after the Hon. Member brings the amended version. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
There being no other Business the House stands adjourned until today 17th at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11:27 a.m. 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     