May 2 5, 2017                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               6 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thur sday, 25th May, 201 7 
The House  met at 2:37p.m. 
(Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Patrick  Siminyu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Siminyu ): Memb ers you may sit down. Yes, Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
 Hon.  Onje . 
 Hon. Onje:  Thank you Hon. Speaker I have a statement . My statement is 
concerning misuse of inspectorate vehicle in Junda Ward Mishomoroni.  
(Hon. Onje moved the Statement)  
 Hon. Speaker  I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee on Administration 
of County Security whether he is aware that the Inspectorate vehicles are being used by 
persons who a re not employees of the County government of Mombasa, to hara ss the 
residents of Junda Ward and the specific measures th at will be taken by the County 
government to remedy the situation.  
 Bwana Spika niki rudi kutaka  kufafanua zaidi hii ni kitu ime fanyika kwa mara ya 
tatu na wale ambao wanakuja wakitumia gari yetu ya Inspectorate wanavaa kirai a hawavai 
zile sare za Inspectorate  lakini inasemekana ni polisi lakini ikiwa wanatumia magari zetu za 
Inspectorate  kuja kuchapa wananchi viboko na kuwapiga si  vizuri si vyema . Mimi kama 
Mwakilishi wa eneo la Junda  naomba k itengo husika  waangalie ni kina nani wanafanya hio 
kazi na ninajua ya kwamba Inspectorate  Chairman  hawezi kukosa kujua ni kina nani 
wanafanya hio kazi maana yake kila mara gari ikitoka kwenda k ufanya kazi lazima kuna duty 
au assignment amba yo wanapewa waweke sahihi ijulikane hio gari inakwenda kufanya kazi 
sehemu gani.  
 Mimi sitaki kusikia tena maana yake huu ni wakati wa siasa na kila mwananchi 
anakubaliwa kuuza sera zake ama kuunga mkono mtu y eyote sitaki nione tena wanakuja 
kuchapa watu bila makosa yeyote , sheria ni kama kwamba una makosa unachukuliwa 
unapelekwa polisi kisha baadae unapelekwa kotini kwenda kujitetea mwenyewe lakini wale 
sheria ambayo wanachukua  mkononi kwenda  kuchapa watu vibo ko si vyema na mimi nikiona 
hiyo kitu ikiwa bado itakuwa inaendelea mbele itabidi ni  mobilise  watu wangu na hata  kama  
hiyo gari tuzingire tujue ni kina nani , hata kama ni kufanya nini tutafanya kwa sababu 
wanafanya yale ambayo hayafa i, mimi kama Mwakilishi naomba nipate kujua vizuri kutoka 
kwa K amati husika. Ahsante sana.  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Siminyu ): Thank you Hon.   Onje, there is no need to 
take action by your own you have done  the right thing to bring it to this House and anybody 
from the Committ ee of Justice and L egal Affairs?  
(Silence ) 
 Any Member?  
(Silence ) 
 I need a report on Tuesday afternoo n on the same, Clerk ? 
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Mary Akinyi . 
 Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir I would like to table a 
statement on status of the ECD teacher’s job application s.  
(Hon.(Ms.) Akinyi moved the Statement)  
May 2 5, 2017                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               6 2 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  Mr. Speaker I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee on Early Childhood 
Education , Children and Vocational Training whether he is aware of the short listing of 
successful candidates or ECD teachers by the Department of Education , Children and 
Environment to the aforesaid positions, considering that it has been more than two months 
since the initial application date.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir it is almost three months  since there was a recruitment vacancies  for 
the ECD teachers and since then th ese ECD teachers have applied  but up to now we have 
never heard from anywhere whether they have been shortlisted or no t, that is why I wanted to 
know from the Chairperson of Early Childhood whether these teachers who applied have 
been shortlisted or not. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Siminyu ): Do we have the Chair of the Committee of 
Early Childhood Education?  
(Silence ) 
 A Member?  
(Silence ) 
 There is no Member?  
(Silence ) 
  Then I direct the Committee and Hon. Mary I give you that obligation to forward 
that information to the Chair of the Committee of Education that this House have directed we 
need a report on the sa id matter on Tuesday afternoon.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Mr. Speaker Sir though you have given directive I have no 
power to go beyond your directive b ut am asking respectfully if possible please if you can 
allow the Majority Leader to take that action because am the one who has brought the matter 
to the Committee , how can I myself go and  seek for the Chairperson again.  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Siminyu ): Then you will direct the Clerks to forward 
the inf ormation to the said Committee, Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
 Hon. Mary Akinyi . 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Thank you once more, I would like to table a statement on 
traffic congestion along Kibarani, Magongo and Mikindani routes.  
(Hon.  Akinyi moved the Statem ent) 
TRAFFIC CONGESTION ALONG KIBARANI, MAGONGO AND MIKINDANI 
ROUTES  
 I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee on Public Works and Transport 
whether he is aware of th e traffic congestion along Kibarani, Changamwe roundabout, 
Magongo and Mikindani routes, which has led to fare(s) being hiked by operators of public 
service vehicles, and th e specific measures the County government is taking to remedy the 
situation.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Siminyu ): The Chair Committe e of Transport and 
Public Works?  
 Hon. Faraj : They are absent Mr. Chair but the Member is here.  
 Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Siminyu ): Hon. Saad Ahmed Faraj I direct this 
Committee because it is an urgent matter we need  to get a report on  the said matter  on 
Tuesday afternoon.  
Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Since there is no other business,  this House stand s adjourned until Tuesday 
afternoon. Thank you .  
 
The House rose at 2 :49p.m. 