July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday 23rd July, 2019  
The House met at 10:10 a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ibrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hono urable Members you may be seated, yes Clerk nex t 
Order?  
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND INVESTMENT 
COMMITTEE  HON. FADHILI MWALIMU ON STATUS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ’S REPORT  
Yes Hon. Fadhili Makarani, Chairperson Committee on Public Accounts and Investment 
Committee ? 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker am 
requesting for some few minutes for me to bring to this Hono urable House what I had stated 
earlier to prove that we got letters that we wrote to the Auditor General , so am requesti ng 
through this Hono urable House to give me some minutes to a accomplish the letters.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili. Hon. Fadhili you can bring them in 
the afternoon session . Yes Clerk next order?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON C OMMITTEE ON TRANSPOR T, INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON. PRISCHILLAH MUMBA ON FIRE TRAGEDY  IN MIKINDANI WARD 
 Yes Hon. Prischillah Mumba, Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and 
Public Works?  
 Hon. Mumba: Thank you Mr. Speaker ; I am stand ing on a Statement of Mikindani 
incident . 

July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 2  As I had earlier spoken to Hon. Thoya that I will just highlight because the Statement is 
about 10 to 11 response  pages so I will just highlight  then I will give him the full booklet so that 
he can understand more  and if any M ember would like to get the copy I will still provide through 
the C lerks because there is another copy , so I will continue . 
 This refers to CM/TI and PW County Assembly 2019, 17th July, 2019, County Assembly 
Clerk; this is County Assembly of M ombasa reference to fire incident at Mikindani.  In refer ence 
to the above matter attached here with is;  
1. A report regarding to the incident by the County Chief officer Transport  
2. A memo from Chief Fire officer.  
3. A daily state report from the Chief Officer fi re of the County Chief officer for 2nd of July , 
2019.  
4. A copy of occurrence book at the fire brigade headquarters for 2nd July, 2019.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Prischillah. Yes Clerk , next Order?  
RESPONSE  TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTE E ON TRADE , TOURISM AND INVESTME NT 
HON. OPEYA  ON CONDUCT OF BUSINESS BY EAST AFRICA SUB SAHARA COMPANY  
Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya, the Chairperson Committee on Trade, Tourism and investment, 
can you respond to the Statement?  
 
Hon. Opeya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give a response on a 
Statement raised by the Hon. Faith Mwende of Kipevu Ward on Wednesday 3rd July, 2019 
regarding conduct of business by East Africa Sub -Sahara Company within the County. Mr. 
Speaker Sir upon receipt of the above complain t the D epartment of Trade assigned three officers 
from the SBP and Inspectorate Unit to investigate the allegations made of the company by the 
name East Africa Sub Sahara company conducting illegal businesses in the County . Mr. Speaker 
Sir, following the investigations the officers report that the alleged East Africa Sub -Sahara 
Company does not exist.  
Secondly the officers got information that the re are  individuals purporting to be  operating 
a micro -finance company in the n ame of East Africa Sub -Sahara company and that they offer 
loan service s; however the persons do not have a physical office and always are in the move 
making it difficult to trace them. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kizito  Opeya. Yes Clerk , next Order?   
(Interruption ) 
 Yes Hon. Bwire?  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker the said Sub Sahara company I also 
happen to be a victim of the same and th ese people have an office in my area where they do meet 
my people wher eby people do register from . 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 3 So I want t o inform the Hon. Chair that these  people have their own offices in different 
areas and it is not th at they operate on a mobile way; t hey have the ir offices where they do take 
their activities or they undertake their  activities so maybe  we liaise with the C ommittee and the 
authority concern ed so that we can take them where these people are having their businesses or 
where they are operating their businesses from.  Thank you . 
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire.  Hon. Kizito I think you have noted 
that, yes Clerk next Order?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS  HON. MOHAM ED HATIMY ON STATUS OF MAJAONI ROAD IN BAMBURI WARD 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Moh amed Mohamed, Chairperson Committee on 
Finance , Budget and Appropriations please give the response?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika hili jambo 
tumeweza kulif uatilia pamoja na aliyeleta hili jambo ndani ya Nyumba hii Mheshimi wa Nyiro na 
tukaona kuwa  kulikuwa na ukosefu wa kufuata u le utaratibu  amba o unatakikana lakini by 
consent  tumekubaliana sote wawili tushikane tunalifuatilia hili jambo na tutakapo  limaliza 
tutakuja kwenye hii Nyumba na tueleze Nyumba hii tumelima liza namna  gani.  Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed. S o Hon. Mohamed we need to 
record in the vote book so maybe if you can tell us will  you take two weeks or one week s o 
that…  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika shida ni k uwa unajua payment  zinapokuwa 
mwaka umekwisha huwa zinaregea tena kuanza mwanzo na hawa watu wa Idara  kwa hivi sasa 
hawajafika kufanya hivi vitu ndipo pale alipoambiwa kuwa ile voucher  yake imekuwa cancelled . 
Kwa hivyo ni lazima aanze kujaza tena ile karat asi kusudi ikiwa ashajaza sisi tushikane pamoja 
tuhakikishe kuwa imekwenda  Idara  zote na imelipwa Mheshimiwa Spika  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So we keep it in four weeks time?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Itakuwa muda mzuri sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Okay, thank you Hon. Mohamed.  Yes Clerk next order?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTE E ON EDUCATION HON. OMONDI  ON STATUS 
OF KWA HOLA ECDE  CENTRE  
Yes Hon. Ibrahim Chairperson Committee on Education?  
(Silence)  
 Any other Member of Educ ation? Yes Hon. Kibwana, please give the response?  
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 4 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker being a Member of the 
Education Committee and my Chair is not around plus the Vice Chair we had summoned the 
Chief officer to explain on the matter  that was raised in this Hono urable House but he ga ve us 
the letter that she is not feeling well so we could not get much or proceed with the respon se 
because of that.  
 Hon. Speaker the othe r challenge that also we encountered  is about the issue of reshuf fle 
that was done by the Hon. Governor . I will wish Hon. Speaker on behalf of the Committee if you 
could add two weeks  time I think will be fair for us so that we can conclude this matter Hon. 
Speaker. T hank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana , so Clerks after two weeks you 
will bring the matter back. Y es next order , Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON EDUCATION  
 
Yes again Hon. Kibwana, Deputy Cha irperson Committee on Education.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker the same issue that we 
are still pursuing ; it is the same response  that I gave earlier I think we should ask for you to give 
us the same time, although you are aware that the system s are not open and the money has not 
been forthcoming  so far . So I think for us to have a comprehensive reply on this issue Hon. 
Speaker  give us  the same two weeks. Thank you . 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Clerk , I think you have noted that so bring the matter back 
after two weeks. Yes next Order?  
 
RESPONSE T O STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON WATER AND NA TURAL RESOURCES 
HON. MWALIMU MGWISHO  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwali mu Mgwisho, Deputy Chairperson 
Comm ittee on Water and N atural resources.  
 
Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante Bwana Spika . Kwa sasa  hii ripoti haijakuwa tayari 
kwa hivyo nahitaji muda zaidi ili niweze kuja na jibu muafaka. A hsante Bwana Spika . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mwalimu how long do you need?  
 
Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  One week Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika naweza sema hii 
Kamati ina mchezo kwa sababu hii Taarifa  ilikuja kitambo na ilikuwa ya mwaka wa fedha wa 
kiserikali uliopita na  mpaka sasa hivi mkutano haujaitwa  tukajua ni kwa nini hawajakuja na sina 
uhakika kama  Idara  iliandikiwa na haijajibu maswali.  
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 5 Mheshimiwa Spika Taarifa  zikija kama hizi executive  walienda Public P articipation  
wakaahidi wananchi na mdomo wao na wanakuja kuuliza mas wali kwa ofisi yangu kwa hivyo 
Waheshimiwa wakileta  Taarifa  isichukuliwe ni ya mzaha na majibu yaweze kupeanwa haraka 
iwezekanavyo. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Faith.  Hon. Faith  you are a Member of that 
Committee as well?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Mhes himiwa Spika mimi ni Mwanakamati  wa hiyo K amati lakini 
nashangaa uzuri wa kusema ukweli Kamati  nyingi zina uzembe wa kukaa katika mikutano, 
hawaitishi mikutano Wenyekiti  na ma  Naibu Wenyekiti  kwa hivyo yafaa si zote lakini waanze 
kuita mikutano.  
 
The Speak er (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  I think we should start askin g ourselves 
very hard questions;  are we doing justice to our people? It  is very unfortunate Hon. Speaker and I 
was coming up with my Motion , I was at  the kitchen tr ying to cook that Motion to see  how are 
we going to  take care of such injustices? B ecause this is injustice to our people Mr. Speaker, 
with all due respect some of the C ommittee s, of course not all, other C ommittees are really 
playing  their part but there are some C ommittees that are not doing justice to the people neither 
do justice to this Hon ourable  House...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 I think through your indulgence Hon. Speaker we need your intake in this and decision so 
that we can do away with this…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Shebe may be you can mention to us which are those 
some of the C ommittee s. 
 
Hon. Athman Shebe:  I think Hon. Speaker it will be kind of premature because like I 
have just h inted  to you that I have something nice cooking in the kitchen so I think…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Shebe you just said I think we need to put this thing 
transparently.  
 
Hon. Athman Shebe:  Of course.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So just explain to the House so that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 6 Hon. Athman Shebe:  …M y backbone , Hon. Speaker is ailing.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Because again Hon. Members it  is very sad if you are a 
Member of that C ommittee and you are coming to this House to complain, why don’t you call 
for a meeting in your Committee? And do that … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 It is very sad for you Membe rs to come and complain on the C ommittee whe re you are 
sitting in the same C ommittee.  
 
Hon. Athuman Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Unless you do  not kno w what are your rights in that 
Committee, may be mention that C ommittee and tell me are you in that Co mmittee or you are 
not in that C ommittee.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . First am not a Member of Water 
Committee because I always involve myself in  Committees which are very active Hon. Speaker 
and you know that.  
Secondly Hon. Speaker it is not only water which is sleeping on the job, let  us call a 
spade a spade not a big spoon , most of the C ommitte es here are sleeping on t he job.  I think it is 
high time we should do justice to our people.  I think my Hon. Member is just whispering to me 
Environment ..., I think they can both appreciate one of the most active , one of the best, thank 
you, thank you, one of the best performed Co mmittee is Environment of course with Health and 
other Committees Hon. Speaker … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Even Members apprecia te. I think Hon. Speaker to be h onest we are really perturbed  by 
this, I think it  is high time we need to take charge on our own destiny and call a spade a spade, 
one of the most dormant Committee is only Water, many Committees  are not even sitting. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But you have not even mentioned it to the House.  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  I have already mention ed it to y ou, for example the Water 
Committee Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : How do you know if they are not mee ting? Are you a 
Member of that C ommittee?  
 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 7 Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Am not a Member but this question Hon. Speaker honestly it was 
raised here last y ear;  Hon. Faith has just proved she is one of the Member s of the Committee , 
they are not sitting.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But you as a Member, example if you were the Member of 
that C ommittee what would you do?  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speak er. W hat exactly I will do, I will not be ..., I 
will declare , I will either resign to that C ommittee, am telling you that C ommittee is not working 
Hon. Speaker I do  not see the reason of me being under that Committee.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : You know H on. Members, just sit down Hon. Shebe.  
 
Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes see Hon. Members, you do  not bring politics in this ; 
there  are minutes there which are recorded, I want to see in those minutes whereby the Hon. 
Member ha s called for that meeting and then he has said or she has said in that meeting that there 
is a, b, c, d, you bring those minutes and then after that there is an action you can take because 
you know very well there are other M embers here they have b een vote d vote of no confidence.   
I think all of you know that and this has happened not only once, I think twice or thrice it 
has happened so why don’t you take the same route if you know that that C ommittee is not 
working, why don’t you take the same route and g ive it to the  person who can make sure that 
Committee works . So Hon. M embers if we really want to work for our people let us work for 
them and let us not politicize this thing please. Yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . I think I wi ll do exactly like you have 
just instructed and I just want to promise you politics is far away from these Hon. Speaker and 
you know it and In Shaa Allah I will do  exactly the same and I see my L eader of Majority is here 
and am going to consult with him so  that we can  make sure we make some changes of course 
which are going to be beneficial to this Hon ourable  House and of course to our people . Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Indeed Mr. Speaker we respect your ruling but it  is 
high time that you crack the w hip; the ruling was made, the C ommittee was to sit and bring back 
the response. The Member who raised the response has just confirmed that they have never had a 
meeting and ind eed the ruling was made by the Chair of the day that they were to si t and bring 
back the response .  
So Mr. Speaker sometimes you see we need also ..., we need to be a bit serious, i f the 
Chair is not around, the Deputy C hair mu st take charge of the C ommitte e and this issue of 
making a ruling today, bring the response tomorrow and tomorrow comes the response is not 
available reason is just because the Members never had a meeting ! Mr. Speaker I think we must 
do away with that and become a bit serious.  
 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 8 The Spe aker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire.  Hon. Members I think it is very 
clear we are talking about the Water C ommittee, that  is the only C ommittee you have a problem 
with so far as the way I can see because I asked the Hon. Member to mention the Committe es 
which he thinks they have problem and he mentioned Water. So Hon. Members there are 
procedures to follow, I think Hon. Faith I agree with you this mat ter has been coming since last 
financial y ear but you see we cannot be talking verbally.  
You need to w rite a letter to your Clerk that you have called for a meeting and there was 
no meeting and explain that Members have been paid for the sittings because if you are telling 
me there is no meeting, so it means Members have been paid for those sittings. So le t us do that 
very clear ok, and then let t he Clerk bring that letter and copy to my office and then we will do 
those investigations and see. So I think we are clear on that, so if you want to be transparent, let 
us be transparent on everything. Yes Hon. Mo ses? 
Hon. Aran:  Thank Mr. Speaker Sir. Actually you are a very wise leader. What I think 
Mr. Speaker Sir all these are sideshows and this is the first time I am speaking after being 
mercilessly voted out as the Chair of Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural A ffairs. Hon. Speaker 
the Youth Committee saw it wise that I was not performing well, they sat down and v oted me 
out; why don’t these Members si t down in their respective Committees vote out those 
incompetent leaders then we move on, we cannot be  coming her e for just small politics and 
sideshows…  
(Applause)  
 Let them follow the example that Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs Committee 
used and for the first time I want to congratulate the Hon. Member who was elected, Hon. Samba 
and I wish you all the  best…  
(Applause)  
 And we are tired of these sideshows , politics Hon. Speaker we need to move on, s o let 
them si t down and just vote out those leaders that they think they are not performing, Mombasa 
needs development Hon. Speaker. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Moses Aran. Hon. Members but I do not 
think the problem is Water the way I can see because not unless you Members you do not want 
to… yes Hon. Chief Whip, Hon. Kitula . 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i. Umeongea vizuri 
sana lakini tusitoke nje ya mada Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ; kulingana na ratba  ya leo. Kulingana 
na ratba  ya leo tunaongea kuhusu  Taarifa  ya Status of Drilling Boreholes in Kipevu Ward  
ambayo Mheshimiwa anatoka lakini tukija katika Standing Order No. 161  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti inanielezea wazi duties of Committee Chairperson  na nitaisoma Mheshi miwa 
Mwenyekiti kwa ruhusa yako.  Standing Order No.161 , Subject to the provision of these Standing 
Orders and the directions of the Committee, a Chairpe rson of a Committee shall:  
(a) Preside at meetings of the Committee ; 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 9 (b) Perform the functions and exercise the powers assigned to office of the Chairperson by 
the Committee, resolutions of the County Assembly or legislation;  
(c) Be the spokesperson of the Committee.  
 
 Mheshimiwa Faith aliona bora zaidi mbali na kuwa Memba katika Kamati hio kwamba 
ile Taarifa  alete katika Nyumba hii ili wewe utoe  uamuzi w ako iweze Kamati kufanya kikao na 
kujadiliwa ili majibu muafaka yaje katika Nyumba hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, lakini hilo 
halikufanyika. Leo hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti itakuwa sio sawa kumvunja moyo kama 
Mwakilishi wa Kipevu kumwambia kwamba japo wewe ndio Memba ingepaswa kumalizika 
katika Kamati zao kama Kamati ya Maji Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Yeye aliona sawa ili iweze 
kuja katika Hansard za Bunge letu kuhakikisha ya kwamba Taarifa  hii ije kwa sababu boreholes  
zimechimbwa kwa kila sehemu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini kulingana na Taarifa  yake 
katika Wodi ya Kipevu havikuchimbwa ama angependa kujua status  yake imekua vipi? L akini la 
kushangaza Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Serikali yetu ya Kaunti ya Mombasa hivi sasa…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Kitula I think that is your understanding. Maybe you 
want t o understand my ruling that way b ut my ruling was very clear, this matter was brought in 
the House and then we took this matter to the Committee on Water whereby the Hon. Member is 
in the same Committee. So my question was, if she is in the same Committee and this thing has 
taken almost two months, why is she not exp laining to this House that why they have not sat 
down on that issue? That is my simple question and when you are telling me that about the 
Committee C hairperson even there is a ruli ng when the Chairperson is not there, so the Vice 
Chair is the Chair, so it  is very clear. Yes if the Vice Chair is not there then a Member becomes a 
Chair automatically. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante nakupata Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini 
kusema ukweli lazima hivi vitu vyote viwe katika sheria kwamba Mwen yekiti asipokuwa 
anamfahamisha Naibu Mwenyekiti na Naibu Mwenyekiti asipokuwa anafahamisha Memba. 
Ikiwa Mheshimiwa Faith hajafahamishwa atafahamu vipi kama kuna mkutano umeweza 
kupangwa? Maana yake mimi kama Memba nitasubiri niweze kufahamishwa kwa sababu 
nawakilisha wananchi wangu na napata mikutano mingi kule mashinani kuhusiana na mahali 
ninapo  wakilishi. Kwa sababu hii mawasiliano  hakuna ndio chanzo kikuu Mheshimiwa Faith 
kusema kwamba Kamati haijakaa…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Member that is what I am saying, if we have these 
things in papers not verbally, if she writes because now it is two months, almost two months this 
issue since it was brought. So if you have in papers then we will know for the last two months 
they have not  sat for that Committee and we will go into records and check if they are being paid 
for sittings and those  Committee and we will look at m inutes. So that is why I am saying if you 
are going to these  things, make sure you know where you are going. Yes, you  got what I am 
trying to say Honourable? So let these things be in papers, it is very good so that tomorrow it is 
not ver bally, the Hon. Member will say  look how many times I went to the Clerks I have tried to 
call for a meeting, the meeting is not brought . Anyway yes you can continue.  
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 
10 The Chief Wh ip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimekufahamu vizuri lakini 
ningependa kuongea kuhusu Kamati ya Maji ya kwamba labda katika kikao hiki cha kuongea 
kuhusu Boreholes  za Kipevu ha wajakaa, na tukiangalia kuhusu  vikao vya Kamati kwamba 
lazima barua iandikwe, wamekaa mara ngapi? La, lakini kuongea kuhusu suala hili Mheshimiwa 
Faith amesema hawajakaa na hawajafahamishwa . Labda katika mikutano mengine wameweza 
kukaa lakini tukisema kuanzia hivi sasa tuweze kufuatili ana mambo ya vikao vya Kamati, italeta 
picha nyengine mbaya katika Bunge letu…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Kwa hio  kama wamekaa mkutano mwengine yeye kama 
Memba, si lazima kuna  kumbukumbu ? Si lazima tarehe ziwe issue ? Then we will have those 
minutes  kuwa ame raise  hii issue na haijakua responded . Not unless  Mheshimiwa labda 
unanipata vyengine?  
(Interruption)  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Hapana ! Nimekupata Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini 
langu kuu ni kuhusiana na  Taarifa  hii, na natuma i kwamba kila  mkutano  inapokaa huwa kuna 
ajenda za mkutano huo, na yeye ni Memba…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Na kuna AOB baada ya ajenda kaa ukijua. .. 
(Interruption)  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ndio, lakini kufahamu wakati mikutano inakuwa  raised  
labda wakati huo pendekezo lake halikuwa akilini mwake, akaona mwafaka hivi sasa alete katika 
Bunge hili ili iweze kufuatili wa kama Kamati lakini kwa bahati mbaya  kuanzia muda tangu alete 
Taarifa  hii hawajakaa mpaka sasa. Hilo ndilo swali lake Mheshi miwa wa Kipevu analiuliza kwa 
nini hatujakaa na ni vipi wananchi wake wataweza kufaidika kupitia miradi ya Boreholes.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes thank you Hon. Kitula. Yes Hon. Juma Renson?  
Hon. Thoya:  Thank Hon. Speaker. I think we need to  get it right and we cannot bury our 
heads on the sun. There is an issue and I was trying to consult the Vice Chair of the Committee, 
we need to retreat after this session so as we can get answer that is being sorted here. So if you  
are ruling that we need to  put our House in order and ensure that we get on track again other than 
maybe going round, I can see this is a House of rules and orders and there is Hansard.  And I 
would say further debate , further d iscussion there is Hansard here  so we are hitting ours elves on 
the head. So as much as you are putting it right we need to be smart, I have requested the Vice 
Chair after the session…  
(Interruption)  
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 
11 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Member, I do not know if you know what you are 
talking? Anyway I have heard what you have said . Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 RESPONSE STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND WASTE 
MANAGEMENT HON . ATHMAN SHEBE ON GARB AGE COLLECTION AT SA RATOGA AREA IN AIRPO RT 
WARD  IN AIRPORT WARD  
Yes Hon. Shebe Salim, the Chairperson Committee on Environment and Waste 
Management?  
 
Hon. Athman  Shebe : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti kunipatia fursa hii . 
Nasikitika kwanza ; masikitiko Mheshimiwa Mwenyeki ti kwa sababu Mheshimiwa mwenza 
ambae alileta Taarifa hii hayupo  lakini hivi ninavyo  kuambia kwanza niweze kutoa duku duku 
kuwa si kweli takriban muda wa miaka saba kuwa taka Airport hazijaondolewa, si kweli.  
Sababu ya msingi kwanza M heshimiwa Spika ilikuwa sipo, pili nilikuwa si Mwenyekiti 
wa Mazingira na hivi ninavyo  kuambia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuna kazi inaendelea Wodi ya 
Airport na licha ya zile changamoto ambazo zipo katika masuala ya usafiri na pale mahali 
zitawekwa taka Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti lakini Airport  Wodi na hicho kifusi chenyewe pia 
nimeenda nimekiona . 
Kuna kazi inaendelea lakini Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Chief Officer  ameniomba wiki 
ijayo tuje na Taarifa ya kushiba zaidi kuhusu mchakato mzima wa Airport pamoja na Miritini 
Estate lakini kwa muda huu wa mukhtasari Mheshimiwa kazi inaendelea eneo la Airport Wodi. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you for the response. Yes Hon. Mwalimu?  
 
Hon. Hamadi Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nilikuwa nataka  kujua 
kutoka kwa Chairman  wa Health  kuhusu…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mwalimu unasimama kutoa  Taarifa ? 
  
Hon.  Hamadi  Mgwisho:  Ndio Bwana Spika . 
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So let the Clerk continue then we will give you the chance. 
Is it a w ritten statement? Umeandika ? 
 
Hon. Hamadi Mgwisho:  Hapana ni ya dharura . 
   
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But I think we agreed Hon. Mwalimu we need to have a 
written Statement, so yes Clerk? Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa ku arifu Jumba hili 
halafu uweze kutoa muongozo.  
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 
12 Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti nimekaa nikaona pamoja na Waheshimiwa wenzangu katika 
Idara tofauti tofauti Chief Officers  wamekuwa waki  handover  kwa Chief Officers  wapya wakati 
sisi hatujui kama Chief Officers  wam eingia katika maofisi yale Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Sasa 
tungependa kujua kama Bunge, je ni sawa vile ama si sawa kupitia muongozo wako maana sisi 
hatufahamu kama Bunge kwamba  reshuffle  imeweza kufanyika. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Kitula is  that a Statement?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : It is a point of information Mr. Speaker . 
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So then it  is a point of information ; then inform us about 
that point, you are not informing us, you are asking for something and you are saying point of 
information. If you have the information inform the House not unless I do  not understand what is 
the meaning of point of information. I think that should come as a Statement maybe you ask 
whoever is concerned , maybe through the Executive you can as k or the Leader of the Majo rity. 
Maybe you can bring that as a Statement and not a Point of Information so when we reach the 
Statement we will give you time to ask that question. Yes Clerk next Order?  
 
STAT US OF SHIKA ADABU MA TERNITY HOSPITAL  
 
Yes Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho? Please give the Statement . 
  
Hon. Hamadi Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nilikuwa nataka kujua 
kutoka kwa  Mwenyekiti was Kamati ya Afya  kuhusu hospitali ya kuzalia kina mama kule Shika  
Adabu ambayo imejengwa muda mrefu na imetiwa kufuli ; ilikuwa nataka kujua ni siku gani 
itafunguliwa na iweze kufanya kazi. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwalimu. The Chairperson on Health is 
not around, so any other Member on Committee on Health? Yes Hon. Makarani?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Do you have the response to Hon. M walimu?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Mr. Speaker currently I have no response to 
what Hon. Member has raised but as a Committee we are requesting for one week and we will 
respond to this Statement.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fa dhili Mwalimu. Yes Clerk next Order?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Yes Hon. Charles Kitula? Please give the Statement . 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 
13 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ningependa Nyumba 
hii iwez e kufahamishwa ikiwa reshuffle ya Chief Officers  imefanyika kweli au ni uzushi  
zinazoendelea katika Jimbo letu la Mombasa. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think the Leader of Majority should tell the House if 
there’s any reshuffle. The Hon. Member i s asking for a Statement, do you have an answer for 
that?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker we have to be very frank yes 
there’s reshuffle but actually they have not bring to my attention officially so Mr. Speaker I will 
request th is House to give me time at least from next week I will give the list…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No! No! No! next week is too far, in the afternoon . 
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Hamisi Mwidani): Fine Mr. Speaker with due respect I 
will do th at. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So make sure in the afternoon you have the Statement 
response please because I believe the office is just next to us and County Secretary is not far so 
make sure we have the response by afternoon.  
 
The Le ader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker with due respect I take the word. 
Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Majority Leader Hon. Hamisi Musa. Yes Hon. 
Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker on the same note th e Leader of 
Majority should also tell this House the contract of the chief officers was it a five years contract 
or for two years, and if was for two years is it supposed to be a reshuffling or a fresh vetting 
process…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khat ri): So Hon. Mwamwiri that  is another Statement . 
  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  It is the same Statement Mr. Speaker  Sir. 
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : The Hon. Member asked about the reshuffle and you are 
bringing other issues . 
  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  He has texted me on the same . 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 
14 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Why don’t you write down that Statement and bring it in the 
afternoon . 
  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , most obliged . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Just write down and bring it in the afternoon then we can 
ask the Hon. Member because  the Majority Leader is an old man , don’t put pressure on him 
please. Yes Hon. Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Mr. Speaker Sir , as you have just inform ed, you said that the Majority 
Leader is an old man I think he needs a Deputy ... 
  
(Applause)  
 
 In the House so that if  he has a lot of work his Deputy will have assisted him to get the 
information that he needed for himself. Thank you very much. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Not Statement, its Motion . 
 
MOTION  
MAINTAINANCE OF SEWER LINES BY YO UTH WITHIN THE ESTAT E 
 
Yes Hon. Tobias Samba? MCA Tudor Ward move the Motion on Maintenance of sewer 
lines by youth within the estate . 
  
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speake r. We had debated this Motion, the only remaining 
part was for you to put a question because we had debated it and we agreed that it should come 
with amendment of which I did so it  is just upon your Hon. Chair to put a question so that 
Members may adopt it . 
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So just read for us what you have resolved and the 
amendments, you have to read so that the Hansard can capture what you have amended . 
  
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker Sir I b eg to move the following Motion ; 
 
THAT AWARE , the National Empow erment Authority Act , 2016 provides a legal 
framework for the state to take affirmative measures to ensure youth and marginalized 
groups access employment and economic empowerment;  
 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 
15 FURTHER AWARE,  that Section 3 (c) of the Act provides a framework to facilit ate 
increased employment of Kenya ns in both National and County governments;  
 
CONCERNED THAT,  despite the bulging youth population, job opportunities are scarce 
and lack of jobs to the youth has led to increase in crimes within the estates;  
 
COGNIZANT THAT,  there are jobs within the County such as maintenance of sewer 
lines which can be performed by the youth to reduce unemployment amongst them ; 
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that: 
 
The County government to provide employment on contractual or casual  basis to 
registered youth groups or companies within the Ward, the oversight role to be provided 
by the Member of the County Assembly in the Ward.  
 
Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Consultations)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon . Speaker I beg to move the following Motion;  
 
THAT AWARE , the National Empowerment Authority Act , 2016 provides a legal 
framework for the state to take affirmative measures to ensure youth and marginalized 
groups access employment and economic empowerment;  
 
FURTHER AWARE,  that Section 3 (c) of the Act provides a framework to facilitate 
increased employment of Kenya ns in both National and County governments;  
 
CONCERNED THAT,  despite the bulging youth population, job opportunities are scarce 
and lack of jobs to the youth has led to increase in crimes within the estates;  
 
COGNIZANT THAT,  there are jobs within the County such as maintenance of sewer 
lines which can be performed by the youth to reduce unemployment amongst them ; 
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLV E that: 
 
The County government to provide employment on contractual or casual basis to 
registered youth groups or companies within the Ward.  
 
 I beg to move the following Motion Hon. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Samba. Hon. Me mbers I now put the 
question that this House adopts the Motion by Hon. Tobias Samba on Maintenance of sewer 
lines by youth within the estate as amended . 
July 23, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edi tor Page 
16  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 23rd July, 2019 at 2 :30p.m.  
 
The House rose at 10:57a.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 