August 7, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     63 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
   
 
       COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 7th August,  2018  
The House met at 2:41p.m  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENTS  
DEMOLITION OF STRUCTU RES IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon . Tobias Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba : Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker . When I raised the issue last week on 
Thursday you assured me that you will give me an opport unity today to raise my concern . 
Mr. Speaker I seek a statement from the department of Devolution and Public S ervices . 
THAT AWARE  of the roles of the department of Devolution and Public services  
administration of the County governm ent of Mombasa with the objective of the 
department to ensure that the spirit and the letter  of devolution is felt by wananchi . 
FURTHER AWARE that this House guided by section 9 of the County Gove rnment 
Act on the roles of the County Assembly and Standing order  number 41(2)(c) of this 
House on request for statement by Member of t he House of the relevant House 
Committee . My concern is that the Inspectorate Department has recent ly embarked  
on demolition of business structures within the County  and this has caused havoc,  
closure of business , state of confusion and anxiety amongst the members of the public 
since they  do no t know when and where will the County government strike next,  
Mr. Speaker it is our roles to protect our people 's interest and therefore when they 
suffer we equally suffer the same . 
I therefore urge the S peaker to direct the relevant Committ ee to summon the 
department of Devolution and Public Service administration to give a  detailed report 
of the recent actions to demolish structures either in writing or oral,  

August 7, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     63 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  I would also request the House, atleast this time the relevant Committee that is going 
to give us the report to at least  enhance and fast track this because o f late we have been 
requesting for statements and it is quite unfortunate we always ask for more time . This issue 
is of great concern to wananchi  we are elected and we need to give feedback to wananchi  so 
Mr. Speaker with due respect I would request that wh ichever relevant department is going to 
be given the mandate they speed up and t hen we have the possible result . 
Another issue Mr. Speaker I would request the House , the relevant Committees atleast 
when we are giving you this task you should go to the grou nd; most of us do not go to the 
ground we wait for the E xecutive . It is quite unfortunate they are compromised like I just had 
a recent case Hon.  Speaker if you will just allow me to air that  I took  my fellow Hon. 
Members to a scenario where there was something fishy that was going on when we took our 
time and called for reinforcement through the County Inspectorate department when they 
came we were reduced to lesser human beings . We had to run away and we were not happy 
so this time round Hon . Members and the departmental Committees let us take our roles 
seriously let wananchi  feel our roles and also our power , we have the powe rs to do 
everything within the Constitution . Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Any reactions to the statement?  Yes H on. 
Faith?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwende:  Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii , ni kwa 
vile nimekuwa mmoja wa rafiki ya Mheshimiwa wa Tudor kuambatana na yeye kwenda 
kuon a ile shida ambayo ilikuwa kwa Wodi yake ya muundo msingi wa maji taka . 
Mheshimiwa Spika chenye tumeona siku ya leo ha ikufurahish a mbele ya macho ya umma, 
maji taka  inatiririka kwa barabara mpaka inaenda kwa plot i nyengine katikati mahali watoto 
wanachezea … 
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Faith the statement I have allowed you 
to atleast talk on issues raised by Hon . Samba. He has  raised a statement concerning County 
askaris  or inspectorate. Demolition on  temporary structures in Tudor Ward and h e was asking 
the department of Devolu tion to ta ke charge. So I just asked the House to atleast put some 
issues concerning the statemen t before I direct the relevant Committee to take charge.  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwende : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ni vile nimeona v yenye kazi 
inafanyika ndio maana ilikuwa i menig hadhabisha sana . Mheshimiwa Spika sio mara ya 
kwanza kuona majengo ya watu inaharibiwa pasipo viongozi wa lile eneo  kujua ; tungeomba 
na si kuomba kwa sababu wanalipwa mshahara ili kufanya ushirikiano na wananchi na 
viongozi ambao wako mashinani, wasikuru puke tu siku moja kwa vile wameambiwa mahali 
fulani kuna majengo waende wabomoe pasipo  kufikiria wale wa tu wakibomolewa wataenda 
wapi? Ni jukumu letu kama watu wanafuru shwa mahali waon yeshwe mahali mbadala na 
wasibumburushwe kama wanyama wa mw itu, tuwachuku lie kama binadamu.  Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Faith. Hon. Members 
concer ning the statement by Hon. Tobia s Samba from Tudor Ward, I direct the Leader of 
Majority and Justice Committee to work on this issue and  bring back a report . 
August 7, 2018                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     63 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  As the Hon. Members said it is an urgent issue , we would like the Committee 
to respond by Thursday afternoon . Yes Hon . Ogutu what is it?  
Hon. Ogutu:  I was requesting  the Committee on L abour to be enjoined in the team.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : So how does Labour Committee come on 
this issue of demolition?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker Inspectorate and Devolution  department fall s under Labour 
and Social S ervices.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ogutu as much as the House is 
concerne d I understand the Chief Officer for Devolution was vetted by Justice Committee so 
it is upon  the Committee on J ustice  to take charge but the Labor Committe e can join the two 
said offices ; office of the Leader of Majority an d office of Justice Committee and work 
together to bring back a report to this House by Thursday afternoon . Yes Clerk.  
ADJOU RNMENT  
Having there no other business the House stands adjourned until Wednesday 8th, 2018 
at 9:00a.m. 
House rose at 2: 53p.m. 
 
 