September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 13th September , 2023  
Third Assembly – Sixty  Third  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:42p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Temporary  Speaker ( Honourable  Hamisi Nyota ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Nyota) : Members have your seat s. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON , COMMITTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS  HONOURABLE KI BWANA SW ALEH ON ALLEGED NON -REMITTANCE OF STATUTORY 
DEDUCTIONS BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Baya, Ch airperson Committee on Finance, Bud get and 
Appropriation, please respond to the Statement.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
Honourable  Mwaura , you a re standing on a Point of Order?  
 
Hon. Mwaura: Mr. Speaker Sir , I rise to put to your attention that we have no quorum in 
the House.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Hamisi  Nyota) : Yes, Clerk please confirm if there is 
quorum?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
[The Clerk confirmed no quorum ] 
 
Serjeant-At-Arms , please ring the bell for five minutes . 
  
[The Ser jeant-At-Arms rung  the quorum bell ] 
 
Yes, Clerk confirm this quorum.  
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 [The Clerk confirm ed the quorum]  
 
Thank you . Yes, Honourable Kibwana Baya, Chairperson C ommittee on Finance, Budget  
and Appropriations,  please res pond to the statement .  
 
[Silen ce] 
 
Yes, Vice Chairperson kindly proceed . 
 
Hon.  Noor: Thank  you Mr . Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir , we are still waiting for some 
response from the  office of finance to  seek clarif ication for us o n this matter.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you Honourable Hamida Noor 
for that response, how  long do you think it can take for the  response?  
 
Hon. Noor: Mr. Speaker , I believe Inshal lah by next week on Wednesday  we will have 
the response . We will follow up on this.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Next week on Wednesday ? 
 
Hon. Noor: Yes.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : It has gone to record that you had made 
a promise  to this  House that next week on Wednesday  you will have a response f or that . Thank 
you so much. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON , COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMETATION HONOURABLE 
SAMUEL MWAURA ON STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RESOLUTION ON INCLUSION OF KIOSK 
TRADERS AS BENEFICIARIES OF MOMBASA COUNTY REVOLVING FUND LOANS  
 
Yes, Hono urable  Samuel Mwaura Chairperson Committee on Implementation please 
respond to the statement?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
The Vice Chair ? Honourable  Mbaya , are you up concerning  the matter?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya: Member  of Implementation , my Chair is not around and at the 
same time with the Vice Chair she is not around.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Okay you want to respond on behalf of 
the Chair?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya : Ndio . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Okay proceed.  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipatia fursa hii . 
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Mheshi miwa Spika baada ya kukueleza kuwa wale wahusika wakuu ambao ndio 
wangeweza kueleza hawapo , naomba kuongezwa m uda kw a wiki tatu tuweze kuleta majibu 
wakati tumewasiliana na Mwenyekiti . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Hounarable Mbaya , you are asking for 
three more weeks?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya : Ndio.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Due to the gravity of that statement , I 
think you can make it up to Wednesday  next week then you can speed up the process.  
 
[Hon. Samuel Mwaura entered the Cham bers]  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya : Mheshimiwa Spika , naomb a kurudisha usukani kwa Mwenyek iti 
kwa sababu aliku wa hayupo lakini sa a hii amefika.   
 
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Yes, Honourable  Samuel Mwaura kindly 
make a r esponse to the statement please . 
 
Hon. Mwaura: Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you for the Hon ourable  Member of my 
Committee for attempting to respond to this question . But Mr. Speaker I want to confirm to this 
House  that we wrote a letter to the Chief  officer,  Trade and Tourism on 17th of August and we 
have not yet got  a response . We then had a reminder on the 11th of September and we are yet to 
get a response so Mr. Speaker we are  pleading for more ti me from you C hair and from the 
Members . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Samuel Mwaura . 
I think you may push the relevant department by Wednesday , you can then table your response 
please . 
  
Hon. Mwaura: Much obliged Mr. Speaker.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Honourable  Leila Nyache you  are up on a 
point of order ? 
 
Hon. Nyache: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Hii taarifa  ilikua ni yangu nimeileta hapa 
katika Bunge hili na wakasema wenyewe kwamba tu kirudi kutoka mapumzikoni wataku wa 
wameleta majibu . Kwa hivyo ni jambo la kusikitisha hata ule mda pia kuuomba Mheshimiwa 
mwenza pale amba ye ni Mwenyekiti wa Kutekeleza,  ule muda pia wa kusema apewe mda gani 
pia sasa hivi hakusema . Ni jambo la k usikitisha Mheshimiwa Spika , sasa sijui hawa wana nchi 
wetu tutawasaidia vipi ikiwa mambo ni haya . Ningeomba jibu mwafaka Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
  The Temporary Speaker (Hon. H amisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Leila Nyache . I 
think I gave a directive on that Honourable Samuel Mwau ra to push the relevant department so 
that they can make a response within Wednesday next week and he also explained that he made 
certain efforts for a response from the department but they have not responded back to him yet .  
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 So, I have given him a directive that by next week Wednesday you should push the 
relevant department so that you can give the response so I think I already gave a direction to that 
Honourable  Leila Nyache.   
 
Hon. Nyache: Bwana  Spika nimeridhika lakini vile amesema ata sukuma asukume  ukweli 
vile amesema atasukuma aweze kusuk uma uk weli tuweze kupata majibu. Ah sante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. H amisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Leila Nyache . I 
think the Chairman for Implementation has taken note on that and gave a directive on next week 
Wednesday for them to push for a response on the relevant department . Yes Clerk.  
 
MTOPANGA RIVER WEED INFESTATION  
 
Yes, Honourable  Morgan Matsaki MCA of Mtopanga Ward. 
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki ): Thank you Mr.  Speaker . I stand to pursuant to 
Standing Order 41(2) (c)  to request for a statement to the Chairperson Committee on 
Environment and Solid waste management on the infestation of weed along in the Mtopanga 
River . Honourable  Speaker, it has  come to my attention that the river is currently facing a serious 
issue with the proliferation  of dense and length y aquatic weeds , which are impending the natural 
flow of water within the river . Honourable  Speaker , this accumulation of weeds poses a serious 
threat to the environme nt and local comm unity  and hinders the rivers capacity to carry water 
efficiently thereby increasing the risk of flooding during the heavy rains . Additionally,  it disrupts 
the ecosystem of the river negatively impacting aquatic life and overall water quality Mr. 
Speaker . Honourable  Speaker , in his response, the Chairperson should inquire and report on the 
plans the County government ha s to: 
a) Initiate a comprehensive program to clear the invasive weeds from the Mtopanga River   
b) Enhance the river’s capacity to handle increased w ater flow during rainy season  
c) Engage the local community to  raise awareness about the importance of maintaining the 
cleanliness and health of the Mtopanga River  
d) Implement measures to protect and preserve the rivers ecosystem  
e) Allocate adequate financial resources to execute these plans efficiently and ensure their 
success.  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Morgan Matsaki . 
Yes, Hon ourable  Juma Mwalimu Chairperson Committee on Environment and Solid Waste 
Management, pleas e respond to the statement. Hon ourable  Juma Mwalimu that  is a statement.  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Mheshimiwa Spika ndio ameleta sa a hizi kwa hivyo tupatie mda 
tufanye maneno . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : No, it’s in your …. 
 
[Interrup tion]  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Saa hizi we ungesema nakukabidhi sasa ulete hii lakini … 
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : No! You are not tabling anything;  you 
have read a statement because you are in the House. He has specified that his statement touches 
on your docket so you need to respond.  
 
Hon. Juma Mw alimu:  Sawa Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa sababu hii  taarifa  ni ndefu kama 
Mswada  itabidi nikafanye utafiti  kwanza, alafu nitaleta majibu baada ya wiki mbili.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : After two weeks?  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu: Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Yes, Honourable  Morgan Matsaki the 
Chairperson has  agreed to res pond back after two weeks.  
 
The L eader of Minority (Hon. Matsaki ): Mheshimiwa Spika naona ni taarifa  nime soma 
na kwa sababu ya  shida ya mvua ya  El Nino, ningeomba wachuku e hatua  kwa haraka 
iwezekanavyo kwa saba bu, sisi kwa ufupi ni watumwa na ni muhimu sana unapowasilisha jambo 
kwa Bunge hili  wacha tu Waheshimiwa wenza na Mwenyekiti mhusika aweze kuchukua hatua 
kwa haraka iwezekanavyo , kwa sababu ya  shida ya mvua ya E l Nino. A hsante.  
 
[Interru ption]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Order! Order! Hon ourable  Members ! 
Honourable  Makanga , kindly wait as I first c onclude the matter with Hon ourable  Matsaki before 
standing, take your seat please ?! Honourable  Makanga , take your seat first , I will give you a 
chance, take your seat ! Honourable  Morgan Matsaki,  the Chairpe rson for E nvironment has 
clearly said that because the statement is too long, he needs to go back to s it with his Committee 
and come with a good response  then I think he has given a duration of two weeks. So , if you can 
kindly give him time to make a substantive response,  please.  
 
The Leader of Minority (Hon. Matsaki ): Okay let me accept it but they should have to do 
it as quick as possible, kwa sababu saa hii zaidi ya hapo wiki mbili ni nyingi sana na ikiwa 
itawezekana  let them take the initiative,  if possible , next week wape ane majibu kufikia Jumanne  
ama Jumatano katika ki kao kija cho. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) :  Okay Hon ourable  Matsaki . Honourable  
Juma Mwalimu it is a humble request from Hon ourable  Matsaki if you can make it a week 
instead of two weeks, to respond to his statement.  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Wajua Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza mimi nakuambia mpaka 
nifanyiwe taratibu kwa sababu hapa  inazungumza mambo ya weed , mambo ya river  na idara  
yangu mimi ni ya maji hii, kwa hivyo kuna mito … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : I think I will  make a rul ing on this 
Honourable  Morgan Matsaki, let me give him two weeks so that you can give a substantive 
response.  
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Haya ni mambo ya kina Kiprop bana … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) :  Honourable  Juma Mwalimu , okay in the 
next two weeks please provide a respond to Hon ourable  Morgan Matsaki .  
 
[Interruption]  
 
Yes, Hon ourable  Frankline Makan ga? You are up on a point of order?  
 
Hon. Makanga: Point of information Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) :  To who?  
 
Hon. Makanga: On the issue that y ou. 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) :  To who?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  To you as the Speaker of the House.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : No.  You can  not inform me.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Okay to the House. May I inform the House Mr. Speaker because we 
have realized the issue that you have just giv en directions to the wrong Committee?  This issue 
concerns storm water drainage so it has the aspect of water and transport and infrastructure.  So, 
unless you give the right direction you will be waiting for response and no one will be coming 
with a response because as a member of the Environment Committee this is not under our 
jurisdiction Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Okay Hon ourable  Makanga . I think 
Honourable Morgan Matsaki , I have directed  this statement to the right Committee … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
It is the right Committee. Hon ourable  Mbelle , you are up on a point of order? Whom are 
you informing the House?  
 
Hon. Mbelle:  Mr. Speaker, I s tand on a point of information and I wish t o inform the 
House that we  are all aware that the weather man had at some point announced that we are having 
El Nino  rains coming …  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 I seek to start again that the weather man had actually announced the El Nino  rains are 
coming very soon and for that reason I want to inform the House that there is a big reason fo r us 
to even ask … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Hamisi Nyota) : Honourable  Patrick Mbelle do you mean 
that the House has no information ? You stand to inform an individual so I think th e issue of 
Honourable  Morgan Ma tsaki which I have already given directions is already settled Hon ourable  
Mbelle u nless you want to inform a specific individual in the House, then we can proceed.  
 
Hon. Mbelle:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker we are all informed by virtue that 
we are all consumers of media that we are h aving El nino rains coming and it is my wish that we 
inform both ourselves and even the H ouse that the departments that we lead that there is a need 
for us to come up with a plan or mea ns and ways of how the County government , particularly the 
executive can tell us on how prepared  with the matter they are because Hon ourable  Morgan 
Matsaki Hon ourable  Member has just raised one issue about the river, but there is more to every 
Ward that needs a lot of concern.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Hamisi  Nyota) : Honourab le Patrick, I think y ou could 
come up with your own statement because already Hon ourable  Matsaki has come up with his 
own statement and he has given directive to a specifi c Committee . So, if you have anything in 
addition to what Hon ourable  Matsaki is requesting, please come up with your own statement 
directed to the Committee which you think can give you the correct response Hon ourable  
Mbelle.  Thank you.  Yes C lerk?  
 
UPDATING OF ROADS IN MTOPANGA WARD  
 
Yes, Honourable  Morgan Ma tsaki MCA Mtopanga Ward. 
 
The L eader of Majority (Hon.  Matsaki): Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker . I stand 
pursuant to Standing Order 41(2 ) (c) to request for a st atement from the Chairperson Committee 
on T ransport and Infrastructure about the upgrading of the following feeder roads in Mtopanga 
Ward. 
i. Shillah roads to Chambani  
ii. Shillah Mosque to Turkey Base  
iii. Shillah Mosque Fairfield academy  
iv. Chembeni to Blue Field  
 
Honourable Speaker , feeder roads are the li velihood  of our local economy and 
transportation network. It is our collective responsibility to ensure their maintenance and 
construction to facilitate the smooth movement of people and goods within our country.  
Honourable  Speaker , it is worth  emphasizing that the mandate for maintaining and constructing 
of feeder roads lies  squarely with the County government as outlined in the Fourth Schedule of 
the Kenyan Constitution. The County Government Act empowers the County Executive  
Committee Member responsible for roads to oversee the development and maintenance of roads ; 
including feeder roads .  
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 Honourable  Speaker, in his response the Chairperson should inquire and issue a 
comprehensive report detailing plans and timelines the County governmen t have for the 
tarmacking of the aforementi oned feeder roads in Mtopan ga. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Morgan Matsaki. 
Yes, Honourable  Hassan Ulkheir Chair person Committee Transport and I nfrastr ucture or de puty 
or Vice Chair T ransport and Infrastructure if you can respond to the Statement?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, kwa hili mimi naomba  tu 
unipatie muda naona wiki ijayo.  
 
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Mwaka. 
Honourable  Morgan Matsaki , the Vice - Chair for Transpo rt and Infrastructure has requested for 
a week to give you a response I think that is … take note of that. Yes Clerk?  
 
POOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM ALONG MTOPANGA AND JORDAN ESTATE  
 
Yes, Honourable  Morgan Matsaki?  
 
The Leader of Minor ity (Hon. Matsaki ): Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker. Honourable  
Speaker , I stand pursuant to standing Order 41 (2) (c) to request for a statement from the 
Chairperson, Committee on Transport and infrastructure on poor drainage system along 
Mtopanga and Jordan Estate.  Honourable  Speaker, the  deteriorating drainage system in 
Mtopanga and Jordan Estates within Mtopanga Ward is a pressing Issue ; it is with great concern 
that the drainage infrastructure in these areas  is not in order, and with impending El Nino rainy 
season, the risk of floods loom large over my constituents.  Honourable  Speaker, the residents of 
these e states have endure d the consequences of this poor drainage system for fa r too long. 
During heavy rains, their ho mes and properties have been inundated, cau sing substantial damage 
and distress. It is my duty as the representative to take swift action to alleviate their suffering.  
Honourable  Speaker , in his response the Chairperson should inquire and report on the plans  the 
County government have to:  
1. Conduct a comprehensive assessment of the drainage system to identify weaknesses and 
areas in need of immediate repair , 
2. Allocate funds for necessary infrastructure improvements, including the expansion and 
maintenance of existing  drainage channels , 
3. Collaborate with releva nt stakeholders to implement sustainable solutions that mitigate 
the risk of flooding , 
4. Raise awareness among residents about responsible waste disposal practices to prevent 
clogging of drains.   
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker ( Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Morgan Matsaki. 
Yes, Honourable  Hussei n Mohammed , Chairperson C ommittee on Transport and Infrastructure 
please respond to the statement . 
 
[Silence]  
 
The Vice -Chair, please respond to the statement . The Vice-Chair, yes proceed . 
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa hili pia nalichanganya na 
lile jengine, kufikia wiki ijayo  tutapata majibu yote mawili. A hsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Mwaka. 
Honourable Morgan M atsaki , the Vice -Chair Transport and Infrastructure has requested for a 
week to give you a comprehensive response. Yes Clerk?  
 
ALLEGED DISCRIMINATION IN RELEASE OF HEALTHCARE PRACTITIONERS FOR FURTHER 
STUDIES  
 
Yes, Honourable  Juma Manuari , MCA Bofu Ward?  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker. Honourable  Speaker , I stand 
pursuant to standing order 41 (2) (c ) to request for a statement from the C hairperson Committee 
on Health Service s on the alleged discrimination  in the release of Health  care practitioners for 
further studies in the County of Mombasa.  Our healthcare professionals play a vital role in the 
well being of our community and it is our  duty to support their professional growth and 
development.  I believe that by addressing this  alleged discrimination we can strengthen our 
health care system and provide equal opportunities for all.  Honourable  Speaker, I would like to 
draw your attention to the case of Ms. Khadija Awadh Said who claim s she has been unfairly 
denied the opportunity to pursue postgraduate studies at Moi University, despite having received 
a confirmation letter from the university.  Honourable  Speaker , this issue strikes at the heart of 
equal education opportunities for our healthcare professionals and it raises concerns about 
potential d iscrimination within our system. It is crucial that we ensure fairness and equity in the 
release of healthcare practitioners for further education.  Honourable  Speaker, I therefore request 
that the Chairpersons of the Committee inquire into the matte r and seek knowing information;  
i) An  explanation  from the authorities responsible for the release of healthcare practitioners 
regarding the denial of Ms. Khadija Awadh Said’s opportunity to pursue postgraduate studies 
despite having a confirmation letter from Moi Unive rsity, 
ii) Plans and action the County government intends to take to address this issue and ensure 
that all healthcare practitioners have equal opportunities to further their studies.   
 Thank y ou very much Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank Hon ourable  Juma Manuari . Yes, 
Honourable  Bernard Ogutu Chairperson Committee on Health services , please respond to the 
statement .  
 
[Silence ] 
 
The Vice Chair Health ? 
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Or any Member o f Health Committee?  Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Yes Mr. Speaker we acknowledge receipt of the said statement and 
therefore seek your permission that we will be able to respond it into two weeks time.  
September 13 , 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                        63 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Hamisi Nyota) : Yes, Honourable  Juma Manuari, the 
Member from Health Committee has just responded that in the next two weeks they are going to 
give a comprehensive response . 
 
Hon. Juma Manuari: Okay thank you Mr. Speaker . Fanyeni kazi yenu sisi twangoja 
majibu watoto wakasome. Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
This House stands adjourned until Tuesday 19th September , 2023 at 10 :00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3 :18p.m. 
 
 
 