June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 28th June, 2016  
The House met at 2: 36p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Members  have your seats . 
Hon. Kasangamba : Ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  kulingana  na 
tamaduni  za Nyumba  hii ni kwamba  kiti cha K iongozi  wa Walio Wengi huwa  upande  wa kulia  
Mheshimiwa  Spika . Lakini  leo hii naona  Mheshimiwa  Mwidani amekalia  kiti changu  bila 
kuniarifu  jambo  lolote  ama chochote . Mheshimiwa Spika naomba  utuelekez e kwa sababu  
sijaelewa  kwa nini anakalia  kiti changu .  
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Meti. 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed  Ebrahim  Omar ): Mheshimiwa Spika  nashang azwa na maneno  
anayo  ongea Mheshimiwa  Abdallah  Kasangamba  kuuliza Ki ongozi wa Walio Wengi wetu  
Hamisi  Musa. Kwa sababu  nafik iri Mheshimiwa  Spika  tokea wiki ya jana  kuna mawasiliano  
kutoka  kwenye  chama  chetu cha ODM  ya kwamba chama imekaa i kabadilisha Kiongozi wa 
Walio Wengi Bungeni  kutoka  Abdallah Kasangamba  kampa  Hamisi  Musa Mwidani.  
Mheshimiwa Spika mawasiliano  hayo yalifika kwenye  meza  yako  na mimi  kama Kiranja wa 
Bunge  hili nilichukua  jukumu  langu  kukuletea  na wewe  pia ukatusomea  mawasiliano hayo.  Kwa 
hio sioni tatizo lolote  kuhusu  Mheshimiwa  Hamisi Musa Mwidani kuketi  kwenye  kiti chake 
kama wanachama  walivyoamua  mhes himiwa Spika . Kwa hio  namuomba  ndugu  yangu a angalie  
mahali  popote  alipo makini napo  aweze  kukaa  ili Bunge  letu liweze  kuendelea  na zile hoja za leo 
Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Jabess Oduor . 
Hon. Oduor : Bwana Spika  nashanga a na matamshi  ya kakangu  mdogo  Meti . Nadhani  
moja  wapo  ya matatizo  ambayo  yanatukumba  Mheshimiwa Spika  bila kuogopa kusema ni kitu 
kinaitwa  uwezo wa  watu  kuelewa  maandishi  ya mistari  miwili  ndani  ya sheria za Bunge  huwa  
inakua  ni tabu. Bwana  Spika  mimi  nilikuwepo  ukitoa uamuzi  ndani  ya Jumba  hili ilisemekana 
status quo ibakie ; neno  status quo  yamaanisha  jinsi mambo yalivyo  yabakie vile , vilevile tuiingia  
kwenye  Jumba  hili Abdallah Kasangamba  aliku a Kiongo zi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  na status 
quo ni abakie , na mwelekeo  wako  ulikua  ni sharti  fungu la kum i na tano la sheria za Bunge 
Bwana Spika …..  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can you allow interruption from  Hon.  Maimuna ? 
Hon. (Ms.)  Maimuna Salim : Mheshimiwa Spika  nimesimama  mbele  ya Nyumba  hii 
nikijua  wewe  ni Spika  wetu  na tulikuchagua  uko na hekima lakini  nashangaa  kwamba  hapa  
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 palitokea suspension  za watu  wawili  leo nashangaa  namu ona Jabess yu ko ndani  ya Bunge  
anaongea  ikiwa  Mheshimiwa  mmoja  ambaye walipata suspension  wote  hajaingizwa katika  
Bunge  hii…  
(Applause ) 
       Kwa  hio nilikua  naomba  Mheshimiwa  Spika  wewe  ni referee  tuangalie  ni jinsi gani 
tutaamua hii tafadhali … 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi: Point of information !  
(Mr. Speake r (Hon. Rajwayi) on his feet)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Kasangamba can you find some where an d have a 
seat, the Speaker is up! N ow ladies and gentlemen I want to put it this way,  those who are 
standing can you  have your seats …  
(Loud Con sultations ) 
       Hon Duncan, Hon.  Kasangamba  can you have  your seats Hon. .. 
(Applause ) 
       The position of  the L eader of M ajority in the County  Assembly or any A ssembly is 
supposed  to be on the right hand of the Speaker and that’s the S tanding order , so I doubt  whether 
you should start fighting for that  particular issue that you are fighting , is it going to help us 
anyway ? And am really asking myself this simple question  why are we fighting over power,  and 
I always say this, when you we re elected  from  ward x whether Mjambere, Mtongwe , Ganjoni  
whichever one, you were elected to perform primarily three functions and those are the things we 
are supposed to do ; basically representation , we are suppose d to be legislating,  we are supp osed 
to be doing a over sight role and the Kenya today is very different from the Kenya you used to 
know yesterday or the day before yesterday so don’t think that when you start quarrelling over 
small matters you are going to get elected based on those grounds. You will not get v otes 
because you are the chairman of a certain party or even chairman of a certain C ommittee or even 
a Chief Whip, that will not get you back in this A ssembly  and it is important for us to know and I 
said it very clearly that party  matters must not be brou ght in the H ouse….  
(Applause)  
       You go sort yourselves out there and bring those issues when you are now clean , if you are 
dirty do not force us to clean you  in front of public like this.  This is a public institution where  in 
fact it is if it was my wish I would open all these walls so we can be seen the  way I used to 
debate when I was  in Pol ana so that people can see us.  We are Hon.  Membe rs but we are 
behaving horribly ! I think for once ladies and  gentlemen I told you here some time last year that 
it is not a must that I must be the  Hon.  Speaker of th is great County , if am supposed  to preside 
over things that are not respectful,  I better be home and do other things than to come here and 
start you know ...Let me just remind you once ag ain that you misbe have I will not  hesitate with 
you because I know where you b elong and I know where I belong , this is one government one 
people.  Can you allow the proceedings that are  there in the Standing order to take effect?   
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
(Loud consult ations ) 
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes what is it ? 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Ras hid): Mr. Speaker  I think  there is an impasse  in this 
House and it ’s only you who can solve that problem . We have got two people here ; both of them 
claim the y are the M ajority leader H amisi Mwidani and A bdallah Kasangamba so we want to 
hear from you , who is the Majority leader of this H ouse… 
(Applause ) 
       We cannot come here and debate the same thing every day . tomorrow it will be the same the 
day after to morrow  it will be  the same so we want to hear from your mouth Mr. Speaker, who is 
our Majority Leader in this H ouse tell us today and we finish this problem for once and for all .  
(Applause ) 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi)  on his feet ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi ): I want to believe we have the O rder paper with us so we 
are going to convert our  Order paper as it is ; and firs t of all I have a communication, b oth those 
Hon.  Members  who are standing can you all  have our seats . 
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) shifted to the next seat to allow  Hon. Kasangamba to 
occupy first right hand seat ) 
(Clapping ) 
 (Laughter ) 
So ladies and gentlemen before me am having two petitions and today’s business is a matter 
that we need to consider as soon as  possible and, the organiz ation called LEN GGO is a local 
empowerment of good governance, it was addressed to the C lerk and it was received today on 
the 28th day of June 2016 .  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) read)  
‘Petition to the County  Assembly of Mombasa on the matter of public part icipation on the 
County  budget estimates of 2 016/2017 and the Mombasa County  Appropriation B ill 2016 
scheduled for 27th day of June 2016 . We the undersigned CSOs and members of the public; 
Kituo Cha Sheria,  Transparency International Kenya (TI -KENYA) , Haki  Yetu ,Pamoja Trust,  
Ujamaa Center,  Juhudi Support Center,  Muslims For Human Rights  (MUHURI) , Center For 
Law And Re search International (CLARION) , Big ship CBO,  Local Empowerment For Good 
Governance  (LENGGO) , KECOSCE, Coast Education Center,  Kwacha Africa  among others  
hereby  petition the Clerk of Mombasa County  Assembly on the above matter . We hereby conte st 
that public participation did not take place for the above scheduled date, we therefore cite the 
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 following contraventions of both the constitution of K enya and County  government Act and 
Public Finance Management A ct, I think it must be of 2012 because we have different A cts there  
in that regard .  
1. Article 33 (1) and 35 (1) of the constitution of Kenya regarding access to information 
held by the state wher eby the Mombasa County  assembly, failed to provide vital data, 
documents and other relevant information in good time (Mombasa County  Budget 
Estimates and the Mombasa County  Appropriation Bill, 2016) to the general public.  
2. Article 196 1(b) with regards to t he public participation and County  Assembly powers, 
privileges and immunities whereby, the County  Assembly failed to facilitate a proper 
public participation process  - by among other things, not furnishing the public with the 
documents under review in good  time; by refusing, rejecting and/or failing to provide the 
County A ppropriation Bill, 2016; furnishing ineligible copies of the budget estimates to 
the public in bad time.  
3. Article  201 regarding the principl es of public finance where the County  Assembly fa iled 
to facilitate an open and accountable process in deliberating the Mombasa County  Budget 
Estimates and th e Mombasa County  Appropriation B ill, 2016.  
4. The County  Assembly contravened section 87 of the County  Government Act with 
regards to principles of ci tizen participation whereby it failed to provide in time access to 
information, data, documents and other information relevant to the public participation 
process. Moreover, the County  Assembly failed to provide reasonable access to the 
process of formulat ing and implementing policies and regulations including the approval 
of development proposals, projects and budgets.  
5. In its dispensation of duties in regard to the above subjects matter, the County  Assembly 
of Mombasa contravened A rticle 131 (2) of  the Pub lic Finance Management A ct 201 2 
which states that before the County  Assembly considers the estimates of revenue and 
expenditure,  the relevant committee of the County  Assembly shall discuss and review the 
estimates and make recommendations to the County  Assembly, the committee shall take  
into account the views of the County  Executive M ember for finance and the public on the 
proposed recommendations.  
6. The manner in which the County  Assembly organized the above stated public 
participation space for the public. A public participation meeting for a County  with a 
population of approximately 1 million residents cannot be organized in only one venue. 
This in our view would not have provided wider consultations with the public therefore 
breaching their participation r ights.  
       THEREFORE, by failing on the above, we assert that we have been robbed of our 
powers of self -governance and participation in making decisions affecting us and thus 
demeaning the principles and objects of devo lution as stated in chapter 11 A rticle 174 of 
the constitution of Kenya.  Nothing that the County  budget cycle ends on the 30th of June 
2016, we  hereby ask for a way forward within the next w orking day (24 hours) . 
Yours faithfully . 
For; the undersigned . 
(End of Communication)  
Ladies and ge ntlemen for the undersigned here am having three pages ; I want to believe from 
different organizations,  we have one 18 members, another one 20 members so if you allow me 
very fast read this so that you don’t add or remove those names that are considered as  signed, 
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 you will have  to excuse me because we  have some handwriting here that is really wanting , first 
one is ;  
1. Akullah Khamisi  
2. Evans A Okal  
3. Swaleh Mohamed  
4. Jared Ogeto 
5. Maimuna Siraji  
6. Mart W Maina  
7. Anne Rose  
8. Rose Wakesho  
       The list is a bit long up t o 32 but it is important I have stated a number of individuals who 
signed this so I want to believe nothing can be added,  the first page 32 second page 18 third one 
20 and the forth one is  also 18. Ladies and gentlemen this particular petition you will agree with 
me that the concerns  that have been raised here are  genuine very valid and we don’t have any 
other option but to speed up so that we can see how best we address that particular concern but 
the most worrying thing is  that as the Hon.  Member s of these Assembly  I will not shy away from 
reminding us that we are a big letdown when it comes to involving the public on the matters of 
these magnitude because these is a very simple thing that we ought to have cleared since last 
week so it is importan t we consider that particular  one and I want to believe  Hon. Patrick 
Siminyu  has been from the same organizations, Hon Jimmy Odari, the Speaker himself so we 
cannot pretend  that when they raise these issues  they are always sweeter when you are on the 
other side but when you are on this side they are now bitter we must address these particular 
issue . 
       The second one again another petition again on the same matter I want to believe that the 
two petition s can be co nsidered forthwith and the issues raise d are almost the same , basically 
about public participation so am directing that Delegated  Legislation  together with the 
Committee of Budget and Appropriation F inance kindly make sure  this particular issues raised 
are considered within a period of  24 hour s as has been said from this particular time making this 
submission meaning  by tomorrow we must conduct a public participation  and you must involve 
the public  in this and I want to see that one done , so you are directed to move with speed  and 
make sure tha t is done .  
Yes next,  yes Hon.  Ebrahim Omar .  
Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ): Ahsante tena Bwana Spika . Bwana  Spika  
mimi bado niko kwa yale mawasiliano ambayo chama i likupa kwa sababu  hapa kwa  Nyumba  
waheshimiwa  wanachanganyikiwa  na pia umma  umechang anyikiwa . Kuliku wa na ule uamuzi 
ambao chama ilifanya kuhusiana na  Kiongozi Wa Walio Wengi Bungeni.  Mheshimiwa Spika  
kama alivyoongea Mheshimiwa Mswabah kwamba kuna watu wawili wanakorogana kuhusu 
yupi ni  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  kati yao wakati cha ma kilishatoa mwelek eo na yale 
mawasiliano  ambayo  nilikupa  niko nayo  hapa copy  labda nikupe tena copy  kama hii uangalie 
vizuri ku wa chama ni ime amua aje kuwa ni yupi Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  ama ni 
yupi Kiongozi Wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  wake na  wewe  Mheshimiwa  Spika  kama referee wetu  
naomba  uheshimu  uamuzi  wetu  wa chama  na ututangazie  sasa hivi kama  inawezekana  ili tujue  
katika  Bunge  hili ili tujue  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni ni y upi. Kwa sababu  tunajua  
kesho  tunaenda  public participation  lazima  tuwe na Kiongozi  wetu  wa Walio wengi  tujadili  
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 naye tupange  ni njia gani tunaweza  tumia  kwa public participation  hio ili tuwape  watu  wa 
Mombasa  ripoti nzuri  kulingana  na bajeti yetu Mheshimiwa  Spika .  
Kwa hi o naomba  kupitia  kiti chako  utupe  jibu na jina la Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi 
Bungeni  wa Mombasa ni nani na mimi  ningependa  nikupe  hii copy  Mheshimiwa  Spika  uangalie 
uamuzi  wetu  wa chama cha ODM  na mimi  kama  Kiranja wa Bunge  nimechukua jukumu langu 
la kukuletea  barua  hii kama  nilifuata  zile amri ulizonipa  kwamba  tutengeneze K amati ya Ad hoc 
ili itupe j ibu Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  ni yupi nae n i Hamis i Musa  Mwidani kama  
ulivyomtuma kwenye ile Kamati , na pia vile vile  vile kulingana  na Kiongozi  wa Chama  na sisi 
wenyewe  wanachama  katika uamuzi wa pamoja  tuliamua  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  ni 
nani. Kwa hivyo  Mheshimiwa  Spika  ripoti ndio hii hapa naomba  tafadhali  kupitia  kiti chako  
ulifungue macho Bunge  hili ili tujue mbivu  na mbichi  kuhusu  ni yupi Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi 
Bungeni  wa Mombasa na naomba k ama yaweze kana nimpe Karani wa Bunge  tena…  
(Chief Whip ( Hon. Ahmed  Omar Ebrahim ) laid paper ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I just want you to listen to this ; I’m going to read based on 
the issue th at has been raised by Hon.  Ebrahim Omar , the same issu e had b een raised by Hon.  
Mswabah who is the Deputy S peaker and its good that you are asking that qu estion when the 
Chair himself gave a directive last week that we need to stop the habit of wrangles and I want 
you to listen . When I woke up this morning  at around  4:37am in the morning I decided to go to 
social media to se e what is happening there in the outside world, I read something and that thing 
touched me and I want to read  it to you so that you can also share the same sentiments with me 
and see whether we ar e on the right track or in a fake one , this letter is a shared one and it is 
written urgent letter to my brother Kenya  in appeal . 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) read an ex tract  of letter ) 
       Hi Bro, My name is Rwanda. Your small bro, this letter is a bit long, anyway how are you? 
Hope you are good, just like Me. Bro, its long since we talked but this letter is urgent! You have 
to do what I say.  Bro, in April 1994, the worst happened to me after the death of my president, 
Juvenal Habyarimana, who was a Tuts i, my people went totally crazy! You see, Tutsi and Hutu 
were the major tribes that I had. Now, the Hutu were smaller than the Tutsi and the Tutsi had 
held on to power for so long! In April, 1994 madness began!  After fierce campaign propaganda 
by the angry  Hutus, who wanted power too, I watched as the  Hutu bought 581,000 machetes 
(Panga ’s) from China. I helplessly watched as the Hutu also bought rocket launchers, mortar 
bombs, grenades and ammunition worth £18M from Egypt.  My heart was beating. My soul was 
scared. I watched, with sadness and fear, the media spreading false propaganda, lies and 
innuendo to the public , I even watched the Church preaching hatred, ethnicity and war. I couldn't 
believe this was happening. The stage was set for War. My children we re getting prepared for the 
worst , hate leaflets were being spread. The Hutu were getting armed , the Tutsi were getting 
scared.  And one sad morning, it happened! I heard children screaming! I saw women crying! I 
had men wailing, my heart almost stopped, wi thin a 100 day, my children turned into animals! 
They butchered each other! Slaughtered each other , ambushed each other I watched as 1 ,000 
Tutsi children were burnt alive in a Polish Catholic Church , I watched as 2,500 Tutsi men were 
bombed to death while hiding in a tiny, crowded Church!  I watched sadly as around 250,000 
girls were mercilessly raped and beaten to death , I watched as 400,000 Tutsi men lost their 
manhood after it was cut in public by the Hutu , I watched as 2,000 women were thrown into a pit 
of fire like dead houseflies , I watched endless rivers of blood flow in my streets , I watched 
children crying, children mourning their parents, children being slaughtered with machetes , I 
watched as USA President, Bill Clinton and the U.N peace keepers ign ored me letting me 
destroy myself!  I knew that was the end of me. It was sad! Painful! Unbelievable! For 100 days, 
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 my children did the worst! It was blood, tears, sorrow, pain, death and agony. Finally, I had lost a 
million people in just 100 days when the  madness stopped. I knelt down and thanked God!         
They were fighting for a politician! Fighting for a tribe! Fighting for power! But what did they 
gain? Nothing! Absolutely nothing! Until today, I have never recovered from the madness! I 
have so many scars, so much pain!  Dear brother, I see your people are holding elections in the 
coming days. I see you guys are getting ready! I see two major tribes the Luo and Kikuyu that 
have the major presidential candidates. Take my word whatever happens , whoever w ins, 
whoever loses, whether they rig or not whether the loser accepts the results or not,  whatever they 
tell you whether they incite you or not.   Whatever grudges you may ha ve toward the winning 
tribe or c andidate I ask you in the name of God please, do n ot do what my people did , do not 
burn the church , do not rape a woman , do not slaughter a child , do not use a panga, take it from 
brother if you dare do that I will never forgive you and you will never be the same again. I would 
never wish that any country  goes through what I did! Never! Kenya you are bigger than any tribe 
or any politician. Kenya have a fun and p eaceful election. Love, Rwanda.  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi)  ended reading the extract of the letter)  
Ladies and gentle men, I have decided to read t hat particular message that has been shared 
to us, I know you have it yourself . I just want to tell you one thing , let us not fight for power , I 
want to ask each  one that we  must not generate it from here, we are one thing and I am asking 
myself why are y ou generating it? Why are you starting it? It’s very simple to me as far as these  
particular issues  are  concerned  and immediately when I made a ruling last week it was a very 
fine clear ruling an d what happened because you a greed never liste ned and you decided to start, 
phone calls have been made  from different counties to the candidates  and now to the whole 
world which is contrary to a directive that was given by this particular important seat  when I 
read it ladies and gentlemen .  I received the lett er that was forwarded to me by the Chief Whip of 
this same Hon.  House, I read it out and the letter is still here with me  and the only name   that is 
carried here as the Leader of Majority in the H ouse  is Hon.  Hamisi Musa Mwidani which I 
mentioned …. 
(Appl ause) 
A question that I asked myself, what happened there after? Now because y ou don’t 
believe in yourself do not make people believe in you if you cannot trust  yourself. If a 
communication has been done,  that particular communication  stands as it is made… .. 
(Applause ) 
       And if you make your own problems as a party and I repeated this, I will never be  used to 
make a decision for a party that  I said and am going to desist and  even right now I am not going 
to start telling you who is going to be your next Leader  of Majority tomorrow , that is not my 
mandate as the Speaker …. 
(Applause ) 
       It is very simple that  any communication that we must  get we read it as it is. All the 
operations that you will want to do as a party  that is within your party struc ture and I  want you 
to respect thi s Assembly and if you don’t  respect the  Assembly , this is where people elected I 
will invite all people who are outside to come and see how you are misbehaving in this Hon.   
House because to me you are not elected alon e, no single vote elected you many got elected even 
those people that you defeated are n ow depending on you as a father,  and as a leader  you must 
provide leadership and that not all the time when you stand, you stand on removing so and so, 
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 each and every t ime  you stand you stand on doing something on another person am waiting to 
see those people who are going to stand out and start appreciating  that the things that we 
approve and pass at CIDP  this is the much that we have achieved, thi s is the much that i s 
remaining . We cannot turn  on each other,  we cannot turn  on our own brothers and  we mus t stop 
misery we are all equal . We have developed the attitude of making others more important than 
others in this Assembly and we have made others to be like semi laws  in the way we operate and 
that must stop  and am just pleading with you, can you think beyond what you are doing, just 
think beyond the box and make sure that you do whatever is required of you , that is my humble 
request to you and if  you are defeated to  do that , I think we have a better way and I will  advice 
you very soon that this is the direction that we can take as a government and for that  matter I am 
not going to entertain any other business apart from what is in the order paper.  
PAPER  
There was a business  that was interrupted even though it did not come before the 
communication ; Hon.  Priscilla you were to give the  report on this you were the one who was 
interrupted between you and Chief W hip you let me understand .  
Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker but  I have my Chief W hip in 
the House I think  I will respect according to our party structure so that he can deliver the 
message .  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I doubt whether this is a party matter but it is ok ay, maybe 
that’s  your ow n arrange ment.  
Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ): Thank you again Mr. Speaker I  do also 
believe the order in the paper was to get a report concerning  the matter of Leader of M inority but 
Hon.  Speaker the  party … am still consulting under  the issue..  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I am  reminding you there is no party and you people be  
honest with yourselves there  is nothing to do with the party here, there is no  party called 
Minority in this H ouse… 
(Laughter ) 
Chief  Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Oma r):  As to what the party was consulting about 
is that they have still chosen Hon.  Maimuna to continue as the Minority leader …. 
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I can see the  intervention  here…  
Hon. Mwabashiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimi wa Spika  katika  wiki iliyopita  
uamuzi ulikua u ko wazi na mimi naona ni swala la kujichanganya kwa sababu uliwapa kina 
mama privilege  wakae wachague.  Kwa hivyo mas uala ya  Kiranja wa Bunge  yanachanganya ; 
hata kama ni kwa chama, hapa hakuna  mambo ya chama  mambo ya chama tuliyazungumza 
yakamalizika yaliyobakia ulitoa uamuzi Mheshimiwa Spika  na uamuzi  wiki iliyop ita kuwa 
caucus wakae na Mheshimiwa Prisc hilla alikuwa . Uliwapa siku mbili wakashindwa wakasema 
waongezewe hadi leo Jumanne , kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika leo ni Jumanne Mheshimiwa 
June 28, 2016                                COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 Prisc hillah asimame aseme kama wanawake wametoa jina gani, wameshindwa basi kina baba 
wachukue hiyo hatua kutoka hapo. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Murfad . 
Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir with all due respect you ar e wise and you have just read 
for us the things that you saw and to avoid such things be a wise man.  Mr. Speaker I want to say 
this, when communication is made to your office it  is through that comm unication we believe 
and stand.  When Hon.  Ndanda was remov ed, he was removed through the commun ication of the 
parties and the M embers  and it was when Hon.  Ndanda was removed as the Chief Whip, again  
when Hon.  Mwabashiri was removed it wa s through the direction of the M embers and the 
endorsement of the party agai n.  Mr. Speaker for the Minority leader to be removed without the 
consensus of  the majority and the party is not correct Mr. Speaker . 
(Applause ) 
            I beg your direction Mr. Speaker .  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now this issue we have moved ten st eps ahead and we are 
going 20 backwards ; one you are the same people who moved the Motion  here, nobody moved a 
Motion . I doubt whether somebody from K ilifi or Kwale came to this H ouse you are the same 
Hon.  Members w ho decided to actually bring a Motion  seconded and overwhelmingly passed  
that Motion  and now the directive from the C hair was very clear that if you now want and I 
stopped you from electing a new person  that is going to act as the Leader of M inority because  I 
consider two things ; one that positi on is a preserve for the Hon.  ladies in the House, secondly, 
that particular position was created through a Motion  where we have a Chairperson a nd we have 
the deputy C hair person so that provisions  can you make good use of them.  And in fact I can 
even reme mber you said that in the next possible sitting which  is today if the Hon.  Ladies do not 
elect or present a M ember you will present yourself the Leader of Minority …  
(Laughter ) 
       And today I wonder what kind of tune that you are bringing on board , I am not going to 
subject this to debate . You know I stopped it the other time and even now I am going to stop it, 
you are not going to elect yourself here ; you either go and leave me a name whether you get me 
any name now am not going to be strict if you get  me any name I will get that name and read it , 
that this is the position of that particular decision that you people are going to make ,  let me just 
assure you that that particular business you won’t do it here and if you have not done it now I am 
giving y ou another directive can you all resume your seats am not going to give you any 
opportunity to do what you want to do you Hon.  Members am giving you not later than Thursday 
this week to sort out your mess but don’t sort it here just do it outside and make sure that you 
bring a smooth decision.  
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Ladies and gentle men this H ouse stands adjourned until tomorrow Wednesday in the 
morning exactly 9 :00a.m. 
The House  rose at  3:23p.m. 