May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 3 1st May, 201 7 
The House met at 9 :35a.m. 
 (Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit down. Yes Clerk . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 Thank you Member s of the County Assembly, first and foremost I apologi ze for 
coming late, the President and his Deputy were going to launch the SGR so there was a lot of 
traffic congestion on my way f rom Changamwe. I also understand that other Member s are held  
up in that cond ition so for that reason I apologize . Hon.  Member s, I wish to bring to the attention 
of this Hon.  Assembly that we have visitors from Mary Joy Kindergarten  and Primary and little 
Stars Junior  School. I would like to recognize the presence of the delegation which consists of:  
1. Oyako Levis Agallo  
2. Gitiya Roy James  
3. Mwangangi Penina Mwende  
4. Swabri Salim  
5. Kirimi Shaleen Kendi  
6. Janet Mkaka  
7. Margaret S asha Nyaboke  
8. Hassan Ali  
9. Anwar Ali Mohammed  
10. Granton Mwandau  
11. Whitney Nyamohanga  
12. Munyendo Ruth Seku  
13. Ahmed Jamal Mohamed  
14. Gloria Bosibori, is absent.  
15. Katee Fidel Munyoki  
16. Munga Jesse Mwaringa  
17. Abdalla Khadija Mohamed  
18. Gacheo Stacey Kerubo  
19. Wesley Wanjala  
20. Sono Mario  Masao  
21. Kinuthia Michelle Njeri  
22. Mware Erick Muthii  
23. Khadija Hajila Adam  
24. Muturi T erryanne Wanjuhi  
25. Rehema Karisa  
26. Samuel Pius  
27. Fauzia Shaban Ramadhan  
28. Mwongela Fredrick Mu wo 
29. Paul Khadija Mutei  
30. Vidzo Lulu Kabei  
31. Juma Mwanasiti Ninjama  
May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 32. George Masha  
33. Udengu Eugene  Okoth  
34. Zainab Janibe Suleiman  
35. Mwadime Ruth Samantha  
36. Wachu Idris Swaleh  
37. Adongo Claudine Marion  
38. Ndung’u Aaliyah Nduta  
39. Nyakina Wyclife Obadia  
40. Ngatia Neo Mwai  
41. Nyaroo Isaac Moturi  
42. Obiero Alvine Nyaboke  
43. Mkoma Daniel Mwaria  
44. Charo  Edwin Mwamure  
45. Ngumi Meshack Mutua  
46. Salim Marinnete Ningome  
47. Muiruri Christine Njeri  
48. Rose Assey  
49. Jonah Kipkoech  
They are accompanied by the staff:  
1. Ms. Mary Kanini Waigi – Managing Director  
2. Mr. Kisongochi Victor  
3. Mr. Mui Baraza  
4. Mr. Seth Okoth  
5. Mr. Christopher Sabwa  
Thank you so much.  On behalf of the Assembly, I welcome you all to the County 
Assembly of Mombasa.  Karibuni sana. 
(Applause)  
Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon. Stephen Wangudi Chairperson, Committee  on Early on Childhood , Education, 
Children and Vocational Training. Hon. Wangudi . 
Hon. Wangudi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa fursa hii niweze kuzungumzia s uala 
ama hoja iliyoletwa ndani ya Jumba hili na Mheshimiwa Mte ule ambaye ni Mheshimiwa Mary 
Akinyi . Mheshimiwa Spika  kama tunavyo fahamu serikali ya Kaunti inasimama kivyake , la 
kwanza kabisa ikiwa ni Bunge  ambalo majukumu yake makubwa ni  uwakilishi , kupiga darubini 
vitengo vy a utekelezaji katika Kaunti na u tunzi wa sheria na kutokana na s uala ambalo 
limechipuka ndani ya Nyumba hii ni suala ambalo  limehusu Kamati  ambayo inafanya  kazi chini 
ya uelekezi wangu ambayo ni Kamati  ya Elimu na watoto . Mheshimiwa Spika  Kamati  hii 
tunaweza kusema ni moja wapo ya Kamati  ambayo zinawajibika zaidi  katika  Jumba hi li na ndio 
maana hata kabla s uala hili halijajitokeza ndani ya Jumba hili Kamati  hii ilikuwa ishachukua 
hatua na ikawa imefika katika kiwango fulani ijapokuwa hakuna Ripoti  ambayo imetengenezwa 
na Kamati  hii kutokana na dharura ya suala hili lakini nitaeleza  Jumba hili  ama ninafahamisha 
Jumba hili hatua ambazo zilikuwa  zimechukuliwa na Kamati hii kuambatana na s uala zima 
ambal o ni uajiri  wa waalimu wa...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mary Akinyi what is it?  
May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , Mheshimiwa Spika  hili ni Jumba 
ambalo linaheshimika na ni Jumba ambalo kama Mheshimiwa yeyote aliye Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati  fulani amepewa nafasi ya kuletea watu Ripoti  yoyote ama majibu yoyote ama jambo 
lolote ni vyema afanye utafiti na alete hiyo Ripoti  katika hali ya maandishi asi tuambie hapa 
kuwa hajafanya utafiti , hajaleta Ripoti  ambayo imeandikwa , tutajuaje kama mwenye jibu  
anaeridhika amepiga hatua mpaka analeta  katika Jumba hili ? 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj . 
Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker , I want to agree to what Hon. Mary 
Akinyi is expressing with  regards to the Report  that was s upposed to be presented by the Hon.  
Member , it is very important  that the  Hon.  Member  is here to represent his own person al views 
instead of coming here with a comprehensive Report  that we have  requested as a House . Mr. 
Speaker if at all  we wanted his own person al views then we would  have  requested a meeting in a 
bar or somewhere or in an Hotel … 
(Applause ) 
...Mr. Speaker this is a House of rules and regulations and we must abide by those rules 
which actually set up this H ouse and the pilla rs of this House. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
(Applause ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Member s of this County Assembly I 
think  what  Hon. Mary Akinyi wanted is to get a clear answer, also we are in order no. 7 which is 
a statement we don’t expec t Hon.  Wangudi to bring a Paper  here, it is not a Paper  we are waiting 
for this is a statement and  this statement it can be replied …  
(Applause)  
...verbally , it can be replied on the spot so it is not a Paper  which we are  anticipating for  
Hon. Steven Wangudi. Yes Hon.  Patrick Muriuki . 
 Hon. Siminyu:  Hon. Speaker with all due respect this is a House of rules and 
procedures  and the matter was directed to the Committee  and the Committee  was supposed to do 
an investigation on the sam e matter and bring a Report  though the statement was brought by 
Hon. Mary and through you Chair you directed the Committee  to bring the Report . I don’t know 
may be it is a typing error I don’t understand according to the records  it is a Paper , but it was 
suppos ed to be a Report  on the said matter…  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  No, no, what I would say is a statement ;  a 
Mem ber can r ise and ask a question and that question can be replied there and then but if the 
Chairman is not ready or he doesn’t hav e the information at hand he can ask for a permission to 
answer it another day , so this is a statement and it is not a Paper  you are not translating into 
being a Paper  I think that is very clear. Your statement can be answered there and then if the 
Chairman  has an answer if he doesn’t have an answer he can seek leave,  yes Hon.  Saad Ahmed 
Faraj . 
 Hon. Faraj : Thank you once again Mr. Speaker now that we understand we would l ike 
to hear from the Hon.  Member  that he has made an effort in a way that he will enable him to 
communicate with the department and show us evidence as well if at all there is any written 
communication between the Clerk ’s office and that office of that particular Department so that 
the information that is not to rely on us is information that is reliable. Thank you.  
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s also you should also understand 
he hasn’t presented the presentation yet so there is no way you can know whether it is credible 
May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 information or not . So let’s give him some tim e to prove his argument and then you will judge 
that argument whether it is credible or not credible. Yes Hon.  Wangudi . 
 Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, thank you for your protection I just seek time 
to present what I have to Hon. Member s. Mheshimiwa Spika  namna nilivyoku wa naeleza 
mazungumzo yangu niliku wa najaribu kuwaeleza Waheshimiwa ya kwamba Kamati  
inayowajibika  imechukua jukumu hata kabla swali halijakuja na chochote ambacho kinahitajika 
ndani ya Jumba hili kuhusiana na s uala hili niko macho kwa mfano ningependa kukujulisha ya 
kuwa mnamo tarehe 22/0 3/2017 Kamati  ya Elimu ilifanya kikao na nina kumbukumbu hapa 
ambazo ningependa nikabidhi Jumba hili na hapo ndipo Kamati  iliafikiana kumualika ambaye ni 
Waziri wa masuala ya Elimu na watoto kuja kuzungumzia suala hilo katika Kamati  hio ambayo  
mimi ndiye Mwenyekiti . Mheshimiwa Spika  ninaomba kukabidhi kumbukumbu hizi ili na wewe 
uweze kuzipitia na uone uamuzi ul iofanywa na Kamati . Mheshimiwa Spika  kama vile 
nilivyo omba ya kuwa nipewe muda niweze kujibu swali ambalo lililetwa na Mheshimiwa Mary 
na suala hili nitaliregesha kwako hapo awali baada ya kuthibitisha ya kwamba Kamati  ilifany a 
pande yake na pale ilipofikia tutak uwa tunaomba muelekeo na muongozo  wako kuhusiana na 
suala hili . Mheshimiwa Spika  baada ya kumbukumbu hizo kuna barua ambayo iliandikwa siku 
hiyo hiyo ya kumualika Waziri aweze kufika mb ele ya Kamati  aweze kueleza Kamati  ya Bunge  
hili kuhusu suala zima la uajiri wa walimu wa shule zetu za chekechea . Mheshimiwa Spika  
naomba na  naikabidhi barua hiyo ya ualis hi wa Waziri ambaye ni wa Elimu na watoto . 
Nikiendelea na mazungumzo  Mheshimiwa….  
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Patrick Muriuki Siminyu what is 
it? 
 Hon. Siminyu: Thank Mr. Speaker, I can see the Hon.  Member  is giving documents 
after documents can you explain to the House and we have an understanding w hat is contained in 
the documents and  the minutes i nstead of giving you so that you explain to the House. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  No, I think Hon.  Wangudi was talking and 
you were not listening that is the problem , he said….  
(Laug hter) 
 …he has been standing there talking  and you’re not listening . These are minutes, th is is 
the pro of that there was a meeting , I think these are the minutes of that matter and this is a letter 
inviting the executive  Member  so I suggest .... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker with all due respect, there was a meeting of the Committee  
what transpired the meeting we don’t know at least…  
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s just have a seat I think all that was 
in the meeting, we have ed ucation Committee  and the Member s attended and it’s not the duty of 
the Committee  to come and tell us what they did in that Committee , Hon.  Mary raise d the 
question so it should be given the answer but not what transpired in the Committee  that’s the 
business of the Committee  we cannot bring all the Committee 's talk and affairs here that is why 
we have Committee s we only need Hon.  Wangudi to answer Hon.  Mary Akinyi. Hon. Stephen 
Wangudi please can you continue to answer  Hon.  Mary Akinyi.  
Hon. Wangudi:  Mheshimiwa Spika baada ya ualishi kama vile jumbo  limepitisha kwa 
kiti chako cha heshima nimepata majibu kutoka kwa Waziri na maandiko haya ndio yana pelekea  
May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 mimi nasimama na kusema ya kwamba mimi nahitaji mtegemeo wako na m wongozo wako 
kuhusu s uala hili kwa sababu nimeonelea ya kwamba namna swali lilipokuja ndani ya Bunge  
haina haja kwenda kutafuta mazungumzo kutoka kwa waziri ilhali kazi nyingi ilikuwa 
tushazifanya na akatupa majibu japokuwa hatukuridhika nayo lakini kwa fu rsa tunaweza 
kutafuta namna tutakavyowasilisha s uala hili kwako ili tuweze kunyenyeke a kwa sababu 
kuzingatia kwamba serikali hii iko na vitendo hivi kadri tulivyosema na imefanyika wazi ya 
kwamba kiko kitengo  ambacho k iko tayari kushirikiana na kitengo ch engine . Mheshimiwa Spika  
tunaelewa ya kwamba kutokana na sheria ya nchi hii na ... 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Wangudi I think you are now going 
overboard ; the Report  you know now how it stands , are you now ready? I have been protecting 
you I wanted you to be given the time to answer that question, do you have an answer?  
Hon. Wangudi:  Ndio nataka kuwakilisha barua am bayo ilikuwa inajibu ualishi wetu wa 
kumualika waziri wa elimu Mheshimiwa Spika  na namna nin avyoeleza nimeandika barua hii 
nimes ema ya kwamba s uala hili limeshughulikiwa na Public Service Board  na yeye hawezi ... 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Leader of Majority  Hon. Mwidani  what 
is it? 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think my colleague is 
misleading the H ouse because whatever he’s putting as a Report  and while he’s saying is not a 
Report  when you check on the Paper s he should have some copies of the Member s to peruse …  
(Applause)  
....if he has a Paper  he's just giving to the Speaker and the Member s are not in the 
position to peruse then what is it? So then Mr. Speaker let us be very serious if it is due to bail so 
that we give him time so that we prepare himsel f which i s very fair we can do so but actually we 
should not make things in another way a ctually we know this will be done  according to the law 
so please ma y I remind my colleague that he should be prepared so that he makes all the 
Member s have all the copies of whatever he has . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Amur . 
Hon. Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker, we are not doubt ing the Chairman , what we are 
doubting is the Committee  commitment on issues that are given Committe e; now days all the 
Committee s have been coming here begging for more time , if he h as said  clearly  he is not 
satisfied with the Report  for the Ministry how will you tell a Report  that even you are not 
satisfied as a Committee . Instead of that summon  the Minister get the facts  and if the Committee  
is not satisfied with the reply the n they should have summoned the Minister against the details 
and that why we would have sen t a Report  that is a comprehensive Report , just not  bringing the 
Report  to the Assembly  but a comprehensive Report . If the Chairman himsel f is saying that  we 
are not satisfied with the Minister ’s reply then there is a proble m. They should have summoned 
him first before they bring any Report  to this House.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Kithinzi?  
Hon. (Ms.)  Zainab Kithinzi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  kama 
tunavyofahamu hii ni Nyumba ya sheria na ni laz ima tufanye vile inavy otakikana l akini naona  
Mheshimiwa Wangudi amegeuza hi i Nyumba kuwa Jumba la sarakasi na kutuletea mambo 
ambayo hatuelewi ; cha muhimu ni aseme Ripoti  anayo ama hana hatutaki hadithi za Abunuasi 
hapa ikiwa Kamati  imeshindwa na kazi pia aseme wako watu ambao wanaweza kufanya hiyo 
kazi. Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick and Hon.  Saad I think we 
have heard you , okay can we hear from you, you have only  one minute and then Hon. Saad one 
minute.  
Hon. Siminyu : Hon. Speaker thank you for giving me this opportunity because I have 
been concerned since the Hon. Wangudi submitted his Report . Mr.  Speaker we need to know the 
conte nts whether verbally or whether the Committee  have the Report , why is the Committee  not 
letting u s to know what was said by the Minister, we need to know the conte nt but he is giving 
you document after document and we don’t know the conte nt he is just b eating arou nd the bush , 
let him give us the real picture or give us a clear Report  of the ma tter Mr. Speaker . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj and then Hon. Salim 
Kalume.  
Hon. Faraj : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa fursa hii . Mheshimiwa Spika  nafikiri  
ile tashwishi ambayo tumekua nayo tangu awali Mh eshimiwa Wangudi alipoanza kujieleza 
tumeweza kuhakikisha baada ya maongezi yake kwa kuwa hakuwa na lolote la kuwapatia na 
kutueleza sisi kama Nyumba na kwa yule ambaye  kwamba aliweza kuuliza suala hili vile  vile 
hakuweza kupata jawabu mwafaka kutokamana na shida na matatizo  ambayo kwamba  aliyopata 
kutokana na swala ili amba lo liko kwenye Nyumba hivi sasa . Mheshimiwa Spika  naomba 
kusititiza jambo moja la  muhimu , kuna stakabadhi  ambazo ziko mkut ano unapoendeshwa ; tuko 
na wale  ambao wanasajili ule mkutano tungependa kupata taarifa kama ile na Ripoti  kama ile 
katika Nyumba hii ili kuweza kujua waliafikiana nini na kuzungumza lipi katika mkutano kama 
ule. Mheshimiwa Spika  naomba tuchukulie kazi ya ku wakilisha wananchi kule mashinani na 
umuhimu kwa  sababu hiyo ndio ambayo imetuleta  katika Ny umba hi i  kuwakilisha wale walioko 
kule hawawezi wale walioko mashi nani wote wakafika kwenye Jumba hili kuelezea matatizo 
walio  nayo na ndio maana Article  1 katika katiba ya Kenya imewapatia wananchi  nguvu kupitia 
sisi kuweza kutekeleza majukumu yetu ya kuwakilisha wana nchi wetu vilivyo kule mashina ni na 
kutokana na Ripoti  ambayo kwamba ameileta hapa ndugu yetu Mheshimiwa Stephen Wangudi 
sioni kama tu naweza kut ekeleza wajibu huo . Ahsante . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Salim Kalume?  
Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  naona ingeku wa vyema tump atie 
Mheshimiwa Wangudi nafasi ili a weze kujieleza kwa  sababu nikiangalia mbele yangu naona  
kuna stakabadhi  kadhaa ambazo yu ko nazo sasa afadhali tumpe nafasi ili ajieleze tusikie Ripoti  
yake inasema nini.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Wangudi can you continue but I 
think you have heard what other Member s are expecting from you.  
Hon.  Wangudi : Mhes himiwa Spika  kama nilivyot hibitisha mbele yako mkutano na 
barua ya ualishi ilikuweko kama namna nilivyo wasilisha katika kiti chako cha heshima na 
majibu kutoka kwa Waziri niko nayo na pia ningependa kuwasilisha kwako na pia kwa niaba ya 
Jumba hili ningepe nda kuwapeleka katika  yale majibu … 
 (Laughter)  
...na ikibidi pia nita wasomea Waheshimiwa w aweze kufahamu majibu ya suala zima  
kuhusiana na suala hili . Mheshimiwa Spika  haya ni majibu kutoka kwa ofisi ya Waziri wa Elimu 
ambaye yalipok elewa katika ofisi yet u ya Karani  mnamo tarehe 28 Mwezi wa tatu, 2017 ... 
Hon. (Ms. ) Akinyi:  Point of information Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Mary Akinyi what is it?  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Am up for a point of order Standing order 73 (2) which states very 
well that , A Member  who begins in any of the languages provided for under paragraph (1) shall 
May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 continue in the same language until the conclusion of the Member 's speech,  he started in 
Kiswahili why did he turn in Kiswahili .  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay Hon. Wangudi stick to one language 
but if i t is something to read and written in English you can read in English . 
Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  ninazungumza nikitumia lugha  ya 
Kiswahili lakini majibu ya Waziri yameandikwa kwa lugha ya kimombo na naomba kwa fursa 
yako niweze kuisoma kama ilivyonakiliwa kwa kizungu . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Permission granted . 
Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you very much Hon. Speaker .  
(Hon. Wangudi read  the response letter ) 
RE: INVITATION TO THE ASSEMBLY COMMITTEE  MEETING ON 29TH 
MARCH, 2017 . 
This is in response to your l etter dated March 22nd, 2017 Ref. CAC/ECM/GEM/VOL.II 
122 to the above referenced matter.  On the issue raised about the recruitment of the ECD 
teacher s since the matter is being...  
(Interrupt ion) 
Hon. Amur : Nakupa miwani yangu , vaa miwani .  
Hon. Wangudi:  Mheshimiwa Spika  kidogo haionyeshi ndio maana ninapata tabu 
kusoma . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Can you wear you spec s, please . 
Hon. Wangudi:  Mheshimiwa Spika  Mheshimiwa Amur analeta matani, nak ala hii nilio  
nayo imefutika .... 
(Interruption)  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Where is the original copy?  
Hon. Wangudi:  The original copy is with the Clerk , Mheshimiwa Spika  naomba 
niregele e kusoma....  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Just give hi m time , Hon. Wangudi can you 
read it . 
(Hon. Wangudi continue d reading the response letter ) 
Hon. Wangudi:  On the issue raised about the recruitment of the ECD teachers since the 
matter is being conducte d by the Mombasa County Public Service Board , It would be prejudicial 
for me to comment on the issue.  
(End of response letter)  
The matter is before the Public Service Board and it is not right for him to discuss on the 
same issue Mr. Speaker and that's the issue with the CEC and t hat's the major issue ; I just seek 
your direction on this matter kama Kamati  tunaweza kusema hapo tulipofika hatuwezi kusonga 
mbele kwa hatua nyengine na hili suala tunaliweka mbele yako na mbele ya Nyumba hili ili 
Waheshimiwa waweze kulijadili tuweze kupa ta suluhu  la kudumu  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Wangudi you have finish your 
presentation . 
Hon. Wangudi:  I think I should quote the response that , ‘I am available to appear before 
the Committee  to respond to any other issue on a da te convenient for the Committee  any time 
from next week due to confirmed appointment this week ’.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay Member s please be patient because 
your answer I can see is not satisfactory, you have not answered the question .  
(Applause)  
May 31, 201 7                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 ....and the Minister I think has referred you somewhere else so it was your duty for you to 
follow that matter with Public Service Board, so Hon. W angudi i sent you to PSB this House 
need  answers to that question, Member s here don't speak on their own  they are represent ing 
people from the ground, if a Member  wakes up and ask s a question that question does not come 
from him person ally it come s from the people at the grassroots, so since that question is not 
answered i order you and the Committee  to follo w it up to the Public Service Board and bring the 
matter here within two weeks.  Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  ninaheshimu uamuzi wako lakini kama 
tunavyofahamu Mheshimiwa  Bunge  hili limefanya kazi na department , ni department  iamrishwe 
kwa sababu hii inawekwa wa department  ya elimu na kama unavyofahamu kutokana na Kanuni 
za Bunge  na sheria ya County Government Act hatufai k wenda kuandama kila mmoja pale alipo 
isipokuwa kupitia kwa executive . Kwa hio nahe shimu uamu zi wako na m uelekeo wako lakini 
bado kuna t ashwishi iwapo hatutatumia executive Member  ofisi ya department  ya elimu kupata 
jawabu kamili.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : So that is your  business for you to do it, it's  
not the business of anyone, you are t he Chairman find the r oute to go to Public Service Board, 
whether you go through the Minister  or where that is your business. T hank you . Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
Hon. Jimmy O dari, yes Hon.  Patrick . 
Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker on behalf of Hon. Jimmy Odari he had communicated to me 
that he is feeling unwell so he was requesting that if possible we postpone  the business in the 
afternoon he will be here because he had an appointment at the hospital . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay if he is sick he is sick , its fine, yes 
Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Member s this House is adjourned until afternoon.  
The House rose at  10:31 a.m. 
 
 