August  8, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 8th August,  2018  
The House met at 9:25a.m.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Yes Clerk.    
 
STATEMENT  
STATUS OF MOMBASA YOUTH FIS H PROJECT  
 Yes Hon. Wambua.  
 Hon. Wambua:  Naam Mheshimiwa Spika , iko tayari taarifa  na sikubeba miwani nime 
delegate kwa Mheshimiwa Moses Aran.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Aran Moses.  
 
 Hon. Oindo : I Thank my C ommittee Chair . Thank y ou. Mr. Speaker with me I have 
the response from the Executive Member for Agricultur e, Livestock, Fisheries and Co -operative s 
so I will read the report or the feedback, with your permission.  
 (Hon. Oindo moved the statement)  
The County Govern ment of Momba sa initiated and funded a fish f arming project called 
Mombasa Youth Fish farming Project. The idea was generated from fish farming 
experience under the Economic Stimulus Program (ESP) of the national government 
which had shown that, in additio n to capture fisheries, fish farming can be  an alternative 
source of fish production and can create sustainable employment for youth s in the 
County.  
 It was expected that establishment of the fish project will contribute to the following very 
critical str ategic themes of the department;  

August  8, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 a. Increase fish production in the County by supplementing what is harvested from   
 the capture fisheries.  
b. Create employment opportunities for both men and women.  
c.  Contribute towards food security and poverty reduction  
d. Diversific ation of income sources to both the youth and women.  
e. Raise revenue for the County from trading in fish and fishing products.  
The County g overnment of Mombasa developed this creative idea, to  develop 
aquaculture in the County after finding out that there we re not enough suitable sites for 
earthen ponds in the County.  
The production system is semi -intensive using a stock  of 500 catfish in a 39metre square 
fish tank (38 catfish per meter  square intensive feeding with floating pellets. Integrated 
fish farming a nd agriculture, gardeni ng where possible small stock (G oats) husbandry to 
be practiced by women ).  
Attached here below is summary on the status of the project/tanks ; 
Mr. Speaker the stock tank 14 of them, name of the group 1 showground which is in 
Nyali Sub - County, number of tank  one; 
1. The tank has a few catfish and ready for the harvesting, this is a tank that is used as a 
demonstration tank during the show and demonstration for farmers.  
2. We have ACK St. Philips  Youth Group which is based at Likoni s ub-County, number 
of tank s also we have one; the tank has matured fish that is ready for harvesting. 
Challenges ex perienced by the group includes;  cannibalism, liner leaking, under -feeding, 
very low water levels and poor management.  
            The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): There is a Member who is up.  
(Inaudible ) 
            Use your microphone.  
            Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speak er, point of order because the C hair who 
has been delegated by the Committee to read the statement, we cannot  unders tand and we cannot  
respond well when we do not have the copies of the report . Hon. S peaker, I think it is very unfair 
and this report is a very crucial repo rt for this House . Thank you. 
 
(Applause)  
 Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker, I was  delegated to read the repo rt, I wi ll request my C hair to 
respond to that.  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika,  nakala hatukuweza kutengeneza kwa 
sababu  Karani ametuambia mashini imeharibika, nafikiri tutaleta nakala zote kwa Waheshimiwa.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes H on. Bwire.  
August  8, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 64 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I also support what H on. Kibwana has said, is it 
the same machine that used to come up with the document that the Member has ? If it is the same 
machine then Mr. Speaker we demand to have copies before whoever w as delegated to read the 
statement on b ehalf of the C ommittee proceed s. Thank  you. 
 
(Applause)  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. M embers , this is a crucial report and 
Members want to know the status of the Mombasa Youth Fish project and it is upon t he 
administration of the Assembly to make sure the reports are in the hands of the Members so I 
request  the copies  to be made for the M embers to go through then report and this rep ort to be 
brought back in this H ouse Tuesday next week afternoon.  
(Applause ) 
 Yes Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Members t here being no other business this  House stand s adjourned until today at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 9:35 a.m. 
 
 