June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 29th June, 202 1 
The House met at 10:20a.m. 
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Honourable  Members we may be seated . Yes, Clerk  next 
order please ? 
 
PAPER  
REPORT ON THE PROPOS ED AMENDMENTS TO THE  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEM BLY 
STANDING ORDERS (STANDING ORDER (186)  
 
Yes, Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani , the Vice Chair of the Rules and Procedures 
please lay the P aper?  
 
The Vice -Chairperson Com mittee of Appointments, Rules and Procedures  (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Let me ta ke this opportunity to lay the P aper; report on the 
proposed amendments to the Mombasa County Assembly Standing O rders (Standing Order  186). 
Thank you.  
 
[Paper l aid] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani . Yes, Clerk 
next Order please?  
 
NOTICE S OF MOTION  
REPORT ON THE PROPOS ED AMENDMENTS TO THE  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEM BLY STANDING 
ORDERS , STANDING ORDER (186)  
 
Yes again Honourable  Hamisi Mu sa Mwidani?  
 
The Vice -Chairperson Committee of Appointments, Rules and Procedures  (Hon. 
Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg to give the following Notice of Motion ; 

June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 That this House adopts the report by the Committee on Appointments, Rules and 
Procedures on the  proposed amendments to the Mombasa County Assembly Standing 
Orders ( Standing Order 186) laid on the T able on Tuesday 29th June, 2021.  
 
Thank you  Sir. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani . Yes Clerk 
Next Order p lease?  
 
ESTA BLISHMENT OF REHABIL ITATION PROGRAM FOR YOUTH ON DRUGS AND S UBSTANCE ABUSE IN 
LIAISON WITH NACADA   
 
Yes Honourable  Faith Mwende MCA Kipevu Ward , please give the Notice of M otion?  
 
Hon. Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I beg to give the following  Motion;  
 
AWA RE that Article 55 of the Constitution of Kenya , 2010 provides inter -alia that the 
state shall take measures including affirmative action programmes to ensure that youth 
are protected from harmful cultural practice s and exploitation;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that A rticle 21 (2) of the same C onstitution dictates that all state 
organs and all public officers have the duty to address the needs of the vulnerable group s 
within the society , one group being youths ; 
  
COGNIZANT  that P art 2 of the Fourth S chedule of the  Constitution of Kenya , 2010 
provides for t he functions and powers of the C ounty govern ments which includes inter -
alia control of drugs and pornography;  
 
DEEPLY CONCERNED  that of rising numbers of youth s including in  drugs substance 
abuse such as c annabi s sativa , heroin , cocaine , amongst others  with reasons for such 
ranging from dysfunctional families , peer influence , uncontrolled alcohol trading 
environment , unemployment , social media influence , stress  and depression to mention  
but a few;  
 
DISTURBED  that failure  by all relevant stakeholders to arrest the growing trend of 
youth s involving in alcohol drugs and  substance abuse would see the C ounty and nation 
lose an entire generation with its advance effect on the moral fabric of the society as seen 
from the rising case of sexual and gender based violence , suicides , homicide , femicide , 
Crime, hopelessness  and unstable marriages;  
 
ACKNOWLEDGING  that the existence of the National Authority for campaign against 
alcohol and drug abuse (NACADA) , a state co rporation under the M inistry of Interior and 
Coordination of national government mandated to undertake public education and 
awareness against drug abuse;  
 
 
June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGNG the need for top -bottom coordin ation approach by the 
National government and the County g overnm ent as provided in Article  189 of the 
Constitution of Kenya,  2010 in mitigating the young generation  from drugs and substance 
abuse;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
 
1. Engage with an  aim of partnering with National Authority for Campaign Aga inst 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse (NACADA ) in developing programmes and policy for creation 
of awareness, treat ment and rehabilitation of the persons with Substance U se Disorder 
(SUDs) ; 
 
2. The Executive to initiate plans for  establishment of an affordable Rehabili tation 
and r escue c entre to be equipped with qualified personnel to offer medical care to those 
already addicted.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Faith Mwende. Yes Clerk, next 
Order Please?  
 
MOTION  
REPORT ON THE PR OPOSED AMENDMENTS TO  THE MOMBASA COUNTY A SSEMBLY 
STANDING ORDERS (STANDING ORDER  (186)  
 
Yes Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Vice -Chairperson Committee of Appointments, 
Rules and Pro cedures, please move the Motion.  
 
The Vice -Chairperson Committee of Appoint ments, Rules and Procedures  (Hon. 
Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker , I beg to move the following Motion ; 
 
That this House Adopts the Report by the Committee on Appointments, Rules and 
Procedures on the proposed  Amendments on the Mombasa County A ssembly Standing 
Orders  186 lai d on the T able on Tuesday 29th June, 2021.  
 
I will request Honourable  Chief Whip to support.  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Wambua) : I second.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Honourable Members.  I now propose the 
question that the Motion by Honourab le Hamisi Musa Mwidani on the Report of the proposed 
Amendments to the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Order 186 be considered by this 
House in the same terms as used.  
 
[Question proposed and a greed  to] 
 
 Yes Honourable Hamisi Musa Mwidani? Please make yo ur contribution.  
June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 The Vice -Chairperson Committee of Appointments, Rules and Procedures  (Hon. 
Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. A s all Members have the copies I will just go in detail. 
Standing Order 186 establishes the Public Investments and Account Committe e whose mandate, 
composition and term s clearly stipulated therein; Standing Order 183 , Section 3; Mr.  Speaker 
provides for the composition as follows;  
 
The County Public Accounts Committee shall consist of Chairperson and not more than 
four other Members.  
 
 The Committee when constituted had a Chairperson and four Members as per the 
Standing Order s. Unfortunately,  in the year 2020  one of the Members passed on and this has 
crippled the Committee oper ations as there are only three M embers with the exclusion of the 
Chairperson.  Mr. Speaker the Committee on Appointment, Rules and Procedures on its 
committal to improve and provision of Standing Order for effective discharge and mandate by 
the Members found it fit to expand the membership from the current members hip of not more 
than four as per the Standing orders to not more than si x in order to cure any quorum c hallenges  
as and when  may arise due  to lean Committee and further to also include Members of the other 
political parties to enhance the oversight  Commit tee role of Committee on County Public 
Investment and Accounts.  So, Mr. Speaker  we are very glad that it is therefore my pleasure, duty  
and privilege on behalf of th e Committee on County Assembly Appoint ment , Procedural and 
rules to present the Committee’s  Report  on the Amendment of the Co unty Assembly Standing 
Order containing proposed amendment for S tanding Order 186. No.188 and Standing Order No. 
234 and hence therefore propose its amendment to the Standing Orders as follows; Standing 
Order 186(3) which reads as follows;  
  
"The County Public Accounts Committee shall consist of Chairperson  and not more 
than four M embers ", be amended to read as follows;  
 
"The County Public Investment s and Accounts Committee shall consist of a 
Chairpers on and not more than s ix other M embers ". 
 
 So, Mr. Speaker I wish the M embers to support on the recommen dation which we have 
made as a C ommittee. On the foregoing Committee recommends as follows;  
 
 THAT;  
 
(a) Pursuant to Provisions of Standing Order No.234, the Assembly approves th e report of 
the Committee on the proposed amendments to the Mombasa County Assembly Standing 
Order as contained in the proposed amendment above; and , 
 
(b) That the amendment Standing Order take effect from the time of adoption this report.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Spea ker Sir.  
 
        The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwi dani. Yes 
Honourable  Fadhili Mwalimu please make your contributions.  
June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5         The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi 
pia ni mmoja wa wanakamati  wa hii K amati y a sheria na taratibu za Bunge; t uliona iko haja ya 
kubadi lisha kipenge e hichi ili kuleta n atija katika K amati ile husika na vile vile hino ni moja 
wapo y a matakwa ya ndugu zetu kutoka Bunge kuu na Bunge la Seneti  walipokuja ndani ya 
ukumb i huu walituomba kama W abunge wa Mombasa tuweze kuongeza wanakamati wa  Kamat i 
husika wanao  shikwa na kipengele mia moja t hama nini na sita. Mheshimiwa Spika  baada ya 
kukaa kwa muda na kuangalia kuwa K amati ile na yale mapendekezo ya liyoletwa na ndugu zetu 
kutoka Seneti  kweli yana umuhimu na yanafaa na vile vile ndani ya Kanuni zetu za Bunge 
zimeonyesha ule muda ambao K amati inatakiwa ikae na imeony esha ni miaka mitatu na lazima 
Kamati ifanyiwe marekebisho ndipo sa tukaona ipo haja tufanye marekebisho haya ili n dugu zetu 
kama ilivyosemwa  Kamati  ili kama itaweza kuingiza wale wengine  ambao wako katika vyama 
vingine, n afikiri tume weka katika ripoti yetu ili nao pia wasione wameachwa nyuma waweze 
kuwa pale mbele na kutoa mapendekezo yao ama kuona kutoa maono yao k ulingana na ripoti 
ilivyoletwa kutoka kwa M hasibu mkuu .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika, n a kama vile vile pia ripoti ilivyo pendekeza kuwa hii Waheshimiwa 
wakiwa wamekubalia na iwe itaanza kwa haraka upesi  hii ina maana kuwa leo ikiwa tutaweza 
kukubaliana itakuwa hatun a budi katika siku mbili zetu   hizi basi majina ama mapendekezo ya 
majina ambayo yataku wa yanapendekez wa hii naomba kupitia K iti chako u we utaturuhusu 
maanake ripoti  inasema hivyo.  Ikiwa itakua imepitish wa Mheshimi wa Spika majina ya wale 
ambao atapendekez wa basi yasichukue mda mrefu ya weze ku wakilish wa mbele yako na Bunge 
hili ili Bunge litakua ni lenye ku wakubali na waanze kufanya kazi maana kama nilivyosema 
wakati wa nyuma tumepokea ripoti mbili ambazo zahitaji kufanyi wa kazi na nina ima ni wale 
watakao  kuwa wamewekwa hapa ili kuja kuipa nguvu Kamati hii watakuja na ari mpya watakuja 
na nguvu mpya na maono mapya na tuta weza kutekeleza majukumu yetu kama wabunge wa 
Bunge hili la pili la Mombasa . Kwa hayo mengi naomba ndugu zangu tushirikian e tup itishe hoja 
hii na tuhakikishe Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa inasonga mbele. A hsante sana.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable  Fadhili M walimu . Yes Honourable  
Charles Kitula please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Kitula: Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika . Mimi pia ni mmoja wao ambao tuli weza 
kutilia mkazo s wala hili li weze kufanyika katika Bunge hili nashukuru kupitia Kamati husika 
wameweza kutekeleza M heshimi wa Spika lakini a wali ya yote kuna kipengele Standing O rder 
158 ambayo pia imenipa tia utatanishi kulingana na inavyosema k wamba , ‘Subject to any written 
law this Standing Order or a resolution of this County Assembly , a Select Committee  shall 
consist of an odd number of Members being not less than 11 and not more than 17 ’. 
Mheshimi wa Spika, sasa K amati yako ime weza kupendekeza Wanachama  wawe sita lakini 
Standing order  158 inazungumzia k wamba Wanachama wasiwe chini ya 11 au zaidi ya 17. Kwa 
hivyo pia iweze kuangaziwa na K amati yako husika, n a vile  vile K amati hii kupitia kipengele 
cha 186  sub section  4 inasema , ‘the Public Investments and Accounts C ommittee constituted  
immediately  following the general election shall serve for a period of three calendar years and 
that constituted  thereafter shall serve for the remaining C ounty Assembly term . Mheshimi wa 
Spika sheria inasema kwamba K amati ambayo  imeweza kuundwa tangu kuanzia B unge hili 
itaweza kuhudumu miaka mitatu kuling ana na  kalenda  yetu. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika 
kupitia he kima ya K amati yako iweze kuz ingatia wanachama wapya katika K amati  hii husika ili 
iweze kuleta damu mpya nguvu mpya na ari mpya . 
June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 Kwa sababu tushaona h uduma yao ambayo imekua katika K amati hii Public Accounts 
Committee , the most powerful Committee  katika Bunge lolote Kenya hua ni Kamati ya uhasibu 
Mheshimiwa Spik a. Kwa hiv yo ni sharti wana Kamati wawe wapya kulingana na sheria 
inavyosema kwamba wahudumu kwa miaka mitatu lakini sasa hivi ni zaidi ya miaka minne 
lakini hakujawahi fanyika mabadiliko y eyote kulingana na sheria . Hivyo  basi niwapatie kongole 
wanakamati lakini sheri a iweze kuf uatwa wanachama wawe wapya tu weze kuona huduma mpya . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimi wa Charles Kitula . Yes Hon ourable  
Samba.  
 
Hon.  Samba:  Thank you Honourable Speaker.  I am also up  to supporting the Motion ; 
indeed you have done a very wonderful  job. This is the first amendment that we had and we have 
been yearning for the amendments. Mr. Speaker , I will also echo what Hon ourable  Kitula has 
said; that when we look at the la ws we do not look  at them selectively so and eve n any business 
that the Committee does they do it for the best and betterment of this House and the people that 
we represent. Honourable  Speaker , I will also repeat the same Standing O rder 186 (4) ; that  this 
thing Members we have been waiting for so long , the amendment s  ought to have been done long 
time ago but equally we are not late , better late than never . We recommend you for the good job 
that you have done but the issues that Members have raised and the ones that am also echoi ng 
should also be considered so n ext time when we you are having Committee look on to 
suggestions that we have given.  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Samba. Yes Hon ourable  Salim 
Kalume?  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipa nafasi hii . M imi 
ningelipenda kuunga mkono hoja ilioko Bungeni na pia vile vile ningependa kuunga mkono 
Kamati iliochaguliwa manake Kamati hii imekuwa kilema kwa muda mrefu sana ikizingatiwa 
kwamba ingekuwa na wanakamati wachache na hivi sasa leo naona tumefanya juh udi zote na 
tumeweza kupata Wanachama  wapya , kwa hiyo naunga mkono Kamati hii…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon ourable  Charles Kitula? Are you on a point of 
information?  
 
Hon. Kitula: Ningependa kumuarifu Mheshimiwa wa Ziwa la Ng’ombe ni kwa mba 
hakuna Kamati iliyoweza kubuniwa ila ni ripoti ya Kamati ya Select  imeweza kubuni 
mapendekezo mapya Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay , thank you . 
 
Hon. Kalume: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Kitula kwa kunirekebisha . Kwa hiyo mimi naunga 
mkono m apendekezo yaliyopo Bungeni kwamba Kamati hii yale mapendekezo yaliyofanywa ni 
sawa na tufanye bidii ili tutengenez e Kamati hii iwe sawa na ifanye kazi kama inavyotakikana. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa. Yes H onourable  Mwaka 
Zahoro?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Zahoro: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii ili na  
mimi  niweze kuchangia hoja ilioko  mbele yetu. Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na ripoti ya 
Kamati wameleta mapendekezo ya kuwa hii Kamati ya Public Ac counts and Investments  iweze 
kufanyiwa marekebisho katika kuongeza idadi ya wa nachama walioko katika Kamati  ile. 
Mheshimiwa Spika na fikiri kama tutaangalia katika Kamati hiyo itakuwa ni bora tuweze 
kuangalia Kamati  zote; unapata kwamba kuna watu wana Kamati nne lakini utapata ilhali kuna 
watu wana Kamati saba ama nane  hivyo basi katika hali ya kusawazisha itabidi Kamati  zote 
ziangaliwe ili kuwe na usawa . Mheshimiwa Spika katika hali hii ka ma Mheshimiwa mwenza 
alivyosema kuna kipengele katika Standing Order  kinaleta utata katika mambo ya uwakilishi , 
kwa hivyo basi sijui Kamati kama mapendekezo ya Kamati hii na hii ripoti yake itabidi 
iongezwe idadi ama itakuwa vipi ama sijui itabidi pia kip engele kile kiweze kushughulikia ili 
vipengele hivi viwili visilete mtafaruku na kugongana. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hayo nasema 
shukran na ni kazi nzuri ya Kamati  yenye imefanya lakini nasisitiza kuwa waangalie Kamati  
zote Wanachama  wote wawe na usawa katika Kamati . Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Mwaka Zahoro. Yes Hon ourable  
Moses Aran?  
 
Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . First, I would like to congratulate the Majority 
Leader for coming up with the noble Mo tion; the Mo tion itself is self -explanatory  so I do support 
the Motion Hon ourable  Speaker. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Moses Aran. Yes Hon ourable  Shebe 
Athman , please make your contribution . 
 
Hon. Shebe Athman: Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa najisanya sanya hapa k idogo niangalie 
lakini wallahi  tangu napiga kelele mpaka sauti ikapotea s asa hii Kamati mimi hata sina ujanja 
nayo kwa sababu imehudumu kwa kipindi kile kinacho  stahiki kulingana na sheria na utaratibu 
wa sheria uko bayana kabisa. Lakini sasa wengine tumekuwa wanyonge kiasi kikumbwa 
Mheshimiwa Spika maana yake sheria ya huku naona yakata mbele tu haikati nyuma. Kwa hivyo 
mimi niko chini ya hi maya yako Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ; ikiwa kutakuwa na mabad iliko ya 
kuweza kuleta muamk o mpya kama vile wanavyo  tangulia kusema Mheshimiwa mwenza bas i 
ahlan wasahlan marhaba  sisi tutaipokea kwa mikono miwili. Na ikiwa mambo ni yale yale kama 
kule kule Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, pia t ushakubali tutafanya namna gani , kwa hivyo sisi hatuna 
ujanja mi mi hata sijui Mheshimiwa niko tu chini ya himaya yako hapa, nishalemewa na mzigo 
huu mpaka shingo imeingia kwa kola. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti .  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante M heshimiwa Shebe Athman. Yes Hon ourable  
Junior Wambua , please make your contribution.  
  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Kwanza ni kupongeza 
Kamati hii ambayo ilienda ikakaa chini na ikaona ni vizuri iongeze Wanachama  katika Kamati 
hii.  
June 29 , 2021                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Tunakumbuka ya kwamba Kamati hii ni muhimu sana katika Bunge na  inafanya 
majukumu makubwa kwa kuangalia mambo ya mahesabu. Bwana Spika ningelitaka ifahamike 
kidogo ya kwamba ile inasemekana kuwa kwa kila miaka mitatu  tubadilishe Kama ti katika 
Kanuni za Bunge 186. Bwana Spika haimaanishi wale waliokuwepo watolewe wote kuwek we 
wengine upya, bali kuna wengine wanaweza kuongezewa ili ikawa inapatia nguvu Kamati 
kuendelea. Kwa sababu ikiwa na watu wachache kama ilivyokuwa nayo, haileti nguvu kamili ya 
kufanya kazi ambayo inastahili kufanyika kuhakikisha ya kwamba mahesabu katika  Kaunti hii 
imechambuliwa ki sawa sawa. Kwa hivyo nauunga mkono Bwana Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa Junior Wambua. Yes 
Honourable  Hamisi Musa , you may reply.  
  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Bwana Spika kwanza nawas hukuru  
Wanachama  wote kwa kuunga mkono huu Mswada na pia tunawashukuru kwa vipengele 
walivyo  vitaja kisheria na pia kama Kamati tuliviangalia kisheria na katika muda ukifika sheria 
haijasema pana Hamisi usirudishe Hamisi, haijasema, imesema ni kwamba munaweza  
kuitengeza tena hio Kamati lakini kuna uwezekano ikiwa walifanya kazi vizuri wakaweza kurudi 
Bwana Spika. Na pia Bwana Spika nashukuru Kamati yetu kwa sababu haswa Public Accounts  
ni Kamati ambayo inatakikana iwe ni oversight  ya Bunge letu na hiyo ni upan de wa upinzani, na 
ukiangalia Bunge letu Wanachama  walio upinzani ni  tatu. Kwa hivyo wakati huu pia 
tumewafikiria ni sawa waweko kwa hiyo Kamati kisheria na ki haki zao. Kwa hivyo Bwana 
Spika langu ni kuwashukuru wa heshimiwa kwa kuunga mkono huo Mswada na kuomba Kamati 
ya Public Accounts  itufanyie kwa haraka kuweza kuleta nominations  zile za majina za ile Kamati 
ndio Wanachama  waweze kujua ki sawa ni nani na nani wako katika hio Kamati. Ahsante sana 
Bwana Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Ahsante Ho nourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani. Hon ourable  
Members , I now put the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani on the 
Report on Proposed Amendments to the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders Standing 
Order 186,  be adopted by this House in the same  terms as mo ved. 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
Yes Clerk , next Order please . Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
There being no other business , this House adjourns until Tuesday, 29th June, 2021 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10:53 a.m. 