August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 8th August,  2018  
The House met at 2:37p.m.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  Order! Order! Hon. 
Members, y es Clerk ? 
PAPERS  
(Laying of Papers)  
REPORT ON THE MUGUK AA MENACE  
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Baya, Chairperson Committee on Health on the report on Muguka  
menace . 
 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker being the Chair of 
the Health Committee on behalf of other Members we are unable to table the report or  to lay 
the report today b ecause of certain circumstances;  some of the circumstances  are technical 
aspects and the other is about the time . So I would request Hon. Speaker to give us ample 
time because this is something that is in public domain which has attracted a lot of interest . 
Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Chairman, what is it Hon. Samba 
before I procee d? 
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker kindly it is now becoming a norm of the House , the 
relevant departments and Committees should be responsible, and that is why if they are 
incompetent enough I would request this House we at least have new Chairmen on board, 
Chairmen who are eligible and who can give us report s at the appropriate time because in the 
morning it was the same thing now in the afternoo n it is the same thing and the Chairman of 
Health was aware that today he was suppose d to table the rep ort and each of every Member 
ought  to have been furnish ed with the copies . So Hon. Speaker with due respect and if  we 
want to do justice for the citizen s of Mombasa County then all the Chairpersons be 
responsible. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  

August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 (Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kombe Nzai?  
 
Hon. Kombe:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii , mimi kama 
Mwanakamati  wa Kamati ya Afya kutilia mkazo yale ambayo Mwenyekiti wangu 
ameyasema tukizingatia yale ambayo Mheshimiwa Mwenzangu wa Tudor pia ameyaleta 
kuna mijadala m iengine ambayo inahusu wanan chi wetu na tunapoyapeleka mbio  mbio basi 
hapo huenda tukazingatia kutum bukiza wananchi katika kisima ama kuwatoa katika kisima . 
 Kwa hio  ningependa kusisitiza Nyumba hii ikiwa ni Jumba la kutunga sheria, sheria 
tunazozitunga hapa tuwe tuna wakati mwafaka wa kuzitatua vizuri na kuziangalia zote 
tukitumia kitengo cha sheria amb acho ni legal advisor . Tukienda pia upande wa ndani 
mambo haya yote yanaongewa juu ya afya ya binadamu na si ya kupelekwa mbio 
Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa hiyo mimi naunga mkono vile vile Mwenyekiti wangu wa Afya 
alivyosema jambo hili lipewe muda mwafaka ili maz ingatio mengine ya utafiti yazidi 
kuendelea. Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I think I'll also agree with my Chairman , these 
are very crucial , in fact  I was waiting for it very dearly Mr. Speaker but as he has said no 
need to bring a half baked report to this House so I request through your Chair that we allow 
the Chairman and his Committee to bring a very comprehensive report on the said issue and 
even  as we wait for that report if there's no comprehensive report still there's no need to bring 
this report here, we need to have a very comprehensive one ... 
 
(Applause)  
 ...and we don't want guess work Mr. Speaker or and I repeat half baked report so let 
them do a research , some of us we are also doing  a research and we will compare the two 
before this House and see which has weight . Otherwise I support the postponement of the 
report because they are not ready as the Committee. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Aran Moses?  
 
Hon. Oindo : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia kama Mwakilishi wa Vijana 
ningependa kusisitiza kwamba Mwenyekiti wa Afya tafadhali nenda uangalie vizuri, ufanye 
maarifa kwa sababu kuja na hiyo ripoti yako nataka kujua kama vijana wangu 
ninawawakilisha hakuna pahali wataguswa ....  
 
(Applause)  
 ...kwa sababu tunajua kwamba mambo ya masw ala ya muguka  imeajiri vijana wengi 
na sitakubali kwa hivyo fanyeni maarifa vizuri na utafiti mzuri . Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Aran stop pre -empting the report 
because the report is not yet ready as per the Chairman of Health but he has not fully 
convinced this House as to why he wants the report not to be tabled today . 
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 The reasons  he is trying to bring to this Hon ourable  House I can say the Committee is 
not serious enough as we had given the Committee time, the Committee has done some few 
research but the Chairman has not seriously convinced the House to give him more time . So 
I'll give him also another chance  to try and convince this House but before  that I'll call upon 
Hon. Shebe Athuman to give his views.  
 
Hon.  Athman  Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. K ulingana na Mheshimiwa  
umuhimu wa hoj a hii iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa mwenza;  pia vile vile  Mheshimiwa Spika 
ningependa k umuunga mkono  Mheshimiwa wa  Kamati wa afya ya Bunge  ili tuweze kulipatia 
mda hili sw ala kwa sababu wananchi wengi wanaliangali a na wanalitazamia kwa kiu 
kikubwa sana . Kwa hivyo ningependa apewe mda M wenyekiti wa Kamati  ya afya  ili alipigie 
mbizi vizuri  hili sw ala kwa sababu pia vile vile sisi tumelivalia njuga vizuri tuweze 
kulia ngazia kwa sababu za kimsingi. Kwa hivyo ningependekeza Mheshimiwa mwenza pia 
apatiwe mda kabambe, ndio tukianza kujadili hili suala basi utaratibu na vigezo vya msingi 
vitawez a kujadiliwa katika Bunge hili . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Athman Mwamwiri.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Naibu Mwenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa 
naunga mkono suala la M wenyekiti kupewa mda lakini isiwe mda mrefu kwa sababu kuna 
zoezi linaendelea mashinani, baadhi ya vijana wetu wanaa thirika na biashara zao kwa sab abu 
kuna utekelezaji wa kusimamishwa shughuli zao za kuuza mugukaa , kuna kuvu njwa kwa 
vibanda vyao vya biashara na ripo ti Bunge hatujaipata na haya yanaendelea, kadri 
tunapokawia na hali hii watu wetu mashinani watakuwa wanaumia  kwa hivyo apewe mda 
ndio.... 
 
(Applause)  
 ...lakini alifanyie wepesi angalau tuweze  kuweka mazingira sahihi kwa sababu kuna 
watu wanaumia mashinan i. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : You were  not audible enough just repeat 
what you are saying.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa naibu Spika , nasema naunga 
mkono suala la M wenyekiti wa Afya kupewa mda ili kuja na ripoti sahihi inayo husiana na 
suala zima lililoangaziwa la mugukaa  lakini katika mda ule tunaomba lisiwe  mda mrefu 
kupitiliza kwa sababu  siku za karibuni tumeona kwamba biashara za vijana wetu zikiathirika ; 
vibanda vyao vya kufanya biashara vikivu njwa hali  kwamba kama Bunge hatujapata ripoti 
sahihi, hatuja  lijadili, hatuja lipeana muafaka liendelee ama lisiendelee.  
Kwa hivyo kadri  tunavyo ipatia muda lakini azingatie kuna biashara za watu ambazo 
zinahujumika mashinani na ha li ya kwamba ripoti hatujaipata  na hatujapean a muafaka  kama 
Bunge Mheshimiwa  na  wanaoathirika wengi ni vijana na ambao wanajitafutia riz iki, ambao 
wameepukana na masuala ya kutoleta uvunjifu wa usalama kwa  sababu wanashughli zao, 
kwa hivyo tukichelewa huenda tuka weka hali nyengine Mheshimiwa.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri, yes Hon. 
Ibrahim Omondi.  
 
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Hon.  Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity granted, as I st and to 
support as the Chairman of E ducation on the iss ue of mugukaa  in Mombasa County a m also 
in the same books with the Honorable, the great Mwamwiri.  I share the same sentiments with 
him, that as much as we want to give the Chairman of health time so that he can give us a 
comprehensive report as my colleague s have said, it is also very important Mr.  Speaker Sir 
that we don’t actually do away with what Hon orable  for Tudor W ard Hon. Samba said 
because the Chairman should not take advantage of that and I think it is very good, the point 
that he brought should sink into the Chairman, I concluded that it is very i mportant to do our 
work, to bring the report in time when it is nee ded but again that one does not happen,  that 
the report must be very comprehensive, the report should actually capture the different 
report s and d ifferent research that ha s been tak en so th at it should be of much importance  to 
us Mr. Speaker S ir. Thank you.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) exited the Chair)  
 
(The Temporary Speaker Hon. Bwire  in the Chair )  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Mwaka.  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi hoja hii naunga 
mkono kwa M wenyekiti wa Afya kwa kutupatia mda sababu jambo hili ni jambo sugu na ni 
jambo ambalo kwamba watu wengi tumeathirika Mombasa  hii na Mombasa  kwa jumla. K wa 
hivyo mimi nasema Mwenyekiti wa Afy a apewe mda ambao kwamba Mheshimiwa 
Mwamwiri amesema usiwe mrefu sana lakini ukipatikana uwe mda ambao utatuletea natija 
kwa sababu jambo hili limetuchokesha sisi wakaazi wa Mombasa, na ni jambo ambalo 
linaathiri vijana. .. 
 
(Interruption ) 
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order Hon. Member we are not yet 
discussing the report, we are only discussing about the laying of the report before the 
Assembly.  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari : Ahsante Bwana Spika , kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono 
Mwenyekiti wangu wa Afya ili  aweze kutuletea report muafaka ambayo kwamba itatuletea 
natija. Ahsante.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Chief Whip.  
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nitaendelea kwa mu da mchache 
tukizingatia kwamba M wenyekiti wa Kamati  ya afya aliweza kupendekeza mbele ya Nyumba 
hii tuweze kumpatia mda kabambe kwa sababu jambo analolizungumzia  Mwenyekiti ni kama 
alivyo weza  kusema kwamba lina  umuhi mu sana na wananchi hasa wafanyi  biashara 
wanasubiria sana hasa kwa hamu na g hamu ji nsi Bunge h ili litaweza kuamua  kuhusiana   na 
ripoti hii . Kwa  hivyo ikiwa leo hii kama Kamati  ya Bunge  haijaleta ripoti katika Nyumba hii, 
hivi sasa watu wetu ikiwa siku chache waliweza kupokonywa sehemu zao na maafisa wa 
Kaunti Mheshimiwa Spika tungependa kujua nan i ameweza kutoa idhini hiyo wakati sisi 
kama Bunge tulikuwa hatuja weza kujadili ripoti hii.. . 
 
(Applause)  
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  …waliweza kupata idhini ya kuweza kuw atoa watu wale, kwa mpango gani.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Hon. Member! K indly adhere to the 
instruction  from the Chair;  the instruction s from the Chair are very specific we are only 
discussing the laying of the report here, let  us avoid discussing things that happened outside 
this report kindly it’s like we are already discussing the report. Plea se continue Chief Whip, 
kindly adhere to the instructions.  
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika ni mekupata, Mheshimiwa hatuwezi 
kujadili ripoti lakini yale yanayotendeka mashin ani nalinganisha na ripoti yetu , haiwezi kuwa 
mambo yanaendelea mashinani wakati ripoti hatujaijadili ; tuweze kuwalinda watu  wetu 
ambao ni wa tozwa ushuru katika Bunge letu , hatujadili ripoti hii . 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Members do not  force me  to get where 
you want me to go;  let us discuss about the laying of the re port, the Chairman of the said 
Committee has requested to be given time and I think we should just discuss th at and Chief 
Whip you wer e already discussing the report. Y ou see when you discuss about  demolishing  
and all that  and I think the Chair who w as here discouraged so kindly or if you are exhausted 
of the ..., because he is the Chief W hip i will  allow  him to finish his  sentiments , but kindly…  
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti naomba unielewe kwa njia ya 
kisasa kwamba hatujadili ripoti lakini yale yanayoendelea mashinani itazingatia na matokeo 
ambayo t utakayojadili katika Bunge hili.  Iweje kule mashinani tayari kuna watu kama 
wameweza kupatiwa muelekeo na mtu fulani kabla sisi hatujaweza kujadili ripoti hiyo katika 
Bunge hayo lazima yaweze kutiliwa  mkazo. Naomba unielewe Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti! 
Naomba unielewe tafadhali ...! 
 
(Interruption ) 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I understand Chief W hip and I respect you 
very much;  I think no one is here to report or other to give us a statement on what happened 
because I had the report as the C hair and I am not in a position to comment on the same  so 
the relevant authority will be summon ed for the same. Let us discuss our today business. 
Hon. Faith?  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Faith Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , kwa vile 
umetu wekea sheria ya kuzungumzia kwa nini ripoti haijakuja siku ya leo. Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti sijui ni uzembe gani ambao tuko nao katika Bunge hi li kila wakati taarifa  
ikitolewa kupata ripoti yake inachelew a; ni wakati wetu na ni wakati mw afaka w a viongozi 
wa Kamati m bali mbali katika hii N yumba wawajibike katika kazi zao na walete ripoti kwa 
wakati unaofaa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applaus e) 
  The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Fatma?  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika kwa kuweza kunipa 
fursa hii; s isi kama Kamati ya Afya nafikiri kama sijakosea na wala sijakosea sisi tuna 
wajibika vikali sana ndio maana tuliweza kufanya utafiti na kuweza kuja na taarifa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika…  
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  
(Interruption ) 
 …Nyamaza! Mheshimiwa Spika nakuomba unilinde.  
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order Hon. Members. She is on the 
floor.  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Sisi kama Kamati ya Afya tunawajibika na  
tumewajibika vikali sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika tuliweza kukaa na wadau 
wakatueleza machache sio kwamba tumezembea kikazi na ripo ti itaweza kuja muda usio 
mrefu . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Tempo rary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is your point of Order?  
(Loud consultation ) 
Hon.  (Ms.) Faith Mwende:  Taarifa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni hivi sasa 
Mwenyekiti  wa Kam ati ya Afya amesema  ripoti haiko  tayari. Kwa hivyo sijui sasa 
Mheshimiwa Mwenza anazungumzia kuhusu nini? Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire):  Order Honorable Members! I think she has 
just clarified that very soon they will be reporting back to this House. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 ...So let us not contradict ourselves. What is it Hon. Abrari?  
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed  Omar : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, cha  kutamausha 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni kuwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Afya nadhani tulimpa 
muda wa kutosha kutuletea ripoti na si si tushafanya utafiti wa kutosha ilimradi tulinganishe 
ripoti yake na ile sisi tuliofanya. Kwa hivyo sisi twaomba kama kuna ripoti atupe siku halisi 
tujue ni siku gani?  
(Interruption ) 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Member, are you having a different 
report from the Committee’s report?  
 
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ndio, Mheshimiwa sisi ni viongozi na mjadala huu 
ulivyokuja hapa kwetu ilikuwa ni  jukumu letu sisi kwenda kufanya utafiti zaidi na tumefanya 
utafiti tuko na facts  kwa hivyo tunataka tu ngojee ripoti yake na yetu tuketi nayo chini 
tuangalie haswa. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti…  
 
(Interruption ) 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order Members! W hat is it Hon. 
Fatma?  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumueleza mwenzangu 
kwamba  it is not in h ealth Committee . Kwa hivyo sijui alikwenda upande gani kufanya 
utafiti?  
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Ndugu yangu.. . 
(Interruption ) 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : He is not even a Member. .. 
(Interruption ) 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Hon . Members? I think you are 
getting into my nerves!  
 
Hon. Oindo : Point of Order Mr. Speaker!  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What is your point of order?  
 
Hon.  Oindo : Standing Order 71 . 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What does it say?  
 
Hon. Oindo : You are giving permission to read it or?  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes of course.  
 
Hon. Oindo : Mixing of language ...if you start in Kiswahili you finish in Kiswahili so 
let Hon. Member, Hon. Fatma Kushe use one language in this Hon . House.  
 
(Applause ) 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you; yes Hon . Member who was on 
the floor?  
 
Hon. Abrari  Mohamed Omar : Naam sisi ni majukumu yetu kwa sababu kuna watu 
ambao tunawakilisha mashinani ambao mimi nikiwa mmoja wao kama natoka Kongowea 
najua wauzaji wa mug ukaa wengi wao mimi ndio ninawawakilisha. Kwa hivyo ilikuwa ni  
lazima mimi nifanye utafiti kivyangu katika z ile njia ambazo zin afaa mimi kufanya utafiti na 
mimi niko hapa leo nilikuwa nimejiandaa vizuri tena vilivyo kupata ripoti ile. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 ...Lakini kwa bahati mbaya ni kuwa Mheshimiwa ba do anatuchelewesha n akuomba  
Mheshimiwa utupe siku muafaka ni sik u gani hasa ripoti hii italetwa kwa sababu sisi tuko 
tayari hata ingekuwa jana ilikuwa sisi tuko tayari tulikuwa tushafanya utafiti wetu. Kwa 
hivyo ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Nyiro has 
been on his feet for quite long now.  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  Mr Speaker if you read the mood of this House, I beg your ears , thank you  if 
you read the mood of this House it is very clear that this thing is of interest and the thing that 
Hon. Chief Whip was raising are very much enj oined in this delays b ecause we have the 
department of Health, we have the M inister and I am sure that the M inister has researchers. 
We also have medical practitioners at the Coast  General hospital so it cannot take that long 
for us to get specialist to venture into this thing so that they can give us results in due time. 
The pressure that is mounting outside there is really eating into our nerves so it is only good 
for the Hon. Mem ber to be very pre cise because this is a matter that is very much in public 
interest and it’s a business and it is a live lihood to some people. So people are at  a limbo  and 
it is good that the Chair gives direction that is able to give this report in a certain day so that 
we can be sure that our people will get a good answer within such a time.  
So with all due respect Hon. Chair it is good that you give us duration of time so that 
we know that we are waiting such a date we are going to receive the report, so that we can 
also tell our people that wait until to these dates and we will get the report otherwise 
whatever is happening on  the ground is not good as the Chief W hip was saying there is a lot 
of tension and people are already taking advantage of these delays to harness  and get money 
from our people, thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Hon. M embers you see when we speak we 
must be having  the pros e you speak with evidence;  if you talk of somebody taking advantage 
of the situation and doing whatever you have mentioned then it's good that you speak with 
evidence, otherwise we understand the rules and norms of this House that you only speak  
what you are sure of if you are aske d to table the evidence so let's avoid to get things that we 
cannot differentiate, what is it Hon. Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. S peaker I think I was the first M ember to atleast put the 
Chairman  to the task to be responsible; as you can see the mood of  the House as my fellow 
colleague has stated , If you look at the gallery the interest of the gallery and there is a reason 
as to why they have come . Hon. Speaker the norm of these Committees of the C hairmen they 
don't give us accurate time they don't give us reports, now as am thinking they want us to 
give them more time to negotiate with the traders...  
 
(Interruption ) 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Hon. Member ! kindly please and I 
repeat myself speak with something that you can substantiate, something that you have proof. 
Hon. M embers this is a House of law and regulati ons and we must adhere to them I will only 
have two people then make ruling over the same. Hon . Amriya?  
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker , much has been said 
at this point and I wish to state as follows or propose that in the adjournment you are looking 
forward to give probably in my respectful opinion should be a final adjo urnment or the last 
adjournment  so that we can get over this matter be cause you know Mr. Speaker the 
Constitution provides in A rticle 159 that justice must not be delayed and this is a matter of 
public interest . So Mr. Speaker my request that any adjournme nt with regards to this matter 
should be a final adjournment, thank you so much.  
 
(Applause ) 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon Shomari.  
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 Hon.  Ali Mohamed Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi 
hii. N afikiri mengi yameshazungumzwa na W aheshimiwa , yangu yatakuwa machache sana 
nafikiri ripoti hii kuletwa katika Bunge  hili hii ni mara ya tatu, hatujui tatizo liko wapi na 
ushahidi tunao kwamba jinsi tunavyoendelea kulijadili swala hil i kule mashinani wakaazi 
wanaa thiriw a. Nikianza na Tononoka  nimepita nikaona jinsi watu walivyo  dhaifishwa  mali 
zao kwa hivyo tungekuomba Mheshimiwa Spika uweze kumharakisha M wenyekiti wetu wa 
afya alete ripoti kwa haraka na iwe ze ijadiliwe ili tu weze kupata njia mwafaka. Ahsante sana 
Mheshi miwa S pika.  
 
(Applause ) 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you, befor e we get the timeline from 
the C hair I think those people who are involved in destruction of the propert y in the areas we 
are mentioning should be stopped ; one, two they should explain under whose authority they 
are doing so.. . 
(Applause ) 
 ...So Hon. C hair I think you can read the mood of the House and kindly tell this 
House on which date  are you reporting back with a comprehensive statement over the same.  
 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker with all due respect I have learn t 
that this issue has generated a lot of interest and although there are some words that have 
been used in this Hon orable  House, there are some words that are not parliamentary , like 
making deals with traders and I think we should be very careful when we are uttering  some 
words because we have dignity , we were elected by people and we don't expect that people 
are g oing to negotiate with traders. A s an Honorable House being a M ember  for my second 
term Mr. Speaker we need to do something that both of us ... I think something that it has got 
some sense, so Hon. Speaker as much as the M embers are really requesting for soonest time 
possible this thing needs to involve researchers not like  the other ones , we have C oast general 
people this thing need s research and this is something we agreed with the traders .  
Hon. Speaker  in this issue we are working with NACADA which is a national body so 
it's something that people think that within three weeks time we can give a full report which 
will be accepted by both the public and also it will have that international standard . So I think 
if you are saying to give me a date thi s will be unfair to me with my C ommittee because am 
not working alone am wor king with NACADA , am also working with the department of 
health which is the main body that is doing research on this .  
Hon. Speaker also the research as an aspect in terms  of financial as you are aware that 
is how  research es are being done in this country they involve a lot of time and a lot of money,  
so it's not something that people can rush, in fact  am thinking now it's like someone is going 
to die tomorrow if you do  not give this report today.  So am asking my fellow M embers I 
think we are not doing camp aign we want to do justice to our people , we want justice to the 
traders, we want to do justice to everybody . Therefore  let us go down  in history of this House 
that we did someth ing good for our people, so Mr. S peaker I was also worried that people 
have started debating , pre empting the issues ; give us time we are going to give a report, we 
are not going to give a report at night we are going to give a report at day time in this Hon. 
House, thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
August 8, 2018              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You have been heard Hon . Member and I 
just w ant a clarification from you Mr. Chairman you are unable to give me the exact date but 
can you tell this House whether you will bring the report after three weeks that you have 
mentioned or after how long, how long a fter how long will you be ready,  even if it is after 
two years can this House be informed and it gets into record of this House.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker I am happy that at least  you have 
read the situation so just for th e purpose of clarity and the purpose of this Hon. House and 
other who are interested people here, I think I will be able to bring this report after the recess, 
thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : I am making a ruling on the same, order 
Hon.  Members! W e have requested to be given the exact time that the C ommittee will be 
ready and they have requested and if you go thr ough the prayers that the Hon. C hairman has 
just made is that the whole process in volves the fin ancial aspects and the researchers.  
 The Chairman has just reported on behalf of the Committee that he will be 
ready after the long recess and as a C hair  I cannot compel him I just have to because he 
thinks that after the long r ecess he will be ready so Hon. C hairman you will have no reason to 
come here and tell us you are not ready after this recess , after the long recess . So Hon. 
Membe rs that is the ruling that the C ommittee under the Chair will bring t he report after the 
long recess. Yes C lerk. 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
There being no other business the House stands adjourned until t omorrow Thursday at 
2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 3:15 p.m. 