June 2 9, 201 6                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 2 9th June, 201 6 
The House met  at 9:28a.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Kindly have your seats Hon. M embers.  
MESSAGES  
(Interruption)  
       Yes Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim . 
       Chief Whip  (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar) : Thank you Mr. Speaker mine was just to 
bring a Procedural Motion  concerning that we are aware that today we are going to conduct a 
public participation concerning our budget at Tononoka Social Hall , so I wish you as the 
Chair to adjourn this House so that we can go to the Public Participation and come back in 
the afternoon to discuss the business of the morning. Thank you.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker i second the Motion . Mr. Speaker the budget 
deadline is tomorrow so if we don't meet it Mr. Speaker it will be an issue, t hank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Can we…, may be get the con sent of the House, any 
proposa l? I propose that the procedural Motion  be considered by the House . 
 (Question proposed and agreed to ) 
       Yes any submissions? Yes Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim . 
       Chief Whip  (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim ): Thank you Mr. Speaker i would like to thank the 
Hon.  Members who support it to go to the Tononoka Social Hall for the public participation 
for our budget so that Mombasa can be able to have the fund s for our developments of our 
County.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia 
nimesimama kuunga mkono swala lili loko mbele yetu . Swala la bajeti ni swala muhimu 
ambalo linahusiana na bajeti yetu ya Mombasa. Mheshimiwa Spika jana nafikiri swala hili 
lilikuweko lakini mata tizo yakat okezea hili jambo likaahirishwa.  Kwa hivyo hivi sasa nasikia 
Tononoka imejaa watu lakini sisi kama wawakilishi wa masuala ya bajeti hatujafika pale, 
kwa hiyo ningeliomba kwa taadhima yako na heshima yako waheshimiwa tuandamane 
mpaka katika Tonono ka Hall. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Karisa Nzai . 
June 2 9, 201 6                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2        Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii ; moja kati ya kazi 
yetu muhimu ambayo tuko nayo ni kuhakikisha kwamba bajeti imepita na mwana nchi wa 
kawaida ameielewa na masuala yatakayojiri tutayajibu kama yanavyotakikana ili bajeti hii 
iweze kuwasaidia wote wananchi wal ioweza kujitokeza. Nashukuru sana Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwa kuweza kutuwezesha ili tukaweze kuungana na wananchi wetu kuweza kuipi tisha bajeti 
hii. A hsante.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Mwidani . 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nikiongezea na 
kuiunga mkono hii procedural Motion  kama Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  ninge omba 
Waheshimiwa  sote ikiwezekana twende kwenye kikao cha Public participation  kuweza 
kuieleza bajeti wa mwaka ujao wa fedha  kwa sababu ni bajeti yetu ya Mombasa isichukuliwe 
kwamba ni bajeti ya mtu fulani ama ya w odi fulani. Kwa hivyo kama Kiongozi wa Walio 
Wengi Bungeni  naomba  tukisha aihirisha kikao cha  Bunge sote twende tuka ungane sote 
wanachama wote wa Bunge hili  tukajumuike pamoja . 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Jabess . 
       Hon. Oduor : Mheshimiwa Spika ingawaje kidogo nina homa, sisikii vizu ri jana kid ogo 
nilikuwa na  ugonjwa wa presha nikiwa upande huu wa shadow ; nauliza tu , nauliza Bwana 
Spika nauliza tu huyu Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha  ni nani? Kwa sababu  Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya Fedha  kule kwenye kuna nguvu niko huko huko … 
(Laughter ) 
       Mr. Spea ker (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Amur . 
       Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir the major thing is that we have full committee of Finance 
Members in the House whether the Chairman  is there or not there but the C ommittee  is there 
and all of the other M embers are there  then we have nothing to lose Mr. Speaker …  
(Applause)  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes that concern Hon.  Jabess is that the latest list of the 
Committees is the only list recognized by this House …  
(Applause ) 
       And that is the way t o go and if you are not in the C ommittee we are sorry but you just 
have to accept the verdict of the House. Ladies and gentlemen it is important to go because it 
is a serious matter of the budget and a ppropriation that's why therefore i will have to put a 
question to the Motion  that was proposed by Hon.  Ahmed Ebrah im Omar in this Hon.  House . 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
       Ladies and gentlemen this House stands adjourned until toda y in the afternoon at exactly 
2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 9: 36a.m. 