May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 3 1st May, 2017  
The House met at 2:50p.m. 
 (Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
        Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you can have your seats.  Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FR OM THE CHAIR  
        Thank y ou. Hon.  Member s, I wish to bring to the  attention of this Hon.  Assembly, that 
we have visitors from Marjory Kindergarten and Primary and Little Stars Junior School.  I 
recognize the presence of the delegation which consists of:  
1. Farhani Lawrence Macoca  
2. Tecla Kache  
3. Piri Kevin Mwatata  
4. Mbehelo  Gift Makoo  
5. Jawad Salim  Abdallah  
6. Ziri Ruth Mwaka  
7. Mnyanzi Rumba  
8. Lombo Sophia Mwende  
9. Osoro  Fatma Moraa  
10. Edward Kilonzo Ndumi  
11. Momanyi Ian Mogesa  
12. Sitati Linus Wanambisi  
13. Osengo Ryan Zidane  
14. Ngeti Tum u Luvuno  
15. Albert Habash  
16. Farhiya Hussein  
17. Charles Flavian Atieno  
18. Odhiambo Joy Adhiambo  
19. Shambi Ali B Shambi  
20. Kalimbo Trevor Ngela  
21. Weche Olwero Mitchele  
22. Halima Mohamed  
23. Betz Nathalia Makena  
24. Jando Tulinave Mbegu  
25. Mwiti Joy Makandi  
26. Hussein Sakeena Issa  
27. Nyawira Ann W anjiru  
28. Asmin Amina  
29. Kimani Kennedy Makau  
30. Nyakaru Deborah Kwamboka  
31. Leah Lwambe  
32. Ndung’u Teresiah Wamwitha  
33. Mwamunga Harun Mnjau  
34. Mitchelle Perpetual  
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 35. King Yusuf Harre  
36. Chege Samuel Ngugi  
37. Jonathan Ochieng  
38. Kirubi Mitchelle Trevor  
39. Ngunga James Mukula  
40. Sylvia  Peter  
41. Ochieng Stewart Kamoga  
42. Kiema Mariam Mwende  
43. Mwangangi Philip Muia  
44. Beatrice Mzungu  
45. Ndunge June Syomiti  
46. Gwengwele Ernest Heri  
47. Saumu Suleiman Kiringi  
48. Brenda Bett  
49. Unda Winnie Mauwa  
The following are a ccompanying Staff;  
1. Ms. Mary Kanini Waigi -Managing Director  
2. Mr. Kisongochi Victor  
3. Mr. Mui Baraza  
4. Mr. Seth Okoth  
5. Mr. Christopher Sabwa  
 
On behalf of the Assembly, I welcome you all to the County Assembly of Mombasa . 
“Karibuni s ana.” Yes Clerk.  
 
STATEMENT  
        Hon.  Ndanda Ch iro, Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda Chiro . 
Hon.  Moha med Chiro Ndanda:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  I am aware that I 
was to give a conclusive Report  on the status of misuse of inspectorate vehicles but...  
(Interruption ) 
Hon.  Mwalimu : Point of O rder. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhi li Makarani . 
Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker  what we need on the floor of the House, is a statement or a 
Report  but it seems that the Hon.  Member .... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  of Tudor , Hon.  Patrick Siminyu .  
(Hon.  Mwalimu  still on the floor ) 
Yes Hon.  can you have your seat, Hon.  Patrick Siminyu of Tudor what is it?  
Hon.  Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker  is the Hon.  in order? I have seen has no tie . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Who is that?  
(Interruption ) 
(Hon.  Mwalimu consulting l oudly)  
Sergeant At Arms!  
(Interruption ) 
Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker  under which S tanding order ? 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Sergeant A t Arms!  
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker  under which Standing Order says that you have to wear a 
tie.. 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Can you verify whether the Hon.  Fadhili 
Makarani is i n order?  
(Sergeant At A rms approached Hon.  Mwalimu to verify)  
Hon.  Mwalimu : Yes Mr. Speaker  I am in order. Mr. Speaker  missing a tie is not that I 
am not in order.   
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Sergeant A t Arms. The dress code, can you 
look at Hon.  Fadhili Makarani whether his dress code is in order or whether he is orderly 
dressed?  
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker  I am orderly dressed. I am just missing a tie.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : That is  the work of Sergeant A t Arms . 
(Hon.  Fadhili Makarani taken out by sergeant at arms  
Applause  
 Yes Hon.  Ndanda Chiro.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Chiro Ndanda:  Mr. Speaker  I was saying am aware that I was to give a 
conclusive Report  on status on misuse of inspectorate vehicles but as you know the work of the 
Committee  is to get and make sure we giv e the right information on the T able. Mr. Speaker  we 
wrote letters inviting the responsible people ; that is the D irector and his team so that we have 
some of the issues that we can also ask them so that we can be able to give a Report  in this 
House.  Mr. Speaker  I have stood  up to explain myself and there after request from your Chair that 
you give me up to next week on the Thursday so that i bring this Report in the right way. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker  Sir.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay you  are granted , Thursday will be okay. 
I understand Thursday is okay.  
(Applause ) 
(Interruption ) 
 But I have ruled, do you have anything, Yes , Hon. .. 
 Hon.  Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker  we respect your ruling but this matter has been brought to 
this House and not the first time and we need answers ; public resources and they are destroying 
the image of this County and the Governor plus the Member s of the County Assembly becaus e 
our work and our duty is to make sure that public resources are well utilized not be misused like 
the way they misuse our vehicles and it will (??) no time for services . Mr. Speaker  the concer ned 
Committee  should bring  it, be it that they should be no po stponing of this matter to  the end of 
June 16. Thank you , Mr. Speaker .  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Fadhili what is it?  
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  hata mimi nilikuwa 
nimesimama na naongezea ali yozungumza ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa Patrick Siminyu. 
Mheshimiwa Spika  twaheshimu uamuzi wako la kini tukiangalia swala h ili limeletwa kitambo 
ndani ya Bunge  hili na kila tunapoendelea kulilalia swala hili pesa za wananchi,  pesa za umma 
zinazidi kupotea na mimi binafsi n akemea swala hili na nina  imani W aBunge  wote wa Bunge  
hili la  Kaunti pia wanakemea san a swala hili tutaendelea kuishi vipi tukiona magari ya Serikali 
yakiwekwa yakiegezwa maeneo,  maeneo ambayo hata hayastahili. .. 
(Interruption ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswab ah Rashid) : Hon.  Mary what is it?  
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir. Mr. Speaker  Sir I know very well that 
this is the House of p rocedure and once you have ruled you have ruled ... 
(Applause ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It is not that  what is talking will going to 
change my decision. .. 
(Applause and l aughter ) 
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika , nafikiri nilianza 
kusema kuwa twaheshimu uamuzi wako na wala sikusimama kusema kuwa napinga uamuzi 
wako, l au ningesimama  na kusema napinga uamuzi wako hapo ningekuwa naenda kinyume na 
maadili ya Bunge  hili lakini tu naomba wakati umempatia hiyo wiki ijayo basi uhakikishe 
Kamati hii chini ya Mwenyekiti Mheshimiwa Mohamed Ndanda....  
 
 Hon.  Mwalimu: .....lakini tu naomba Mhesh imiwa Spika  wakati mumempatia hiyo wiki 
ijayo basi Mheshimiwa Spika  uhakikishe Kamati hii chini ya Mwenyekiti Mheshimiwa 
Mohamed  Ndanda wataleta Ripoti  hii katika Bunge  hili maana yaonekana ni uzembe wa ile 
Kamati kutokuleta majibu ndani ya Bunge  hili. Ahs ante Mheshimiwa Spika .  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
 Yes Hon.  Fadhili .  
 Hon.  Mwalimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  Kamati yangu 
bado tunaendelea kutengeneza hii Ripoti , nina imani tutaweza kuleta Ripoti  hii tukiwa 
tumemaliza kuitengeneza vilivyo maana hili suala lilikuwa na utata mwingi ndani yake na nina 
imani Waheshimiwa wote wanakubaliana na mimi lakini vile vile tumeona kuwa kidogo maji 
yameanza kutoka na....  
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswaba h Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Prischillah .  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Prischillah Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika  nimesimama hapa 
kufahamisha N yumba kwa sababu Mheshimiwa ali eko katika kuzungumza sasa hivi ametoka 
kumshutumu Mheshimiwa mwenzake na kusema jinsi anavyozembea katika  kufanya majukumu 
yake na yeye sasa ni kama kiongozi wa hii Kamat i ameanza sasa hadithi za elfu ulela hapa na 
ametoka kumshutumu mwenzake je hivi anavyofanya kama kiongozi ni sawa na yeye manake 
ametupeleka katika uongo wa kutuambia muktadha mwingi na ilha li yeye pia amekuwa 
akitupitisha , kwa hivyo pia yeye leo twaomba atupe Ripoti  aache mambo mengi.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu . 
 Hon.  Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker  when you point a finger look at how many fingers are 
pointing at yo u. Mr. Speaker  we have postponed this statement more than three times and in  fact 
it was postponed to this Committee  where the other Committee s have failed and this PAC 
Committee is failing again.  Mr. Speaker  we need to have answers for Mombasa people , people 
are suffering , diseases are being r eport ed during this raining time and we need answers and if the 
Committee  has fail ed then let it be dealt with the other Committees  and if it doesn't have the 
power let the Committee  tell us when they will bring this Report  because I know I understand 
they have done nothing about this.  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Stephen Wangudi . 
 Hon.  Wangudi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa fursa hii na mimi niong ee kwa 
kifupi kuhusu suala hili . Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa hakika....  
(Inter ruption)  
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  Hon.  Mwalimu:  Point of order Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes. 
 Hon.  Mwalimu:  There's no quorum . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Clerk can you ascertain if there's quorum, 
Hon.  Nasser you can ha ve a seat please . 
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
(Applause)  
 Sergeant at Arms can you ring the bell, Hon.  Prischillah Mumba whip the Member s. 
(Sergeant At Arms ru ng the quorum bell)  
(Loud consultations/applause ) 
 
 Thank you very much Deputy Chief Whip, y es Clerk can you ascertain now if there is 
quorum . 
(Clerk confirmed quorum)  
 Thank you very much, yes Honorable.  
 Hon.  Wangudi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  nilikuwa nimesimama 
kudai Ripoti hii ambayo imechukua mda Mr.efu na napongeza kwa kuw a wale ambao 
wamezungumza wanasema… Wahenga  waliotangulia walisema , 'mkuki mtamu kwa nguruwe na 
kwa binadamu mchungu ' na hivi sasa naona vile Mheshimiwa. ..koti hii  anavyo tapatapa na 
maneno ameshi ndwa na la  kusema hana ufahamu iwapo anastahili kuleta Ripot i kwenye J umba 
hili na hivi sasa anadai kwa sababu hii si kwa manufaa ya Bunge  hili tu lakini kwa manufaa ya 
wakaazi wa Mombasa . Mheshimiwa Spika  tunahitaji Ripoti  hiyo kama si sasa ni sasa hivi 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili atuambie hii Ripoti  tumpe dakika ngapi ato ke pale atuletee iwapo hawezi 
nawewe uchukue hatua kutoka kwa kiti chako chenye mamlaka.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mary?  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. Mr. Speaker  Sir this business has been 
brought into this House for more than four times so I may ask through your Chair we give it a 
natural death. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj?  
 Hon.  Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker  for this opportunity . Mr. Speaker  first 
and foremost we as a House considering the fact that we have been here for the past four years it 
is as if we do not understand our  responsibilities in this House,  the statement which was 
requested was with regards to the scarcity of wa ter in Mombasa County and we have a fully 
fledged  Committee  which deals with water and sewerage  in this A ssembly . Mr. Speaker  it's very 
unfortunate that today we are deliberating on a matter that should have been dealt with a 
Committee  which exists in thi s House.  
(Applause ) 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patric k?   
 Hon.  Siminyu : Mr. Speaker  I hope Hon.  Faraj was around when this Motion  was 
brought at the first time , it was directed to the relevant Committee  then and the Committee  failed 
and it was redirected to the other Committee , Mr. Speaker  I just want to make my colleague to 
understand the position. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Honorable  what is it, because Hon.  Saad  
Faraj is still  on th e floor, are you up on a P oint of order?  
 Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh : Yes.  
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  Deputy Spea ker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : You up on a point of order?  
 Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Yes exactly Hon.  Speaker , I think Hon.  Speaker  when you look 
at the P aper Mohamed Hatimy is also a  Member  of the Public Accounts Committee  so I think 
regarding the issue of replacing the statement from the Public Accounts Chair and am also a 
Member  I think there is some conflict of interest somewhere Mr. Speaker . 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Ahmed Faraj . 
 Hon.  Faraj : Mr. Speaker  I understand that the Hon.  Member  for Tudor Hon.  Patrick 
Siminyu has brought with regards to this matter ; saying that the Committee  was not able to 
address this matter does not justify this problem to be sent to another Committee . We know the 
procedures of dealing with  such issues we have our S tanding order here and if a Committee  is 
incompetent we know what we are supposed to do with that particular Committee  but not to 
redirect this to another Committee  which is no t even supposed to deal with these  matters. Thank 
you. 
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Member s I think this matter was here before 
us for quite a long time and it was directed to the Committee  of Water but before it was finalized  
there we re some allegations of corruption and a Member  of Public Accounts Committee  by the 
name Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy requested that this matter should be investigated by the Public 
Accounts Committee . That is why this matter has found itself in the Committee  of Pub lic 
Accounts Committee  so Hon.  Fadhili I think your Committee  was supposed to investigate this 
matter because they were allegations of corruption. Now Hon.  Fadhili this thing has been around 
for a long time I think next week Thursday will be the final day,  you cannot do away with it then 
this matter will be taken back to the Committee  of Water. Yes Hon.  Fadhili .  
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  as I said and I thi nk it is in the 
Hansard records , we as Public Accounts Committee  are dealing with corruption issues at  the 
Mombasa Water Board Mr. Speaker . Thank you . Mr. Speaker  the issue of scarcity of water …. 
(Interruption)  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Is due to corruption . 
 Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker  the issue of scarcity of water lie s with the Water 
Committee  of which the Hon.  Chair left some few minutes ago . Mr. Speaker  that is why I said 
we were still waiting to hear from the other Committee s for us to compile a good Report  to 
Report  back to this Hon.  House. Mr. Speaker  the corrupti on issues as you have given us until 
next week Thursday the Public Accounts Committee  we will try our level best to summon the 
Member s from the Water Board to come and respond. And Mr. Speaker  we will also ask the 
Hon.  House to give us time to go and compi le a Report  because it is not a small issue , it is not an 
issue to be deliberated  on just one or two hours, we are talking about millions of money that are 
being lost . So Mr. Speaker  I will ask this Hon.  House to accord the Public Accounts Committee  
time f or us to go and compile the said Report , and as I said it is a Report  that we will engage the 
other Committee s also so through you r Chair am asking for about three to four days for us to 
compile that Report . Thank you , Mr. Speaker .  
 Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay, what I said stand by Thursday this 
House should have a Report  from Public Accounts Committee  failure to that this matter will be 
returned back to the Committee  of Water , thank you. Clerk ? 
MOTION  
 Hon.  Mary Akinyi . 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  Sir I wish to table a Motion  
on the fumigation due to outbreak of Dengue fever.  
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 (Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi tabled  the Motion)  
FUMIGATION DUIE TO DENGUE FEVER  
 THAT AWARE that under Part Two (2) (c) of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitu tion 
of Kenya 2010; County Health Services including in particular promotion  of primary health care 
is a function of the Country Government;  
FURTHER AWARE that cases of people suffering from Dengue fever and Malaria has 
been on the rise in the County since  the onset of the rains due to increase in the number of 
mosquitoes breeding. Fumigation will help reduce breeding of mosquitoes;            
CONCERNED THAT  Dengue fever has no known cur e and in severe cases may lead to 
death.  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that: 
The County government of Mombasa through the Department of Health carrie s out 
fumigation as a method of controlling insects especially mosquitoes to alleviate the deng ue fever 
outbreak.  
I wish to table the Motion  and I may ask Hon.  Fadhil i Mwalimu to second the Motion . 
(Hon.  Mwalimu  bowed to second the Motion ) 
(Question proposed)  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much. Member s I will 
propose the question, fumigation due to outbreak of Dengue fe ver in Mombasa County 
Executive. Yes Hon.  Mary Akinyi.  
Hon.  (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Ahsante s ana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  kama vile 
Kaunti yetu sasa  hivi tuko na u gonjwa unaitwa Dengu e; na huu ugonjwa unaweza hata kuu a. 
Hivyo basi ndio ni ngeomba serikali hii yetu ya Kaunti ifanye vile i livyo kuwa inafanya, kwa 
kunyunyiza dawa kila baada hata ya miezi mitatu isipite. Kwa hivi sasa h uo ugonjwa umeenea na 
watu wana ugua sana Mombasa hii yetu. Na Mh eshimiwa Spika , ugonjwa huo wa Dengu e fever  
huletwa na mbu jike, ambaye huwa wanauma hata wakati wa usiku wa manane. Huu ugonjwa 
wa Dengu e fever  unaletwa na mbu ambao wanauma mchana ; hivyo basi ndio ningeomba kupitia 
hili Jumba  Kaunti yetu ianze haraka iwezekanavyo, iweze kunyunyiza dawa ki la mahali ili iwe ze 
kuua wale mbu ambao wana zaana, ili tusipoteze watu katika hii Kaunti yetu, kwa sababu ya 
ugonjwa huu wa Dengu e fever  ambao ni ugonjwa wa virusi . Mheshimiwa Spika  ni ugonjwa 
ambao hauna dawa, na dawa yake ili  tuweze kuweza kuthib itisha ama kuweza kukinga ugonjwa 
huu, ni  lazima serikali ya Kaunt i kupitia katika kitengo cha  afya, ijito e kimasomaso kwa  kuweza 
kunyunyi za dawa katika Kaunti hii yetu nzima. Mheshimiwa Spika, hata hivi ninavyo ongea 
kuna Waheshimiwa k aribu watat u hapa ambao saa hizi wanaugua Dengu e fever . Kwa hi o ili 
tusijichimbie makaburi yetu afadhali kukinga kuliko kutibu. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Sheila Mumba.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Sheila  Mumba: Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Spika , nimesimama pia kuunga 
mkono hoja iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Mary Akinyi,  na nimesikia kudhalilika kwa hili jambo 
sababu kusema ukweli mimi ni mekulia katika ma landi ambayo tutasema yanaitwa Buxton na 
ikiwa nimezaliwa na kukulia pale udogoni mwangu nik ikua hizo nyumba zilikuwa 
zinanyunyiziwa dawa, kila baada ya miezi kadhaa, tunaona watu wanakuja na kunyunyiza dawa , 
kwenye mashimo wananyunyiza , kule nje kwenye manyasi, lakini hayo mambo yanaonekana 
yamepotea kwenye kaburi la sahau, kwa sababu hata kutok a nifikie hapa tu miaka min ne 
niliyokuwa hapa kumekuwa na mvua zikipita , kiangazi, sijawahi  kuona hata siku  moja 
tukitembelewa katika mita a ambayo  tunaijua hata ni  ya Kaunti, ni ya nyumba za Kaunti  kuweza 
kuangalia usafi, kuweza kuangaliwa usafi, kuweza kuangalia mitaa kama inahudumiwa kupigwa 
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 dawa maumbu, kombamwiko  hata mapanya yanaingia. Hivyo ni baadhi ya vitu ambavyo 
vinaleta mkurupuko wa maradhi mara  moja kama haijaangaliwa, na tunajua sisi kama katika 
Kaunti  tuna wizara yetu ya afya ambayo inatakika iwe  na kitengo cha  kukimu hayo madawa na 
kuangalia jinsi watakavyo kinga mbu na maradhi mengine ambayo yanaweza kutafutiwa mbinu 
ya kukingwa kwa kutumia madawa ya kunyunyizwa. Kwa hivyo nasikia pia  mimi kuunga 
mkono Mswada  huu wa sababu g harama siku hizi za matibabu ziko juu na wakati utaona mtu 
anapel ekwa kwa  homa ya  Dengue  hata kuna wengine hata hawajatambua ugonjwa wa  homa ya  
Dengu e unakuja vipi na malaria . Kwa hi o inakuwa vigumu kuelewa kitambo mtu aelewe mtu 
wake ana  homa ya  Dengue  ametibu malaria mpaka amechoka na pia awe pengine ni mtu wa 
haraka ya kut aka kuchunguza zaidi maisha saa hizi ikiwa unga wenyewe ni shida hiyo kutibu 
mtu ataanza kutibu wangapi ikiwa wawili watatu na ina masharti tofauti . Kwa hi o tuangalie 
afadhali tupunguz e gharama zengine kwa kutumia serikali ya Kaunti na kitengo cha afya 
kiangalie jinsi kinavyoweza kukinga maana tunaamini kinga ni bora kuliko kutibu , kwa hi o 
naunga mkono kikamilifu huu Mswada  na tunaomba uweze kutekelezwa maana tunaona hayo 
matatizo makubwa, a hsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick . 
Hon.  Simin yu: Thank you Mr. Speaker  for this opportunity, i also have been in Tudor  
estate and I represent them today, when we were young we used to see vehicle s fidgeting over 
the years;  i don't know people were wiser then or what changed . Mr. Speaker  prevention is better 
than cure and if we treat these areas that are affected mosquito diseases then we are goin g to save 
this County a lot of money, i support this Motion  so that our people can get better service s 
instea d of feeding a hospital with patients suffering  from a  disease  which can be controlled . We 
need to start ways of preventing th is disease and one of the ways is spraying our estates and 
places where there are pond s which  create  a conducive environment for mosquito breeding . I 
fully support this Motion . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mary Akinyi can you reply to the 
Motion . 
Hon.  (Ms.)  Akinyi:  Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa Spika , narudisha shukrani za dhati kwa 
wale ambao wam echangia huu mjadala na naomba Nyumba hii tuweze kuipitisha, kuweza 
kunyunyiza dawa ili tuweze kumalizana na huu ugonjwa wa ho ma ya Dengu e, tukimalizana na 
homa ya Dengu e tukaweza ku zuia hata msongamano katika hospit ali pia itakuwa vizuri, naomba 
Nyumba hii muendelee kuniunga mkono na nawashukuru tupitishe na tukishapitisha wale 
wate kelezaji waanze kuitekeleza. Ahsante  sana, Mheshimiwa . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Member s, in the absence of 
further debate I will put the question it has been asked that the County government of Mombasa 
through the department of health carry out a fumigation ; a method of controlling insects 
specifical ly mosquitoes to affiliate the dengue fever outbreak . 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
Yes Clerk? 
MOTION  
Member s Hon.  Jimmy Odari  has called me  and said he isn't feeling well .   
Hon.  Kasangamba:  He also called m e. 
Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Then he called everybody;  I think the 
message is the same so … 
(Interruption)  
Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  May I give the message . 
May 31, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 65 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version  of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : I will give it myself because the three of you 
want to give the message and the message is the sane so i will give the message m yself .  
Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Mr. Speaker  he is among the Member s who are suffering from 
Dengue fever . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much for telling the House, 
he told me he is sick i don't know which disease and Hon.  Jimmy Odari  is a person ; a respected  
person  he doesn't l ie so when he says he is sick I know he is, so he had asked for permission that 
his Motion  to be taken back to HBC so that it c an be allotted a date next week . Thank  you and I 
agreed to that, yes Clerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
Member s this House is adjourned until next week, thank you.  
The House rose at  3:33p.m . 