June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 29th June, 2016  
The House met at 2: 43p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon . Thadius Rajwayi ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Members  have your seats.  
REPORT  
MOMBASA COUNTY BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 2016 /2017  
Yes Hon . Hamisi Mwidani . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity so that I c an table the report of Mombasa County Budget Estimates  for 2016/2017 . 
(Interruption)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : First of all Hon. Mwidani  you have tabled this particular 
report  but I  need confirmation of this whether it is the report from the Committee  on Finance 
pursuant to Standing Order 207 (6) Hon . Mwidani.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Yes Mr. Speaker the Committee  on Finan ce, 
Budget and Appropriations  is the one dealing with this docket.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes any secondment? Hon. Kondo.  
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Thank you Mr.  Speaker sir I stand to second C hairman of 
Finance , Budget and Appropriations Hamisi  Mwidan i. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I want to believe that you had second ed the report, n ow I 
propose that this County Assembly adopts  the report on  Budget and Appropriation Committee  on 
the budget  estimates for the County government  and the County Assembly tab led in this County 
Assembly on the 29th of June 2016 .  
(Question proposed and agr eed to ) 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
Hon. Mswabah Rashid ? 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir for giving me this 
opportunity to r ead this N otice of Motion  on Painting of Tusks adjacent to Uhuru Gardens . 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid moved the Notice of Motion ) 
PAINTING OF TUSKS ADJACENT TO UHURU GARDENS  
       Mr. Speaker sir, I beg to give notice of the following Motion : 
June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2        THAT AWARE that the famous  decorative elephant tusks on Moi avenue, Mombasa are an 
important county Landmark and part of our historic heritage;  
       FURTHER AWARE that the decorative elephant tusks were erected way back in 1953 to 
commemorate the crowning of Her Majesty Queen Eli zabeth II of United Kingdom who was 
then the sovereign ruler in Kenya.  
       CONCERNED that since their construction the metal plates have been depreciating and 
there is need to paint them regularly to maintain them and preserve this important county and 
national landmark.  
       I therefore urge the county assembly to RESOLVE that:  
       The C ounty government to annually paint the landmark decorative tusks on Moi avenue, 
Mombasa and replace any warn out metal plates to preser ve this important piece of ou r County 
and national heritage.  
Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Mswabah when do you want to table this as a 
Motion ? 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah  Rashid) : Hon.  Speaker  i would like to table it 
tomorrow afternoon .  
MOTION  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Ra jwayi) : Yes Hon. Nyamvula . 
Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I wish to be given an opportunity to 
move  the Motion  on behalf of the F inance Committee .  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Rem ember Hon. Mwidani  did seek leave , he is away on 
matters concer ning the party because he already tabled it and already this parti cular report is 
adopted in the H ouse as it is. Yes  Hon. Murfad ? 
Hon. Amur : Hon. Speaker it’s not about the bud get but I want to seek leave to bring a  
Motion , if am allowed by your Chair . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I want you to reaffirm on the same position . 
Hon. Amur : No Mr. Speaker  I want to move another Motion , I will wait for you to allow 
me pursuant to Standing Order 49  (e), if you allow me I can read it . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Maybe we consider  that after considering the Motion  
before us which is actually the report , any  submissions on the report? I want to confirm d o we 
agree that we consider the report by the Financ e Committee …. 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
       Yes Hon. Amir T hoya . 
June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika  kama kiongozi, 
miongoni mwa viongozi wa serikali hii yetu tukufu,  tumeweza kudad isi ripoti ya Kamati ya 
Fedha  hasa hasa  nikiweza kuzingatia ma kadirio ambayo yalikuwa  yamet oka kwa executives na 
pia tulipata  nafasi ya kuzu ngumza  na kila  idara zetu kumi  za serikali ya Mombasa na tukaweza 
kuangalia zile sehemu amb azo tulikuwa tunahisi kam a Bunge  zinahitaji marekebisho tukaweza 
kufanya  marekebisho na leo asubuhi tulikuwa katika ukumbi wa T ononoka ili kupatia nafasi 
wana nchi vile vile waweze kuangalia kama  kunaweza kuwa na marekebisho yoyote Ili tuweze 
kuja kuipitisha katika Bunge hili.  Mheshimiwa Spika  yale ya msingi yaliweza kutekelezwa,  
katika executive pia yaliweza kutekelezwa na wananchi vile  vile waliweza kupatiwa nafasi ya 
kuweza kuangalia sehemu hii ya b ajeti ili kama kuna mapendekezo yoyote waweze kuyaleta na 
tuweze kuangalia yaweze kudumishwa namna gani katika b ajeti yetu.  Vile vile mwenyekiti 
ambae alikua pale aliweza kuwapatia nafasi na kuwa ambia kwamba kama kuna mapend ekezo 
yoyote ambayo yametolewa bado mlango wa kuweza kuyaangalia uko wazi wanaweza kuyaleta 
katika Bunge ili  tuhakikishe kwamba maoni yao pia yameweza kudumishwa . Kwa hio zaidi 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  ni kwamba yale ya msingi yote  ya sheria yameweza kutekelezwa na ripoti hii 
iko tayari kuweza kujadiliwa na kupitishwa katika Bunge  kama hili, kwa hivyo la  muhimu ni 
kuomba wenzangu, kwa sababu ripoti hii ni muhimu kwetu kama serikali  waweze ku jadili na 
ikiwezekana ipitishwe. Ah sante .   
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I was really expecting that when Hon. Hamis i Mwidani is 
out H on. Nzai Munyika was supposed to be in the House, to take us through introduction to the 
end, in the list H on. Mwidani is not in, Hon. Nzai not in Hon. Abdallah Kasa ngamba not in.  
Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula: Mr Speaker Hon . Mwidani recommended me to take this 
through so am a Member am asking for your direction.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You know our S tanding order is very clear if the C hair is 
not around the vice takes o ver, if he is also not around any M ember can take ove r so H on. 
Nyamvula you are very much in order.   
(Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula moved  the Report for FY 2016/2017  Budget, Finance and Appropriation 
Budget estimates ) 
Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker S ir this is t he Report of the Committee  on Budget, 
Finance and Appropriation,  budget estimates 2016/2017 . 
Members are ; 
Hon. Hamisi Mwidani   Chairman  
Hon. Karisa Nzai   Vice  
Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba   
Hon Riziki Fundi    
Hon. Beatrice Nzai    
Hon. Caroline Owino  
Hon. Khamis  Mwabashiri  
Hon. Jabess Oduor  
Hon. Mohammed Chiro  
Hon Mswabah Rashid  
June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 Hon. Nasser Rashid  
Hon Serah Nyamvula  
Hon Tom Oluoch  
Hon. Paul Onje  
 
Committee  Staff is Abdallah Khamis  
1. Introduction  
       Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon. M embers, I am pleased to present to yo u a brief report on the 
budget estimates of the County Government of Mombasa for the Fiscal Year 2016/2017.  
       The C ounty G overnment is planning to spend Kshs.  9,925 ,754,293.  00 to  finance its 
operations and developments across all wards in the next f inancial year 2016/2017.  
       The budget estimates were tabled before the Assembly on the 29th April 2016.  
       This report is before t he County Assembly pursuant to S ection 131 (1) and (2) of the Public 
Finance Management Act which provide that:  
       The Coun ty Assembly shall consider the C ounty g overnment budget estimates with a view 
of approving them, with or without amendments, in time for the relevant Appropriation Law and 
any other laws required to implement the budget to be passed by the 30th June 2016.  Mr. Speaker 
Sir, sub  section 2 of the above mentioned section provides that before the Assembly considers 
the estimates of revenue and expenditure, the relevant Committee  which in this case is the 
Committee  on Finance, budget and Appropriation sh all discuss and review the estimates and 
make recommendations to the Assembly, and in finalizing the recommendations to the county 
Assembly, the Committee  shall take into account the views of the County Executive Committee  
member for Finance and the public . Mr. Speaker Sir the above provision made it necessary for 
the Committee  to scrutinize the estimates and also conduct a public participation in accordance 
with Article 196(1)b of the Constitution, Section  131(2) of the Public Finance and Management 
Act 20 12 and Standing Order no. 121(3) of the County Assembly. The Committee  advertised the 
public participation on the 22nd June 2016 in the Standard newspaper and in the advertisement 
the public participation was to take place on Monday 27th June 2016 at Tonon oka Socia l Hall 
from 9:00a.m to 12: 00p.m. The same advertisement was run in Radio Maisha and KBC radio 
stations which are transmitted nationally  from the 21st June 2016. Mr. Speaker Sir, on the date 
of the public participation there were difficulties whic h the Committee  experienced as some of 
the Departments from the executive had not yet clarified on issues raised on their budget 
estimates and the members of the public on their part did not sign the attendance register and 
hence the Committee  agreed to re schedule the meeting to Wednesday 29th June 2016 at 
Tononoka  Social Hall from 9:00a.m to 12:00 p.m. Mr Speaker Sir the rescheduling was 
advertised in the Standard and Star Newspapers dated 29th June 2016 and the airing of the 
advertisements in the radios wa s also done. The public were therefore informed of the public 
participation exercise.  This report is highlights of contents of the proposed budget estimates. It is 
based on the Committee ’s own observations, analyses from the County Assembly’s Budget 
Office  and the views of the CEC Finance and the public.  
2. Observations and Findings  
A) Legal Basis for Budgetary Preparation and Enactment  
 
June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 2.1 County government b udgeting is derived and based on a host of legislation which should be 
read and interpreted together holist ically to arrive at a multi -dimensional framework. The 
following laws of Kenya form the bedrock of county government budgeting:  
a) Section 131 of the County Governments Act,  2012 points to a law on public finance that 
shall be the basis for county government funding, financial management and budgeting. 
Part XI of the same law divided into several sections provides a basis for planning 
including integrated development planning which is at the core of annual and medium 
term development budgeting.  
b) The law envisag ed by 131 of the County Governments Act,  2012 is the Public Finance 
Management Act,2012 which deals extensively on matters of financial management and 
budgeting including budgetary timelines and the preparation of  programme based 
budgeting vide section 12  of the Second Schedule to the Act. It also in section 131 
clearly stipulates the timelines within which the budget estimates and the subsequent 
Appropriation law must be enacted i.e by 30th June of every year.  
c) Other laws which are applicable to county gov ernment budgeting include the constitution 
vide article 201 on principles of public finance and the County Allocation of Revenue 
Act 2016. Furthermore, the budgets are regulated by ceilings imposed by the 
Commission on Revenue Allocation, circulars from th e Transition Authority, National 
Treasury, and Commission  on Revenue Allocation and by the internal Appropriation 
Acts enacted annually.  
B) Compliance to Legislation  
       Mr. Speaker Sir, the County G overnment budget estimates have complied with the laws 
cited in the following manner and a few highlights will be mentioned here:  
a) The draft budget estimates were submitted within the statutory timeline which requires 
that they be submitted to the county assembly before 30th April of every year. As earlier 
mentio ned it was formally tabled before the Assembly on the 29th April 2016 ;  
b) The budget has been prepared in a programme based budget format as per section 12 of 
the Second Schedule to the Public Finance Management Act,2012. In addition 
Transition Authority Cir cular dated 12th March, 2014 (Ref.  TA/7/5/Vol.  II) stipulates 
compliance with the same;  
c)    Adherence to constitutional principle of public participation and section 131 of the 
Public Finance Management Act 2012, the proposed budget estimates for 2016/2017 
were submitted by the County Assembly to the public for their views made by the 
county assembly through a public participation forum at Tononoka Hall on   29th June 
2016.  
d) The requirement of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 vide section 107 (2) th at at 
least 30% of County Government spending estimates be allocated to development 
expenditure. This has been met since about 32% of the budget estimates will be channeled  to 
development.  
c. Public View  
Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon . Members of this Assembly, t he Committee  on Finance, Budget 
and Appropriations subjected this document to public participation. Sufficient notice was 
issued from the 21st June, 2016 and attendance register was signed by the participants on the 
day of the forum i.e. 29th June, 2016 an d the only concern that was raised by the majority of 
June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 the members of the public is that sufficient notice of seven days ought to have been issued. 
And Mr. Speaker Sir we have documentary evidence that sufficient notice was issued. The 
members of the public  did not raise any concern in regard to the budget estimates 
2016/2017.  
1. Conclusion  
(a) The budget estimates need to be approved by this Assembly in time to enable the 
processing of the Appropriation law.  
2. Recommendations  
(a) The Committee  recommends t hat approves the proposed budget estimates.  
(b) The County Assembly to consider and adopt this report.  
       Signed , by Hon . Hamisi Musa Mwidani , Chairman  of Finance, Budget and Appropriation.  
       Dated : Wednesday 29th June, 2016.  
       Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
     Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Any comments concerning that? Yes Hon . Ibrahim Kondo ? 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker I  just want to second the Motion . 
(Question proposed ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes I  now propose a question in this Hon . House to consider 
this particular Motion  brought by Honorable Serah Nyamvula . 
(Question put and  agreed  to) 
(Applause ) 
       Any submissions? A m asking Hon . Nyamvula to confirm part (c) in the third line is it 21st 
June, 2016 or 22nd June, 2016 . Hon. Nyamvula can you confirm part (c) the third line is it 21st 
June, 2016 or 22nd June, 2016? Can you confirm that date?  
Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Which part is it Hon . Speaker?  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : The third line of part (c) .  
Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker I  wish to confirm that it is an error it should be 21st  
June, 2016 .  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Is it 21st or 22nd June, 2016? Can you consult before it 
goes into the Hansard be cause  it may affect the outcome so can you confirm  please? The other 
document that am having reads 22nd of June, 2016 confirm again.  
June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 (Consultations ) 
       As she confirms can we continue. Yes Hon . Murfad . 
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker i would like to seek leave to move a Motion ... 
(Interruption ) 
Mr. S peaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Resume your seat Hon . Murfad...  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Amur : I have … am requesting to move a Motion . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Murfad just have your seat when we are through 
with this you will be get an opportunity.  
(Consultatio ns) 
        We can continue, do you have a response to that Hon . Kondo .  
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Yes I  have Mr. Speaker Sir it is supposed to be  21st June, 2016 
not 206 it is an error it is 2016.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes any other if there's none now I proceed to put a 
question that the report on Mombasa County Budget Estimates 2016/ 2017.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
Yes Clerk . 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir....  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Murfad you are not the Clerk. Yes Clerk . 
BILLS  
We are on Bills Clerk , Hon. Amur Murfad you can continue . 
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity I  want to move a 
Procedural Motion  under Standing Order 49 (e) allow me Mr. Speaker … 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : You mentioned Stand ing Order Number 44 ? 
Hon. Amur : 49 (e ). 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : 49 (e) , yes continue ? 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker Sir I  wish to move a Procedural Motion .  
 
June 29, 2016                               COUN TY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 (Hon. Amur  Move d a Procedural Motion ) 
SUSPENSION OF HON. MEMBERS  
       THAT AWARE that  some M embers were suspended from the County Assembly through 
your directive.  
       FURTHER AWARE that the suspension was of the indefinite period contrary to the 
provisions of Standing Order 105 and 109  which talks about matters of suspension of M embers.  
        CON CERNED THAT the  suspension of M embers is against and violation of human rights.        
       NOTING THAT indefinite of suspension of the M embers is not provided for in the Standing 
Order or any other law directing to that effective  suspension.  
       I urge that Mombasa County Assembly resolve that the County Assembly to reinstate the 
County Assembly Members in the County Assembly and restore them fully.  
       Thank you . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : I want to inform you that me as the Chair you were not in  
last week  when  the issue was raised by Hon . Mary seeking for the extension of the matter by the 
Committee  on P ower s and privilege , and the deadline is actually tomorrow as it required you 
don't even need to move a Motion  for that so it is automatic if the re's no any considerations from 
that Committee  that they know they will resume the si ttings automatically that's one;  two issues 
that you have raised in fact that is actually saving the situation that giving 12 month s the way 
Hon. of Ugenya ,  I want to bel ieve from National Assembly was suspended and the matter 
resumed after one month which is a direct penalty so as a Chair you can direct penalty like that 
for a Hon . Member to be heard by a Committee . So as it is the request remain as it is tomorrow.  
Hon. Amur: Mr. Speaker my worry was that if the report is tabled tomorrow and they 
have not been given a chance to defend themselves ... I agree they will table a report tomorrow....  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Order Hon . Murfad resume your seat do n't pre -empt 
anything that the Committee  has not table d and if you have anything to that except, that's way 
this is a House of procedures and rules anything that you will want will be decided and you have 
been given as far as tomorrow so you will be given yours so I have been given a ruling. Yes next . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Ladies and gentlemen this House stand adjourned until tomorrow Thursday 30th June, 
2016 at exactly  2:30p.m. 
The House r ose at  3:19p.m. 
  