August 9 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 9th August , 2018  
The House met at 2:39p .m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats.  Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENTS  
RENOVATION OF COUNTY HEALTH RESIDE NTIAL HOUSES IN MWAKIRUNGE WARD  
 
Yes Hon. Ahmed Salama , Chairperson Committee on Lands Planning and Housing.  
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, malalamiko ya 
Mheshimiwa Feddis , Mwakirunge Dispensary ambayo yatakikana ilikuwa ifanyiwe ukarabati 
wakati wa s erikali ya Manispaa ya Mombasa. Ilifanyiwa ukarabati lakini ukarabati ule 
ulikuwa ni hafifu na nyumba yenyewe ni m oja tu ya daktari na sisi kama s erikali ya Kaunti 
ya Mombasa tumepitia na tukaona n yumba ile inahitaji m arekebisho ambapo itagharimu 
takriban milioni saba na elfu mia mbili (Shilingi 7.2Milioni) na iko katika hali ya kufanyika 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo ilikuwa tungeomba kwamba tupewe muda kidogo ili kusudi 
hii hali ya ujenzi ipate kumalizika. Ahsante Mhesh imiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Fed dies? 
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na pia ahsante sana  
Mheshimiwa Ahmed Salama lakini mbona ni  kijikaratasi  ambacho mimi nilikuwa nafikiri ni 
ripoti pia mimi nitakuwa na ripoti yangu…  
 
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Fe ddies you requested for a statement 
of which the Hon. Chair has responded so if you are not satisfied with his respon se then you 
can raise that you are not satisfied with his response. The issue of asking if he is having paper 
or a report that is up to the Committee , if they wanted to bring a report they could bring a 
report.  

August 9 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 Hon.  (Ms.)  Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  lakini naona kama ingekuwa ni 
ripoti kwa  hivyo sijakubaliana na hiyo ripoti kwa ufupi tafadhali.  
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Mheshimiwa Spika nakub aliana na Bi  Faith w ajua.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Madam Feddis . 
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Bi Feddis  nakubaliana naye moja kwa moja lakini 
Mheshimiwa Spika kama unavyojua na kama nilivyozungumza Mwakirunge ni mbali kwa 
tisha mpaka uamue kwenda na kufanya yale ambayo tumeyafanya lakini nam uhakikishia 
tukitoka hapa ile ripoti ataipata bila  wasiwasi. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Chairman  Lands, P lanning 
and Housing for the response. What is it Hon. Feddis ? 
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nata ka kukata msemaji 
Mheshimiwa Ah med Salama kwamba Mwakirunge ni mbali . Mimi kila siku natoka 
Mwakirunge nikija hapa na Mwakirunge ni Kaunti ya Mombasa leo ananiambia yeye 
ameniletea ripoti t ena ananiambia Mwakirunge ni m bali sasa nishike lipi . Mimi nataka ripoti 
hasa zile nyumba zitajengeka  na zitajengwa lini kwa wakati . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Bwire ? 
 
Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. S peaker as per the report or s tatement 
given by the Chairman  it simply means  the Committee never went to the  site to have the view 
of what the Member presented or rather demanded to be told and his Committee according to 
what he has described Mwakirunge is far and I think Mr. Speaker the Committee has to go 
for a site visit and bring a very comprehensive stateme nt. I doubt whether a renovation of on e 
house can cost  shs 7.2Million;  what  about a construction of a new h ouse. So I think we 
should again give  the Chairman and his Committee time to have a site visit and then bring the 
statement back to this House. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri ilikuwa...  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ahmed Salama y ou are out of order, 
yes Hon. Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker thank you for giving me this opportunity an d as I stated 
here yesterday these  young men need to be serious when they are articulating their duties. 
Hon. Speaker whenever a Member of the House see ks a statement they have every time and 
all the time possible for them to do a site visit and everything they are suppose d to be giving 
us the information that we have requested for and it is high time Hon. Speaker if they are not 
eligible enough the re are  Hon. Members , am not even the Chairman I can take over from any 
Chairman position ... 
 
(Applause)  
August 9 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 ...I can do that Hon. Speaker not t hat every now and then they ask  for more time, 
when actually is the more time, when will this tendenc y end of seeking for more time, 
unspecified time we need all Chairmen to be responsible and whenever a Member has 
requested for statement they need to furnish us with the relevant information that is suppose d 
to help this County of Mombasa. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Samba, Chairman 
Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing the House needs a comprehensive report by next 
week Thursday failure to which we will appoint an Ad ho c Committee to work on the same!  
 
(Applause)  
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Ahsante . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
ILLEGAL CONSTRUCTION OF TWO HOUSES IN KATISHA , FRERE TOWN WARD  
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama , Chairperson for Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing.  
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kujibu hoja ya 
Bwana Mheshimiwa Kitula ni kwamba zile nyumba mbili zilizojengwa kule zimejengwa 
pahali ambapo ni pazuri, barabara inapitika vizuri na zimejengwa katika hali ambayo 
yapendeza lakini kupitia kwa yale ambayo tuli yoyaona pale hawakujenga kihalali zile 
nyumba zimejengwa bila mipangilio ya kuidhinishwa yaani approval plan  na kama serikali 
ya Kaunti ya Mombasa haikuidhinisha nyumba zile na tunasema k wamba ziko kiharamu na 
serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa kupitia Kamati y a Ardhi itapeleka notisi ya siku saba ya zile 
nyumba zivunjwe Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa sababu haziko kihalali kisheria. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Charles Kitula are you satisfied with 
the response?  
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika kusema 
kweli nilikuwa na Mwenyekiti pamoja na Naibu wake katika kata ndogo yangu ya Frere 
Town ninayo wakilisha na kusema kweli tuliweza kukaa na kuweza kuchunguza na tukaweza 
kugundua ya kweli nyumba zil e ni za tajiri fulani katika mtaa wangu lakini kama kiongozi 
lazima niongoze na kuweza kuacha legacy  katika eneo langu . Kwa hivyo jukumu la 
Mwenyekiti alilochukua kuwapatia siku saba ili waweze kuhakikisha kwamba wameondoa 
jengo lile au sisi kama serikali tuweze kuchukua jukumu . Kusema kweli Mheshimiwa Spika 
nimeridhika na majibu ya Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
IMPLEMENTATION OF VAR IOUS PLANS /PROJECTS IN DEPARTME NT OF LANDS , PLANNING AND 
HOUSING  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
August 9 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I first want to declare 
interest under Standing Order 86 since am a Member of this Committee so I declare interest . 
Mr. Speaker I seek a detail ed statement from the Chairman;  I have declared interest under 
Standing Order 86 I am a Member of this C ommittee, I want to seek detailed statement from 
my Chairman Committee on Physical  planning and housing as follow s: 
 
1. What is the status of implementation of integrated Strategic of Urban Development 
Plan approved by this House in the F irst Assembly?  
 
2. Which companies were appointed to participate in the project and in which 
categories/areas?  
 
3. When will the Housing R edevelopment plan be launched ? 
 
4. What is the Mombasa Gate City Master plan and w hat is the status of 
implementation?  
 
5. When will M embers of the Assembly be involved/sensitized on these projects with a 
view to them being made aware and receiving their  input?  
Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Chairperson Committee  on Lands, Planning 
and Housing , any response?  
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Bwana Spika nafikiri tumesikia  na tupatie kama wiki 
mbili nitaijibu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes what is it Hon. Hatimy . Use your 
microphone . 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I request my Chair two weeks I think is a long 
time and I request him to give us next week because next week is a long time because 
everything is ready because  about the plan, so it is just to request the department to give us all 
these things. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chairman.  
 
Hon.  Ahmed Salama  Omar : Mheshimiwa S pika mimi nimesema wiki mbili tukiwa 
na sababu, kwa sababu tuna moja ambayo ni ya Feddis  hajaridhika twataka tuifanye  vizuri, 
alafu tutaregea kwa Mheshimiwa Hatimy baada ya wiki mbili tutaijibu.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think Hon ourable  Chair on the issue of the 
first statement from Hon. Fed dis and we can also go to the Hansard record s you said before 
this Hon ourable  House that the report is re ady and  it is just that we are waiting for the tabling 
of the report . So as the Honourable  Member, Hon. Mohamed Hatimy  before he gave out this 
statement he declared before this Hon ourable  House that he is a Member of the same 
Committee . 
August 9 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 And he said he  is aware of what is transpiri ng in the C ommittee and he is also aware 
that what he has asked is ready it is just th e plan or information from the C ommittee . So with  
all that we will give you seven days to bring bac k the report.   
 
Hon. Ahmed Salama  Omar : Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I rise to seek your guidance . I 
raised a statement last week and you ruled that should be brought back in this House today at 
this sess ion bu t I can’t find it in the Order paper.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes proceed.  
 
STATUS OF LOANS AND G RATUITY SUBMISSION F OR HON . MEMBERS AND STAFF OF 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  My statement was one that I seek to know from the Chair 
Finance the status of loans for Hon. Members and staff of this Assembly and the same t ime 
the gratuity submission;  whether  they submitted  because we are not aware if they are being 
remitted to any institution,  we are not aware of that. T hank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy , the Chairman Finance and 
Budget.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa m wenzangu ameuliza 
swali la ku taka kujua juu ya mambo ya gratuity  na mikopo  nafikiri  hii ni N yumba ya sheria, 
na kuna sheria ambazo ni lazima sisi tuzifuate kuhusiana  na mambo haya . Nafikiri  sheria ya  
County Government A ct inaelezea vizuri sana ni nani an afaa kufanya nini, kusema hivi  
nafikiri Mheshimiwa Spika kama si kukosea ukiangalia section  12, 13, 14 inazungumza juu ya 
gratuity  ni chini ya wafanyi  kazi manake ni malipo ambayo yanalipwa baada ya kufanya ile 
kazi ulioandi kwa na naangalia mambo haya, mambo  ya welfare  yanaangaliwa na B odi. 
Pia tukiangalia nafikiri juzi tulikuwa na mwakilishi  wa B odi nafikiri aliweza kukaa na 
Waheshimiwa kuz ungumza na sijui mulifikia wapi  lakini naomba hili suala li elekezwe kwa 
Bodi ili wawe ze kujibu kwa sababu ukiangalia Kamati ina majukumu yake, Kamati 
majukumu yake wamemaliza, tumeleta sheria, tulipitisha sheria, tulifanya bajeti tukaweka 
pesa sasa ni Bodi iwe itatengeneza itafuata ile sheria ya kutuambia sisi kama washa teua zile 
Kamati ambazo zinatakikana ziweko na pi a washafanya mikakati ya kuweza kutengeneza 
pesa ili W aheshimiwa waweze kupata hizo pesa. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba 
Nyumba hii ikubaliane na mimi kuwa haya ni majukumu ya Bodi na Bodi ndio itaweza kuja 
kujibu haya masuala. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Chairman but as the 
Member has requested that the Chair Finance to respond on this you have responded to his 
statement  and I hereby request that the  Board to bring back the report to this Hon. House in 
not more than 14 days, the board to report back to this House. Yes Clerk? Just a minute 
Clerk, what is it Hon. Hatimy?  
 
August 9 , 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Not more than 14 days or within 14 days?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Within 14 days and not more than 14 days . I 
think it is one or the same, within 14 days  and not more than 14 days the B oard will sit and 
bring back the report to this Hon. House. Yes Hon. Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Sp ika nimesimama chini ya kipengele 
41 (c) kwa kuweza kuzungumzia kwa ruhusa yako .  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just read the Standing Order ? 
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): 41 (C ) A M ember may request for a statement from the 
Committee Chairperson relating  to matters under the mandate of the Committee and the 
Speaker may either appoint a day for the statement or direct that the statement be issued on 
the same day.  Mr. Speaker. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu):  So what do you want to ask?  
 
OPEN SEWER /DRAINAGE AT MARIKITI MARKET  
 
Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kuuliza Kamati ya 
uchukuzi na huduma kwa jamii au wananchi ikiwa wanafahamu pale katika soko la Marikiti  
kuna shimo ambalo liko wazi na linatoa harufu mbaya zaidi kwa wafanyi  biashara na watalii 
ambao wanaingia kuzuru ule mtaa. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : To grant permission to the Committee 
concerned you will ask the same statement next week  on Thursday because in the same 
Standing Order you are supposed to notify the Speaker before you come to this Hon. House 
so as you are now notifying the Speaker and it is upon the Speaker to either let the statement 
be responded or appoint a later date . So I would ask the Committee c oncerned plus the Mover 
of the statement to bring your s tatement on Thursday and the Committee concern ed will 
respond on it. Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members having there no other business the House stands adjourn ed until next 
week Tuesday at 2: 30p.m.  
The House rose at 3: 05p.m  
 
 