July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 24th July, 2019  
The House met at 2:58 p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have your seats. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
LACK OF RAMPS ON  THE PAVE WALKWAYS AL ONG THE STREETS OF MOMBASA CITY  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ramla?  
 
Hon. Said:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand pursuant to Standing Order 
41(2) (c), seeking to know from the Chairperson Committee on Tra nsport, Infrastructure and 
Public Works whether she is aware that pave walkways installed on the streets do not provide 
accessibility for wheelchair users and the street texture is not friendly to the people living with 
disability?   
Mr. Speaker I also requ est to know whether the County g overnment of Mombasa have 
plans to put ramps and make the pathways friendly to the disabled as a matter of urgency.  As I 
elaborate , the pavem ent that people are walking on we have people with disability who are using 
wheelch airs and tricycles , we also have people who are blind and they need to know where they 
are going and at what point they are supposed to cross.  
So I need to know if the County g overnment has  plans to make such an important p roject 
for the people living wit h disability. Thank you.  
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Any Member from the Transport Committee? 
Yes the Vice Chair any response?  
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante Bwana Spika.  

July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 Napenda kuweza kuchukua suala hili la Mheshimiwa Ramla kuweza kumjibu  ama 
kumueleza kwamba katika zile barabara ni pavement pekee yake lakini kile kitu tumekifanya 
ramps ziko mpaka kwenye hospital i ziko, upande wa halls  ziko ramps  pia lakini kwa suala la 
barabara hilo naomba nipatiwe muda ili tuweze kulijadili. Ahsante Bwan a Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Timeline , when will you be able to respond?  
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Naomba kupatiwa wiki mbili.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ramla , what is it?  
Hon. Said:  Mr. Speaker Sir two weeks is too long because i t is better to know the status, 
whether they do have those plans or not. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok, the Vice Chair we are going to give you one 
week  for you to respond to this Honourable  House.  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  It is ok one week, I can manage.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
PROJECTS IMPLEMENTED  FROM THE GRANTS RECE IVED IN F INANCIAL YEAR, 2017/2018  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand pursuant to 
Standing Order 41(2) (c), seeking to know from the Chairperson Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works,  sorry, sorry Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I was repeating what 
Mheshimiwa Ramla has just said.  
My Statement Mr. Speaker is on Project implement ed from the grants received in financial 
year 2017/2018. Mr Speaker Sir, I stand pursuant to Standing Order No.41 (2) (c), Seeking to 
know from the Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations on the grants in 
the FY 2017/2018 . I therefore r equest to know the p rojects that were implemented i n each W ard 
in the FY 2017/2018 :  
1. Kenya Devolution Support Programme (KDSP) – Kshs. 49,809,062 ; 
2. Compensation for User Fee Foregone – Kshs. 23,514,312 ; 
3. DANIDA grant – Kshs. 23,261,504 ; 
4. Level 5 Hospital that  is our Coast General Hospital – Kshs. 388,439,306 ; 
5. Development of Youth Polytechnic – Kshs. 30,586,320 ; 
6. Conditional Allocation – Other Loans and Grants – Kshs. 38,140, 114 ; 
7. World Bank Loan for Transforming Health System for Universal Care Project – Kshs. 
10,736,032 ; 
8. Road Maintenance Fuel Levy Fund – Kshs. 182M ; 
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chairman Finance?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Nimeona Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwenye Road Levy  sina kwe nye hii karatasi hap a. Sijui am eongeza kwa juu? Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwa ufahamu wangu mimi sijui Kshs. 49M hizi zimetoka wapi? Number one, Kenya Devolution 
Support Programme (KDSP)  lakini kwa ufahamu wangu mimi najua pesa tulioambiwa kupawa 
ni Kshs. 259M na sio Kshs. 49M...  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  A point of information Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes inform the House.  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  The sum which the Chair of Finance is referring of Kshs. 
200M illion  plus that is for the FY 2018/2019 and my  request is for FY 2017/2018 which we 
received Kshs. 49M illion,  but the amount he is referring is for FY 2018/2019.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone , be audible.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kama kuna grant yeyote, grant ni lazima 
iingie kwenye Appropriation Bill or Appropriation Act  na kusema sisi kuwa tumepokea Kshs. 
259M illion  vile unavyose ma wewe sijui imetokea wapi hio!  Na nataka niseme kuwa grants  
kama No.2, Kshs. 23M illion  hizi ni facilities  ambazo sisi tunapatiwa Mhe shimiwa Spika. 
 DANIDA ni grant kama unavyojua Mheshimiwa Spika siku hizi waambiwa wapewa 
grant, utapewa figure  ya zile pesa lakini zile pesa huzi control  wewe, zile pesa zina controliwa 
na yule mtu wa zile pesa.  Halafu Level 5 Hospital  sijui 388,439,306 k ama ni Condition al grant 
ambaye hio ni pesa ambayo inatumika kwa Coast General  pekee yake. Development of Youth 
Polytechnic  Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni Grant ya Education .  
Conditional Allocation – Other Loans and Grants  Kshs.38, 140,114 hio i tabidi niulize 
Mheshimiwa Spika, l akini World Bank Loan for Transforming Health System for Universal Care 
Project, hio pia ni Health  ambapo hizi pesa wenyewe wanazi control . Maana yake huwa 
wanakupatia zile Programs  halafu zile Programs  ndio wenyewe wana control  kama ni 
kufundisha watu, kuwapa dawa, kama ni kuwapa nini wao wenyewe ndio wana control hizi pesa 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : What is it Hon. Athman Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mr. Speaker the information which I  seek to know is very 
much available in  the Controller of Budget’s Report and the source of information which was 
indicated in that document, the Controller of Budget gets it from Mombasa County Treasury.  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 That is the actual and confirmed tha t they receive d this g rants f or the implementation of 
those projects, s o my question was ver y much simply, where are these projects as per this g rant 
which were received? Because for example of the KDSP it was meant for Wards, and in their 
implementation you have indica ted that these things were done at the Wards level, n ot 
necessarily in my Ward but I just wanted to know this Ward at that area so that I can maybe go 
and see it for myself but this issue of the County Treasury confirmed that they received these 
grants and  they actually spent  the money on those alleged  projects as per the g rant. So mine I just 
wanted to know where are these p rojects? Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chair are you in position as at now to 
point the projects?  
Hon. Mohame d Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kama anataka kujua miradi  itabidi 
tuwaandikie  Idara  halafu tuweze kuleta kumpatia ili apate kuridhika . Kwa hivyo naomba muda 
wa wiki mbili.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok.  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: That is what I expected fro m the Senior Hon. Member to tell 
me, most obliged Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Hon. Renson Thoya?  
(Silence)  
Yes Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON IMPLEMENTA TION , HON. SALIM 
KALUME ON STATUS  OF IMPLEMENTATION OF  MOTIONS PASSED IN TH E COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
Yes Hon. Salim Kalume?  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I wish to give the following Statement 
response on the Status of the Implementation on Motions passed in the County Assembly of 
Momb asa.  
Mr. Speaker Sir the Committee of Implementation wrote to the County Secretary and 
Head of Public Service requesting him to attend Implementation Committee meeting regarding 
the same issues. Mr. Speaker the County Secretary wrote to the Committee on 1 2th July, 2019 
requested to be given two more weeks time to prepare adequate responses on  the matter raised.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, we are requesting more time to table the report before this Assembly. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.   
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chief Whip is up?  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kusema la ukweli Kamati hii 
ya Utekelezaji  inatoa nidhamu mbaya au picha mbaya katika Bunge letu la Kaunti ya Mombasa. 
Taarifa  hii ililetwa kwenye Bunge, tulienda mapumzikoni ; long recess , tukaenda short recess  na 
hadi wa leo bado anasema tumpatie wakati !  
Tafadhali Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tumia nguvu zako kulingana na kitabu chetu kinacho  
tuongoza katika Bunge letu la leo kwamba tungeomba kwa sasa Kamati ya Utekelezaji  tunahita ji 
majibu haya mimi sio niliyeuliza  Taarifa  lakini inanihusu mimi kwa sababu kuna M iswada mingi 
imepitishwa ambayo inaangazia wananchi lakini Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya 
Utekelezaji  kusema tumpatie muda zaidi sio sawa katika kiti chake.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Musumba Raphael?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker it is very interesting I remember the 
Hon. Chair asking for more time and I think from where I sit that date elapsed today and it  is 
very unfortunate that he still asking for more time. I think Mr. Speaker this is my take as the 
whole term of five  years if we entertain this; yes we have been passing here so many Motions 
without implementation , now how long does it take for us to know that these two or three 
Motions have been implemented  and the remaining five M otions have not been implemented 
because of one two three . 
I think we stated last week that this issue of , give me tomorrow, tomorrow comes, give 
me two weeks, two weeks elapse give me one month Mr. Speake r! I think we should not be 
entertaining this so I appeal that Mr. Speaker today you kindly give a very harsh and rough 
ruling on the same so that the Chairpersons of different Committees or respective C ommittees 
adhere to the rulings made by the Chair. Th ank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir, I just want to add value to what or emphasize to what 
the Hon. Membe r has just stated. Mr. Speaker S ir we all know that one of our m ajor core 
functions in this Honourable  House is to legislate or to make laws and the end of it all we will 
realize that…  
 
 (The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) exited the Chair) 
(The Temporary Speaker ( Hon.  Bwire) in the Chair)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I was saying I just wanted to try 
and emphasize on what Hon. Bwire has just stated and therefore as we all know that one of the 
major functions of this Honourable  House is actually to legislate and when we talk about 
legislation we have M otions that come into this House and we have very many things that are 
passed through this particular House and therefore this Hono urable House is going to lose its 
meaning if the implementation does not take place at all . Therefore Mr. Speaker Sir I just want to 
urge the Chair for implementation to be very serious on this. Thank you.  
 
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim . I am informed that 
you are also a Member of  the said Committee? Are you a M ember of  the said Committee?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker I am so rry I have not heard any Member … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : I am asking , are you a Member of the 
Implementation C ommittee?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes I am Mr. Speaker Sir, but…  
 
(Laughte r and Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So declare your interest?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir that one should not keep me away from airing my 
views…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Anyway it is okay! It is okay!  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes, airing out my views as a Member of Airport W ard. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . 
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Kombe Nzai?  
 
Hon. Nzai : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. M imi ni mmoja wa M wanachama wa 
Kamati ya Utekelezaji , na mwanzo nataka nichukue nafasi hii nipongeze jitihada ya  Mwenyekiti  
wangu...  
 
(Applause)  
 
Kama anavyoshughulikia hili suala la ku tekeleza  kama katika Bunge hili aidh a lilopita 
ama hili liloko sasa. K ama kuna Kamati  ambayo ina cha ngamoto  Mheshimiwa Spika ni Kamati 
ya Utekelezaji ; kwa sababu haina Waziri mhusika moja kwa moja  ambaye yuko attached  kwa 
hiyo Kamati. K ila tukienda kwa huyu twapigwa mpira kule tukienda kwa yule twaambiwa 
twende kule CEC yule ; hiyo Mheshimiwa S pika ni changamoto wenzetu ambao mara kwa mara 
tunawategemea ili kutusaidia pale na hapa ni Makarani  wetu ambao ni ndugu zetu, wengine ni 
watu wa  Utafiti  tunapata matatizo mengi kabisa. Mheshimiwa Spika leo hapa kurusha kidole cha 
lawama kwa Mwenyekiti wa Utekelezaji  tutakuwa hapo tunaenda mbio sana lakini laiti basi leo 
Bunge hili lingesimama likasema W aziri wa  Utekelezaji  katika Bunge la Mombasa ni fulani  pia 
sisi nasi tungekuwa tuna mahali mnatusaidia.  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika Mwenyekiti  wangu kuitish a muda naomba samahani sana 
lakini mumpe nafasi azidi kutafuta haya maneno kwa sababu hana ofisi husika ambayo anaweza 
kuingia na akapata haya majibu moja kwa moja. Kwa hayo machache tusaidianeni.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you H on. Nzai, yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Ath man Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I think the response 
from my Chair is very much okay because the communication was done on 12th July to the 
Implementation Committee from the County Secretary asking for  two weeks and on my 
calculations we are having two weeks , we have two days for the two weeks to elapse so it is 
unfair for him to be told that is a lot of time , the response was supposed to be…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Mem ber those are  views given by the 
Members you should also give your views.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Yes I am informing those Members that they should be 
aware and sometime s they should go to their calendar and calculate these dates, so till next week 
if we w ill not be in a position to submit this one or the report then we will have a c ommunication 
as to why but as of  now the CEC has requested the Committee  and there is nothing we can do 
until he is done with his two weeks to give us whatever  he has collected f rom all the 
Departments for us to submit to this Assembly. So Mr. Speaker I thi nk we are still having two 
days.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire): So you mean the busin ess has been brought pre -
maturely ?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Yes, because two weeks; the  letter…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Let me confirm with my Clerks.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  The letter was received on 12th July and that was on Friday 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Samba as I confirm w ith the Clerk 
you should not mislead the House Hon. Member.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes Mr. Speaker I also happen to be a Member of the said Committee on  
Implementation;  this time round I have to congratulate our Chairman we have tried as a 
Committee…  
 
(Applause)  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 It was just last week we had a consulta tion and conversation with the D epartment 
concern ed, the CEC who is in position that is now is vacant , so maybe that is why the delay is 
being propelled in between . 
But so far so good Hon. Speaker we do  not want to giv e the House report that they will 
doubt, that they cannot verify, that is not true, we want to give them a report that is verifiable. 
We have only asked for two weeks , others have been asking for two weeks after two weeks, we 
pray that you may just give us  that one week and then after one week . I think i will liaise with 
Chairman the rep ort or the House will have full  report and very convincing report and I think 
from that day we will be heading towards good direction. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri mimi ndiye niliyeuliza hili swali 
na mimi nimesimama hapa nataka kuiambia Nyumba hii kuwa nimeridhika na sababu  zilizokuja 
na Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya  Utekelezaji ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Kwa hivyo naomba na nasema kuwa kama mwenye swali, apatiwe muda alete majibu ya 
kisawasawa tusimpeleke mbio akaja akatuletea mambo ambayo hayako sawa.  Kwa hivyo 
naomba wenzangu W aheshimiwa wakubaliane  na mimi tumpatie muda kupi tia K iti chako 
Mheshimiwa Spika ili atuletee jibu la sawa sawa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Chair Hon. David Kalume?  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Kwanza ningependa kumshukuru Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti wa Kamati 
ya Fedha  kwa kuwa na mawazo ya busara na kuona kwamba hii kazi ni ngumu na kunisaidia 
kuomba muda katika Bunge hili.  Kwa kweli Mheshimiwa Spika hii kazi si rahisi kama mtu 
anavyofikiria kwa sababu hizi status  lazima tuzipate kutoka kwa Katibu wa Kaunti  na kama vil e 
walivyosema Waheshimiwa wenzangu; Mheshimiwa Kombe Nzai, Mheshimiwa Samba, 
Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri haya majibu yote yanatoka kwa Bwana CS na tukijua kwamba kwa 
sasa hivi tuko na CS ambaye ni Interim  ni CS yule Interim  pia inakuwa ni kazi kubwa kwake 
kutafuta  majibu kama haya kwa sababu yeye hana ufahamu wa kazi ile kwa hiyo mimi 
ninashukuru Kamati yangu tumekaa vizuri…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Are you declaring that the acting CS is 
incompetent Hon. Member?  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Kidogo, ha na uzoefu yule CS aliyoko kwa sasa , ni interim  ambaye hana 
uzoefu katika kazi ile. Kwa hivyo mimi na  Kamati yangu tumekaa muda baada muda 
tukishirikiana na Makarani  tukihakikisha kuwa ripoti hii imekuja katika Bunge letu la Mombasa. 
Lakini kwa vile CS yule  hana uzoefu amekuwa akiomba muda ili  kusudi atuletee ripoti mwafaka 
ambayo itakuwa ni  sahihi katika B unge hili.  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 Kwa hiyo naomba Mheshimiwa Spika kama alivyosema Mwenyekiti  wangu 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy alivyosema tuongezewe muda ili tuweze kuwaletea ripoti ya ufasaha. 
Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : What was it Hon . Member?  
 
Hon. Athuman Shebe : Mheshimiwa Spika chini ya himaya yako ukiniruhusu, alama 
kielimishi!  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes?  
 
Hon. Ath man Shebe : Kwanza kabisa  Mheshimiwa Spika wavyele wasema , mwenda 
pole hajikwai  na Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mwenza kwanza kabisa ukizingatia kiti chake ni 
kikubwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, mwili wake ni mkubwa, koti lake ni kubwa vile vile nafikiri 
kazi pia vile  vile ni kubwa . Kwa hivyo  Mheshimiwa pia mimi…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) ,Can you Hon. Member go to straight; you 
wanted to inform the House . 
  
Hon. Ath man Shebe:  Nawajulisha kuwa changamoto zinazo.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order Member! There is a P oint of order! Yes 
Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  I stand to inform…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order Member! You are out of order! Y ou are 
out of order Hon. Member! Y ou have stood o n a point of order again , you want to stand on a 
point of information at the same time.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Order Member! Order Member! Under which S tanding order Hon. Member?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Under which S tanding order are you standing on?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Kindl y point of information! I am very sorry Mr. Speaker Sir Point of 
information.  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : He was on the point of information , you stood 
on the point of order.  
 
Hon. Omondi : I also want to inform him Mr. Speaker Sir, I want to inform  him because 
he has used a terminology tha t is not acceptable in this Honourable  House.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Okay.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir , referring to my fellow Chair Hon. Kalume that he has a 
very big body and therefore he cannot p erform I think that one is not accepted…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Order Member! You are out of Order! T hose were 
not the words used by the Hon. Member, am very much keen when am here and those were not 
the words used by Hon. Member and Hon. Member you also stood on a point of information but 
it is like you are making a S tatement.  
 
Hon. Ath mani Shebe:  Not at all  Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwa kuelewa malengo 
yangu, nilikuwa sikulenga kumkejeli Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini nimesimama k atika alama 
ya kielimishi kuwa mimi mwenyewe pia Mheshimiwa ki bin afsi najua hizi changamoto. K wa 
hivyo ningependelea kwa sababu Mheshimiwa CS ambaye yuko sasa uzoefu na ofisi pia vile 
Mheshimiwa bado hajaifahamu vizuri hivyo basi  hili swala la Utekelezi  tumekuwa tukiuliza kwa 
muda mrefu , kweli Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti lakini pia ningependelea aweze kupatiwa mda ule 
ambao umebaki ndio akituletea kitu hapa cha ki sawa sawa kila mtu ataridhika otherwise 
changamoto pia nazijua. Ahsante . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Is it on the same issue Hon. Ramla?  
 
Hon. Said:  Mheshimiwa naomba kutoa  Taarifa . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Am yet to make a ruling on the other issue then 
I will give you a chance.  
 
Hon. Said:  Sorry.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : It is okay. Hon. Members I think the Hon. 
Mohamed Hatimy who raise d the issue is contented with the period asked by the Hon. Chair of 
two weeks I think, Hon. David Kalume you asked for two weeks?  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon . Bwire) : Kindly make use of these two weeks because it 
has over stayed, the response has over stayed and Members are n ow turning mad on the same so 
I will just allow  you to bring back the response in the next two weeks from today.  
 
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11 Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante Mh eshimiwa Spika.  
 
  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : And again the period you asked was to elapse 
on Friday so if two weeks elapse s on Friday kindly make an effort of bringing the response on 
Wednesday because we will entertain you since Friday we do not  have sessions so we will not 
count till Friday, we will count till Wednesday so make use of these two weeks and ensure that is 
elapse s within the days of the session.  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Clerk.  
 
CONSTRUCTION OF RAMP  AT THE ENTRANCE OF T HE COUNTY ASSEMBLY B UILDING  
 
Yes Hon. Ramla?  
 
Hon. Said:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Naomba kujua kuhusu ujenzi wa ramp  
mbele ya  jengo l etu la Assembli kwa sababu ni miaka miwili imepita na nimekuwa nafuatiliza  
mpaka sasa sijapata majibu ya kisawa sawa na walemavu ambao wanatumia wheel  chair  na 
tricycle  wanapata tabu kufikia ofisi yangu. Ahsante  Mheshimiwa.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you, are you up on the same issue Hon. 
Member?   
(Hon.  Athman  Mwamwiri off mic rophone ) 
 
 Then give me time...  
 
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri off mic rophone ) 
 
On the same issue raise d by Hon. Ramla, but that is a S tatement.  
 
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri off mic rophone ) 
 
I think it should be directed to the relevant authority, are yo u one of the relevant 
authority?  
 
(Hon. Athman Mwamwiri off mic rophone ) 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : I think this is all about the welfare of the Hon. 
Members and I w ill therefore direct it to the B oard, is it so or am directed otherwi se. Hon. 
Hatimy am directing it since it has been raised by the Hon. Member and it  is all about the welfare 
of the Hon. Members, am requesting that we di rect it to the County Assembly Service B oard so 
let the Members present or let it be taken into consideration  that I  think by next week the B oard 
can bring back the response on the mechanism of the plans they have for the Assembly.  
 
(Interruption)  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 Yes what is it Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I just want Standing order 41 2 (C)…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Tempo rary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : What does it say?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Seeking to ..., Mr. Speaker Sir I want to give a S tatement  and if you allow 
me to give a Statement.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : What does Standing Order 41 2 (c) say?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Spea ker Sir a minute.  Mr. Speaker Sir , A Member may request for a 
Statement from the Committee Chairperson relating to the ma tters under the mandate of the 
Committee and the Speaker ma y either appoint a day for the Statement or direct that the 
Statement be iss ued on the same day . Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you now it  is up to the Chair to make a 
ruling on the same.  
 
  Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : And like we said last week we need to be 
notifying  the O ffice of the Speaker before, if you have something that has not been captured in 
the business of the week, then you ought to notify the Speaker prior so I think just because I have 
allowed Hon. Ramla I hope it will not be justice on your side If I w ill not give you time but Hon. 
Members under my C hairmanship this i s the last time I  will be giving a Member who has not 
notified the office of the Speaker. Yes?  
 
STATUS OF THE STORM WATER DRAINAGE ALONG  BOMU CATHOLIC CHURCH  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir I want to ..., am seeking to 
know from the  Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works if he is 
aware that the storm water drainage along Bomu Catholic Church is in a very pathetic condition 
or rather it is in its death bed if I may use that term.  
Mr. Speaker Sir I am sayi ng that because w e have lost around two children  who have 
been drained in that particular storm water because it  is very open and it is deep and therefore 
when it rains it is very dangerous to the surrounding or people who live around that particular 
place  and therefore I want the Chair for Committee on Transport to be able to lock or to, which 
term can I use?  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire ): Alrea dy you have directed it to the D epartm ent 
so you will just issue the S tatement then I think  it will be so w ise to let the D epartment itself to 
know how they will deal with the situation.  
 
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Abrari, Abrari was up.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. N imesimama  katika 
kipengee 41 cha K anuni ya daftari ya Bunge hili. Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kujua hasa 
Mwenyekiti  wa Uvuvi  na ukulima maana kuna  janga ambalo limetokea na ni dharura  kwangu ; 
wavuvi wote wa Nyali B each wame simamishwa  kuvua na baadhi yao vyombo vyao  vya kuvua 
vimeshikwa, wengine  wamepelekwa n dani kushtakiwa. Kwa hivyo ningependa hasa kupitia 
Mwenyekiti wa ukulima na uvuvi alichukulie jambo hili na atupe majibu . Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : But the ter m stopisha relate to, is not 
Parliamentary and I do  not understand it.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrari : Wamesimamishwa kuvua.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you, the Clerks have take no te of the 
same and I think we g iven them two weeks because they are not here , any Committee Member?  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Abrari:  Kidogo Mheshimiwa hili ni jambo la dharura, hawa ni watu 
vipato vyao wote vinatokana na bahari na wamesimamishwa na KWS na malalamiko mengine ni 
ya utovu wa usalama  wa watu wa hoteli  na watu wa Kenya  Fisheries . Kwa hivyo mimi naomba 
Bunge hili li tilie mkazo, ni jambo la dharura hawa ni watu wanakula kupitia bahari. Ahsante . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Hon. Mwamwiri, are  you a Member 
of the said Committee? Are you aware what  the Hon. Member has just raised?  
 
Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Am n ot aware and as a Committee they have not received 
any communication on the same apart from what he has just raised , so since it  is an emergency 
issue because it concern s people 's wellbeing and livelihood so by next week, one week will be 
enough for us to r espond because the people out there actually are suffering if that is their only 
means of livelihood and currently they are not operating . So within one week we are supposed 
to.., am sure will we will be ready to give a respon se to this Assembly and the way forward fo r 
our people at least to go back to their normal routine.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : So from today to...  
 
Hon. Athmani  Mwamwiri : To next week Wednesday.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : So you make a site visit then you bring back the 
response on Wednesday next week.  
 
Hon. Athmani  Mwamwiri : I have not asked for a site visit because it implies with issues 
of transport and currently Counties are suffering…  
 
(Interruption)  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire): Order Member ! Order Member ! You make your 
own ways to the site, we are interested in  seeing the response as the Hon ourable  House that  is 
what we w ant so kindly liaise with your Committee next week on Wednesday.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni jambo la dharura na Waziri  anajua, 
Waziri  alipigi wa simu siku ya Jumamosi na aliongea na kikundi cha wavuvi na akawaahidi kuwa 
kufikia leo atakuwa na suluhisho, wao wawe wataruhusiwa . Kwa hivyo nakuomba kupitia Bunge 
hili kama inawezekana kwa haraka ifanyike kesho kwa sababu watu hawatashinda njaa kwa 
sababu ya Bunge hili wakisema  waketi mpaka wiki ijayo Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : I get you r concern and that  is why I said you 
see the only ... Tomorrow we w ill not  be having a session and Friday we w ill not  be having 
sessions so the site visi t can be done tomorrow or even Friday, it may be resolved either today or 
Friday but the day that response has to see the light of this House is on Wednesday next week so 
I have just ruled out that they bring the response back but it can solved even as ear ly as 
tomorrow.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika jambo hili ni jambo la dharura na nafikiria 
limegusia maisha ya watu wengi, Kamati  ni extension  ya Bu nge ikiwa kupitia Kiti chako 
utaweza kuwapatia Kamati  idhini ya kuweza kufuatilia hili jambo kwa sababu Mheshimiwa 
Spika tumebadilisha vikao  kuweka Jumanne kusudi Alhamisi na Ijumaa Kamati  zipate kufanya 
kazi.  
Kwa hivyo naona kama kesho Kamati  itaweza kulivalia njuga hili jambo waende 
wakaangalie ili tuweze kuwasaidia hawa watu ambao hawana uwezo Mheshimiwa Spika. Kamati  
iangalie itafanya nini? Kama itaweza kuingililia halafu ituletee ripoti ndani ya hii Nyumba lakini 
mwanzo wahakikishe kuwa  wameliingililia hilo jambo k wa haraka iwezekanavyo. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you and in fact it is very easy and simple 
since the County Executive Committee Member (CECM) on Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Livestock is aware of the same so due to the public outcry a nd conc erns of the Hon. Members . 
Hon. Member , liaise with your Chairman to liaise with the Department so that you can even have 
a site visit tomo rrow if possible yes since the Department is aware of it you w ill not  be informing 
them for the first to prepare themselv es, they are aware of the issue .   
The Hon. Member has just made me understand that they are aware of the issue so you 
can see the mood of the House and it  is a bit urgent . Kindly liaise with your Chairman to liaise 
with the County Executive Committee Member (CECM) if possible tomorrow you can have a 
site visit just liaise with the Hon. Member representing the said area so that you can talk to these 
people possible tomorrow and latest Friday.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  If it pleases you Hon. Speaker I have no objection . 
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you tomorrow or latest Friday and then 
bring back the responses next week. Yes Hon. Athman?  
 
Hon. Athman  Shebe : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Nasimama kwa kipengee ama 
alama kiamrishi 41 2 (c) ; Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti pia ni suala la dharura ambalo takriban miezi 
mitatu sasa lakini bado halijashughulikiwa , ni masuala ya ardhi katika eneo langu la Jomvu mtaa 
wa Narcol kuna shule ya ECDE pale Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  ambapo a rdhi inanyakuliwa na 
tangu ni ekari mpaka sasa imebakia kiduchu sana .  
Kwa hivyo naomba Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa ardhi aweze kulivalia njuga suala hili 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni mali ya umma inanyakuliwa na mimi kama kiongozi siwezi 
kuangalia dhulma wakifanyiwa watu wangu na mimi niko na nguvu ya kuzungumza 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
Na vile vile niko na taarifa nyengine ya mpigo kupitia kwa Mwenyekiti wa Transport  na 
Infrastructure  (Uchukuzi) Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nin gependa 
kujua pia kama Mwenyekiti anajua kuwa katika Idara yake ya Uchukuzi kuna nafasi za kazi 
watu  wanaajiriwa na Bunge hili ama Waheshimiwa ambao sisi ndio tunahitaji zaidi kwa watu 
wetu kule mashinani lakini bado hatujazingatiwa, ukiangalia kuiga mfano  mwema kama 
Mwenyekiti wa Mazingira natija itakayopatikana katika Idara…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order! Member, Order please. Which 
issue are you up on?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Naomba kuarifu Bunge hili ya kwamba suala la ajira lik o na 
kanuni zake na taratibu zake na sisi kama Bunge labda iwe kuna hujuma au dhulma ndio 
tunapata kuingililia kati lakini hili ni suala la kitengo husika na taratibu zao, kwa hiyo kulijadili 
hapa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni kinyume na maadili. Ahsante Mheshi miwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you the issue raised by Hon. Shebe 
Athman concerning land you are the Vice Chair of Lands, are you aware of the issue raised?  
  
Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Am not aware of that . 
  
Hon. Athman  Shebe : Mheshimiwa Mweny ekiti hili suala la ardhi la Jomvu nimelileta 
hapa takriban mwezi wa tatu nalia Jomvu Narcol ardhi ya shule inanyakuliwa, nimelia 
nimengoja milele mimi naona nafa bila kelele na halijafanyiwa kazi . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, 
ni masikitiko na ukiangalia ripoti z etu za Bunge za Hansard zipo , sasa ni mchezo wa paka na 
panya tunach ezeana ama ni nini? Maanake ni masuala ambayo yanahitaji suluhisho la dharura 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Yeye amezua suala lake la Kongowea kuhusu wavuvi…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Hon. Member . 
 
Hon. Athman  Shebe : Tusichezeane Mheshimiwa hapa…  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 (Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order ! The Member may not be aware of the 
issue raised, maybe it was raised in his absence, the Committee may  be aware but the Member 
may not be aware . So I was just asking the Vice Chair on Lands whether he was aware and he is 
not aware I was to give directives so sometimes you do  not react that harsh and I was appealing 
to the Hon. Vice Chair Hon. Abrar i Omar you were not in the picture now you are in the picture 
liaise wit h your Chairman and the entire Committee and if the Member is so genuine that he 
brought here in March then I see no reason of giving you more days . I think next week 
Wednesday it will be appropriate for you to bring back the response . 
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Hon. Samba you will be the last speaker, you 
are up? Hon. Samba , then Hon. Leila then we call it a day . 
 
Hon. Samba:  I was also on Standing Ord er 41 2 (c) I would wish to get a Statemen t from 
the Department of Health ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You wish to get a Statement ? 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes Statement from the Health…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are issuing a Statement ? 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes am requesting a Statemen t from the Department of Health . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are requesting for a response on a 
Statement you want to raise . 
  
Hon. Samba:  Yes am giving ou t a Statement requesting for a response . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . 
 
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I do  not know if the Department is aware that fee for P3 was 
removed and if you go to our hospitals still they are charging Kshs.  1,500 . 
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17 I just wanted this House to just confirm whether the allegations are true, and if it is true 
what is that Kshs. 1,500 for? Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  Thank you , any Committee Member? Yes 
Hon. Milka?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Mr. Speaker thank you personally am not aware of the same but we will be 
able to do some investigations and bring the answer in the next meeting which will be 
Wednesday next week , God willing.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So one week is okay with yo u? 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Leila? So bring back the 
response next week Wednesday Hon. Member. Hon. Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyache: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii . Nasimama  
kupitia Standin g Order  41 2 (c). Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kujua kupitia Mwenyekiti wa  
Afya  ya kwamba kama ana ufahamu ile Zahanati  ilioko kule Bokole ambayo ni ya Kaunti pia ni 
ya miaka na miaka na imechakaa kweli kweli Mheshimiwa Spika yaani ukuta wake hauangalilik i 
umechoka.  
Kwa hivyo ningeomba ikiwa Bunge hili pia wanaweza kupitia kule na kuweza kwenda 
kuangalia ile  Zahanati  ile hali ilioko iko hali mbaya , imechakaa hata haiangaliliki. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba Kamati ya  Afya  waweze kufuatilia na iwe ze kupakwa rangi 
ibadilike manake muundo wake ni madhubuti ni rangi tu ndio imechakaa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Mheshimiwa haiangaliliki , uliona vipi wewe? ! 
 
(Laughter)  
 
Ahsante. It was just on a light note.  
 
Hon. Nyache: Yaani namaanisha imechakaa.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are a Member of the Committee? Yes Hon. 
Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Point of Information , japokuwa hii ishu  imemalizika  
Mheshimiwa Spika lakini nataka kueleza Nyumba hii kuwa Idara  sizo zinazo  charge, Idara  
wanaleta kwenye Idara ya Fedha  halafu Idara hio  ndio wanatengeneza ile sheria  ambayo 
inalipisha  watu. Kwa hivyo kama kuna ada zozote msema kweli ni Finance Act,  kama kitu kipo, 
hakuna  mtu yoyote mwenye nguvu za kuondoa ada zozo te isipokuwa Nyumba hii, jambo lolote 
la kutoza ada  lazima lije hapa kama ni  kupewa exemption  lazima lipitie Nyumba hii Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Ahsante.  
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : You are reacting on Statement raised by Ho n. 
Samba? So are you aware the Department proposed to do away with the charges? So according 
to you the Finance Committee the charges are still intact…  
 
(Hon. Moham ed Hatimy nod ded) 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Then Hon. Member you are answered.  
         
 Hon. Samba:  It was  on a government circular that the P3 should be free of charge two 
months ago ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Which government, the County or the national 
government?  
 
Hon. Samba:  National government, any government hospital and County go vernment  
also falls under national government. Police have done away with payments of P3 or any other 
payments so now I was in a certain function and it was raised and I promise to give back the 
response as far as this House is concerned . 
  
The Temporary Sp eaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So I think you will liaise with the Chairman on 
Finance maybe you will get to know if it was an executi ve directive from the national Parliament 
maybe we have not impl emented and you see the Health Department was devolved and we also 
have a say even if the national government will give directives but we also have to sit down and 
look on the directives given, if they favour us we will drive the directives if it does not favour u s 
so maybe you liaise with the Chairman you have heard what h e said…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Samba:  I do not get you , we liaise with who?  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : With the Chairman on  Finance , anything to do 
with money it has to go through the Department of Finance…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Samba:  Let me try to elab orate a little further ; when th e issue was raised some of 
the Members who happen to work for the Coast Provincial General Hospital confirm ed that th e 
charges are there but they sa id these charges catered for Doctors’ fees while they are attending 
court cases, when they go for postmortem s so that is why it generated that thing because they are 
employee s of the County government and why should they be paid so that is why have brought 
this issue in the floor of this House.  
 
July 24, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. So I think just  as i have said the 
Health and Finance Committee since is related with issues to do with money plus yourself you 
get to understand the whole issue if you w ill no t agree then please bring it back . 
  
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . 
 
The Tempora ry Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : And the issue raised by Hon. Leila, Hon. Milka 
you have heard when are you reporting back?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  I will consult with the Chairman but I think the same time when we are 
bringing the other report on Wednesday we will be a ble to do the same . 
  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you and the issue raised by Hon. Ibrahim 
Omondi I think the Committee on Transport and Infrastructure we expect to bring the response 
next week but one on Wednesday. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
There having being no other b usiness the House stands adjourned until Tuesday of 30th 
July, 2019 at 10: 00a.m.  
 
The House rose at 4:00 p.m. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
 