June 6 , 2017                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            66 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 6th June, 2017  
The House met at 2:45p.m. 
 (Temporary  Speaker  (Hon.  Patrick Siminyu ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
Temporary  Speaker  (Hon.  Siminyu ): Member s you may sit down . Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Yes Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh Baya . 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh: Thank you  Hon. Speaker, my Statement is with regard  to 
gratuity; I would like to tell Hon.  Member s of this Hon.  House that our term s ends as usual , 
for the services that we have given to our people for five years term  there are some goodies 
that the  Hon.  Member s must be given in terms of g ratuity. Mr. Speaker  my concern  is about 
the time; when, and how would Honorables  will be able to get their gra tuity. Mr. Speaker the 
other concern is that I want to know how much has been remitted to our relevant accounts as  
you are  aware we are about to go for recess , this is a very important matter , it is our concern 
for every Member  to know that at the end of our term we can  be able to settle down and I 
hope even the Hon.  Member s who are still on the race to know it is our concern and my 
concern  so we would like to have  a communication from the Chairperson , Committee of  
Finance and Budget . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Temporary  Speaker  (Hon.  Siminyu ): Thank you Hon.  Kibwana, this is a great 
concern to the House  about the  issue of gratuity monies . The Chair of Committee of Finance , 
is he around?   
(Silence ) 
Any Member  from the said Committee?  
(Silence ) 
Then  I direct to have a report by next week Tuesday. Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Since there is no other business this House stands adjourned until tomorrow morning.   
The House rose at 2:51p .m. 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 