June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 30th June, 2016  
The House met at 2: 37p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Thadius Rajwayi ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Please have your seats Hon. Member s.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Yes maybe this is information  that has just come to me .  I have been informed that the 
Member s of the public have been locked out because of time but am directing them that they be 
allowed five minutes they come in but th ereafter nobody should come in because I unde rstand 
that there are quite a number of people that are outside so they better be allowed to come . You 
can organize and see how best that number can be accommodated . 
(Member s of the public allowed into the public gallery)  
PAPER  
       Again we have a  petition before the Hon.  House and it reads ; ‘Notification on the outcome  of 
the public participation forum on Mombasa County  budget estimates 2016 -2017 scheduled for 
29th June  2016.  The above Subject matter refers.  We the undersigned CSOs and Member s of the 
public; Kituo Cha Sheria , Transparency International Kenya (TI -KENYA) , Haki Yetu, Pamoja 
Trust , Ujamaa Center , Juhudi Support Center , Muslims For Human Rights  (MUHURI) , Center 
For Law And Research International (CLARION) bigship CBO,  Local Empowerment for go od 
governance  (LENGGO) , KECOSCE, Coast Education Center,  Kwacha Afrika among others 
hereby notifies you that the planned public participation meeting that was scheduled to take 
place on the above said date 29th June 2016 at Tononoka Social Hall did not tak e place and the 
forum was called off by the Acting Chairperson of the budget and appropriations Committee  
Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani.  That was due to the fact that there was no proper notificatio n to the 
public about the forum . The documents that were supposed to  be discussed on this day has also 
not been given to the public in good time to facilitate for their internalization before 
participating in the forum.  Kindly be advised that any attempt to read and  /or pass the budget is 
illegal and not acceptable to us a nd the public in general for the undersigned.’  
       Attached are copies from the Nation and the Standard newspapers , the Nation page 24 and 
the Standard page 22 so it is important ladies and gentlemen that I bring this to your attention , I 
wish it was br ought as early as yesterday because that is when it was due for the Report  but your 
Report  yesterday was that that public participation was smooth and this one now contradicts that 
position . I do not know what you are saying abou t this but this is the peti tion; any Member  from 
Finance Committee ? I want to hear from any Member ? Yes Hon.  Nyamvula?  
Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker I actually wish to comment on your 
communication from the Finance Committee , because of this petition I would appreciate if just 
about five representatives would come in so as they see deliberations because ever since in the 
morning we have received a lot of phone calls from the press because Mr. Speaker on behalf of 
my Committee  because some of you …that is my opinion . Yesterday the day before we had a 
public participation at the Tononoka Hall as mentioned in yesterday’s Report  it is true that… it is 
true that we went there ; the very unfortunate thing is that I turned up there because the Member s 
were still interrogating the budget d ocument at North C oast. We were interrogating it on behalf 
of the said public f or us to have taken longer Mr. S peaker is because we had concerns and that is 
why we had to call the C hief Officer' s to come and defend themselves and that is why we took 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 longer . So there was no point , yes it had been advertised but there would not have been any point 
of us going ahead with it if we the representatives of the people had some issues with it ; now 
from what I understand thereafter yesterday we had a public…so the on ly representative I was 
there I was shut down becau se you understand I am still a Member  of the C ivil Society 
Organisations (CSO' s) and I understood their anger and I understood their appeal but then we did 
it for them we did it for the people of Mombasa . Yesterday according to the Report  Member s did 
not turn up and if it is about the seven days that can be debated,  the seven day notice that can be  
debated M r. Speaker but  Hon.  Member s of this County  Assembly turned up for this public 
participation and accor ding to our Report  on behalf of this Committee , my Chair the Leader of 
Majority is not here I do not know what the Chief Whip will say be cause he must have whipped 
the Member s that this public participation t ook place.  Thank you Mr. Speaker  and if I am rig ht 
there were two advertisements on yesterday’s dailies.  Thank you.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Swale h Fatuma Mote?  
Hon.  (Ms. ) Fatuma  Swaleh : Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii ; 
public participation  ilifanyika na kulikuwa na utuliv u na usalama.  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Riziki?  
Hon.  Fundi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kutokana na ripoti ambayo umetupatia ya 
kwamba umepatiwa  tetesi  ambayo mashirika kadhaa ya uma ambayo yanawakilisha katika 
Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa imeleta  tetesi  yao kuhusiana na masu ala ya b ajeti.  Mheshimiwa S pika 
sisi tuko hapa pia kuwakilisha watu na wao vilevile wanawakilisha watu naf ikiri itak uwa si bora 
ikiwa tutaipuuza hii  tetesi  ambayo imeletwa mbele yetu kwa saba bu wame toa sababu  zao za 
kisheria katika N yumba hii . Kwa hivyo na  hii ni mara ya kwanza katika  muhula ambao 
tumeingia katika B unge hii kwamba wakati tukiwa na b ajeti tunaletewa tetesi.  Kwa hio nafikiri  
itakuwa ni jambo la busara sher ia ambazo zitakuwa zinatumika kuhusiana na mambo ya  tetesi 
tukiangalia  sheria za Bunge kuanzia na mbari 199 mpaka 202 naf ikiria Mheshimiwa S pika iko 
haja ya sisi kuangalia hiyo  tetesi  na sisi kuangalia sheria zilizotumiwa ili wale watu walio kule 
nje wajue kwamb a tuko hapa kwa maslahi y a wana nchi na sio kwa maslahi yetu hili . Ni jambo 
limetutokea sisi kwa mara ya kwanza na sheria ziko wazi , ningependa kutokana na sheria 
ambazo zinatupatia sisi uwez o katika B unge hili  tuweze kuishughulikia hiyo petition ili tuangalie 
vile ambavyo pameanga ziwa pale ili tuweze kupata mwelekeo rasmi kulingana na matumizi ya 
pesa.   
Mheshimiwa S pika b ajeti ambayo tumetengeneza ni zaidi ya Billioni tisa  na billion i tisa 
sio pesa kidogo hizi ni pesa nyingi na nyingi zinatoka katika serikali kuu.  Kwa hio kuna haj a sisi 
kama Wawakilishi wa watu na kwa sababu tumeletewa malal amishi kuna haja ya kuwa 
kuangalia yale mal alamishi ili tuweze kuyarekebisha ; mimi sioni haja ya kupitisha b ajeti ambayo 
kesho ambayo itapelekwa kortini kwa sababu rai a wamepatiwa nguvu na katib a kwamba wao pia 
wako na nguvu ya kuchukua ili nao waweze mambo ambayo tumepiti sha hapa kiny ume cha 
sheria wanaweza kuchuku a hatua . Kwa hio M heshimiwa Spika mimi nachukua hili ni jambo zuri 
katika Kaunti  ya Mombasa tuonyeshe ule uwakilishi wetu kwa sababu ya watu wa Mombasa 
kwa s ababu pesa ambazo tunataka kuzi commit  saa hii ni pesa  nyingi na hizi ni pesa za wana nchi,  
wanalipa kodi,  mimi pia ungeniweka jina langu katika hiyo  tetesi  kwa sababu mimi pia nilikuwa 
na maoni mengi sana ningetoa …(Inaudible)  kwa sa babu watu wangu wa B amburi 
hawajawakilishwa kabisa katika b ajeti ilioko mbele yetu . Kwa hi o Mheshi miwa S pika tuf uate 
sheria tuangalie  tetesi  inasema nini tu iangalie tuipatie muda ili wanan chi wa Mombasa waridhike 
wajue kw amba wako na waakilishi katika Bung e hili. .. kwa dhati wa moyo na…  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Amir Thoya?  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika, nachukua  fursa hii kujaribu kusema 
jambo moja … (Inaudible ) tulikuwa  tunaul iza kama cha msingi ni kwamba Bwana S pika um ma 
wana haki ya  kuuliza m aswa la yote ambayo tunafa nya katika B unge kwa sababu …. (Inaudible) .  
Mambo haya yanafanya chini ya sheria na sisi hatuna jambo a mbalo tunaweza kupinga 
Mheshimiwa Spika ….(Inaudible)  ya kwamba  mpangilio wa …. (Inaudible)  kwa sababu mambo 
haya ni ya k isheria ….nataka kusema kwamba M heshimiwa Riziki anasema anataka kuwa moja 
wa wale petitioners  jina lake liwe moja ya yale yako pale katika orodha . Jambo la kusikitisha ni 
kwamba Mheshimiwa Riziki amekuwa katika Bunge hili;  bajeti  tangu mara ya  kwanza 
ilifanywa alikuwepo kule kikambala na executive  alikuwepo hivi sasa nashanga a akipata nafasi 
ya kuchangia maoni mkutano muhimu kama ule ambapo angekuwa moja wa wale ambao 
wanapinga ni kinyu me cha sheria na ni kama kwamba ….cha msingi Bwana S pika wanan chi 
wamei kubali tuko nazo katika rekodi za B unge na kama ilikuwa ni  tetesi  sisi kama B unge hatuna 
uoga wowote wa  tetesi  kwa sababu ni s wala ambalo liko katika katiba.  Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Riziki. 
Hon.  Fundi : Ningep enda kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa Amir Thoya ambaye namheshimu 
sana waka ti tulikuwa kule nilitoa maoni yangu na haimanaishi kwamba m aoni ya kila moja 
yatachukuliwa vile yalivyo lakini m aoni ni lazima niseme wakati nilikuwa pale nilise ma watu 
wazi ya kwamba wodi ya Bamburi haikuhusishwa katika maendeleo na naregel ea kusema hapa 
hata M heshimiwa Spika ukiangalia katika ripoti ya H ansard itaonyesha ya kwamba hata kule 
Kikambala nilipinga Hansard itaonyesha kwamba nimepinga kwa hivyo kusema kwamba 
nilichangia nilisikika vizuru na ikiwa itawezekana uwende kwa  ofisi ya  Hansard  watakuonyesha 
na…  
(Interruption ) 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Kondo . 
 Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Nyumba hii ina sheria na ni lazima lifuatiliwe  Mheshim iwa 
Spika swala la b ajeti ni swala la wanan chi wa M ombasa na si swala ya mashirika ya Mombasa . 
Nafikiri jana tulik uwako na wanan chi, kuna makundi ambayo yalikuwako kuna makundi ambayo 
yalikuwa na maoni yao kupitia kwa M wenyekiti wetu Hamisi Musa M widani mashirika yal itoa 
maoni yao , mashirika yal itioa maoni  yao na pia maoni yanavyozidi kutolewa …yakajadiliwa na 
yakapatiwa kipa o mbele.  Mheshimiwa S pika swala hili la b ajeti halikuanza jana wala halikuanza 
leo, kama a livyotangulia kusema aliyekuwa M wenyekiti mdogo nafikiri ni moja aliyekuwa na 
kipao mbele kwanz ia shughuli zilipoanza mpaka hapo jana na ni mmoja alikuwa pale na alikuwa 
na W awakilishi wa kutoka katika wodi yake ambao walikuwako zaidi ya watu wengine wote 
katika Kaunti  ya Mombasa . Mheshimiwa S pika yeye ni M wakili shi hatuwezi kuleta wa watu wa 
Bamburi ndani ya N yumba hii wakaongea isipokuwa ni kauli yake na kuna njia nyingi za 
kufuata kupitia kwa K iongozi wa Walio Wengi.  Kwa hio mimi ningependa swala hili ni la 
umuhimi kwa watu wote wa Mombasa tusinagalie tu yale mashirika,  mashirika yana mambo 
mengi y a….na ikiwa walitoa maoni yao sisi tuliyachukuwa na tuliyapatia kipa o mbele kwa hivyo 
tunaangalia masu ala katika b ajeti hii tuangalie masu ala yetu katika Kaunti ya Mombasa . 
Ahsante. 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Karume . 
Hon.  Karume:  Thank you Hon.  Speak er sir  I just want to raise three iss ues; first and 
foremost the constitution is the backbone  of our nation Article 196 of the constitution is  very 
clear on public participation . Mr. Speaker  you realize with this petition we are breaking the law . 
Mr. Speak er sir I believe  that Hon.  collea gue Hon.  Fatuma M ote who has affirmed  to that and 
even Hon.  Patrick who has affirmed  to that , unfortunately I  was personally not there to attend the 
sittings but the Committee  had a Report  so I want to believe all of us kno w the consequen ces of 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 misleading this House we move for Ward  and do what we are required to do and thirdly all of us 
in this H ouse we know there are other avenues of who can follow it through and exercise their 
will… (Inaudible ). Mr. S peaker sir at this par ticular time I repeat my Submission … (Inaudible)  I 
find it very annoying and ...the police …(Inaudible)  that is not permissible under the law  and it’s 
not right and I would like I am not directing you Mr. S peaker to direct tha t similar respect to be 
allowe d (Technical hitch ). 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : The Hon.  Member s that are up standing are the ones who 
will speak  then I will give direction,  Hon.  Mary ?  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , kabla niendelee ningeomba wale 
ambao wako nje ambao haw akuingia kwa gallery  waruhusiwe waingie hata kama wengine 
watasimama lakini wawe wamesimama lakini wawe wamepata haki zao ya kuweza kukaa kwa 
public  gallery. Mheshimiwa Spika ni jana ndio tulikuwa tuna jana tulipitisha ripoti ya public 
participation ambaye ilikuwa imeletwa hapa na ambaye ana shikilia  kama M wenyekiti wa Fedha 
na Bajeti.  Ripoti ikaja hapa ikapitishwa na marekebisho,  ndio wameleta  tetesi  yao lakini juzi siku 
ya Jumanne pia walikuwa na tetesi tukak ubaliana ndiposa tukarudia public participation  siku ya 
Jumatano . Mimi nilikuwa naomba tuweze kuendelea kwa sababu hata public participation  juu ya  
hii bajeti  tunataka kupitisha ilikuwa isha tegenezwa katika public participation  na executive  
ambapo sisi tulikuwa tumeenda ndio watungaji sheria kupeleka hii  public participation  lakini 
ilikuwa ishapele kwa. Sasa sisi zile haja za wana nchi walikuwa wameleta tukiwa public 
participation  wana marekebisho mahali popote tuko tayari walete kwa karatasi  ya maandishi 
yaani  written memorandum  ili tuweze kuwarekebishia k abisa lakini tue ndelee wakati hauko 
upande wetu . Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid . 
            Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Rashid  Mswabah ): Ahsante sana Bwana S pika mimi pia 
nachangia swala hili la tetesi . Mheshimiwa S pika nikinukuu katiba  kwa kiingereza utaniruhusu 
nisome kwa kimomb o (Inaudible ) wana haki ya kuleta  tetesi , nasikitika kusema ya kuwa  tetesi  
hii yao itakuwa imepitwa na wakati kwa  sababu hiyo alafu ya pili hii b ajeti si yetu ilitengenezwa 
na executive  arm kama miezi mitatu  ilyopita na wao pia walikuwa wameenda public 
participation . Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa S pika mzuri sana ni baada ya public participation  ya 
executive  ili tuangalie kabla ikiwa hii Bill ambayo iko mbele yetu iwapo haitapita itakuwa 
makosa sana tutakosa pesa kama Momba sa ikiwa County  Appropriation Bill haitapita leo 
ambapo leo ni mwisho kama wanavyotaka wao ikiwa tutakubali petition  yao itabidi iendee kwa 
Kamati ya Fedha , wakati umeisha kwa hivyo tuweze kufanya biashara yetu ya leo ili tuweze 
kupata pesa tufanye huduma kwa wanainchi.  Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Mwabashiri?  
Hon. Mwabashiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipa fursa hii kwa tetesi  hii, jana 
public participation  haikufanyika tuseme ukweli na M wenyekiti ambaye ni Hamisi Musa 
Mwid ani akaahirisha kikao ….  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Amur : Point of information . 
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Amur?  
Hon.  Amur : The public participation was done on humanitarian grounds ; the notice was 
given on 22nd of June 2016 , the public part icipation was to take place on the 27th but because  
they wanted a hearing ……the seven day notice was given …to see and understand what it was 
about but they did not give us a chance . They said no notice no public participation but if they 
had sat and discu ssed and had solutions we were there to hear them and according to the 
advertisement the notice was there and they can proceed with what they want .thank you.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Onje.  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 Hon.  Onje:  Ahsante sana mheshimiwa Spika mimi naungana na wenzangu ambao 
wameongea saa hii kama public participation  ilifanyika,  ilifanyika ikiwa wanasema 
haikufanyika na ilikuwa na  notisi fupi  walijuaje kuna public participation  na itafanyika sio 
kwamba noti si ni fupi . Hiyo iko sawa kama unaju a wazi hutaki kufan ya kitu usiingie lakini 
ukiingia mpaka unas ema hii kidogo ukiingia mahali Mheshimiwa S pika na polisi wamekuja 
utasema wewe sio mwizi . Kwa hivyo public participation  ilifanyika vizuri sana na rekodi 
ikachukuliwa wale walikuwa wanapinga ni kidogo ni kawaida ni siasa lakini ilipita vizuri na 
tusirudi nyuma hiyo unajua saa hii tuniangia katika musimu wa siasa najua kuna wengine 
wanataka kusimama lakini public participation  ilikuwa very successful … 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Thank you Hon.  Onje,  can we have Hon. Mwabashiri?  
Hon. Mwabashiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika public participation  siku ya jumatatu 
haikufanywa lakini jana ilifanyika mda mcha che. Kwa hivyo wakaomb a wajitayarishe tena kwa 
hivyo siku nyingine l akini jana haikuweza kufanyika Mheshimiwa S pika kwa  sababu walikuwa 
wanadai ile noti si ya jana ilikuwa ni fupi sana mwenzangu akisema ilikuwa imewekwa tarehe 22 
mwezi huu kwa gazeti na kweli nimeona ilikuwepo kweli . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika mimi 
kwa ufupi mimi nimesema naunga mkono hiyo petition  hata sas a mimi M wabashiri nazungumza 
kwa niaba ya M jambere . Juzi tulikuwa wote kut oa maoni ya b ajetii hii lakini Mheshimiwa S pika 
maoni yetu bado hayajatiliwa maanani . Jana pia wale wananchi waliokuwa pale walitoa maoni 
yao lakini maoni hayakuchukuliwa m aanani hat a moja hakuna na sisi pia tulitoa maoni yetu 
tukiwa wote tulitoa maoni kuhusu hii b ajeti, jana M wenyekiti wa Fedha alipoleta maoni hayo 
bado b ajeti iko vile vile kama executive  walivyoileta , maoni yetu kama wabunge bado 
hayajitiliwa maanani . Kwa hio si kuw a napinga b ajeti mimi nataka b ajeti ipite hata leo hata jana 
lakini nasema b ajeti hii ipite ikiwa imeangalia maoni ya Mombasa mzima kwa ujumla yawe 
yamepewa kipa o mbele .  
Mheshimiwa Spika nimezungumza katika M jambere hakuna hata mradi hata mmoja 
ndani ya b ajeti hii kwa watu wa M jambere na hayo ni masikitiko mheshimiwa kwa sababu 
Mjambere iko ndani ya Kaunti  ya M ombasa lakini kwa masikitiko makubwa maoni yangu 
hayajachukuliwa muhimu na mimi nilitoa maoni yangu nikiwaakilisha lakini hata sasa maoni 
yao hayaja tiliwa umuhimu . Mheshimiwa Spika tusipopitisha leo Mombasa Kaunti  kutakuwa na 
shida hata tukipitisha wiki ijayo ama mwezi ujao pesa am bazo tutapata ni chini ya asilimia 50 . 
Kwa hivyo ikiwezekana kwa sababu pesa ambazo tunapitisha hapa ni zao wao ndio wanak atwa 
kodi tusifanye pesa ni zetu sisi zatoka mfu koni mwetu hizi ni pesa za wanan chi ambao 
wanakatwa kod i wakiwa na jambo.  Mheshimiwa Spika kama viongozi katika J umba hili 
tukubaliane kwamba ni ya mwisho ikiwa wameleta maoni yao tuyasikilize kupitia K amati ya 
Fedha pia tuangalie mwana nchi atafaidika vipi na b ajeti hii lakini mambo ya kwenda ghafla  
ghafla na maoni ya wananchi hayaangaziwi tukishtukia tunapitisha kitu ambacho sisi wenyewe 
kitatudhuru katika mji wetu wa Mombasa . Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwa yi): Hon.  Madundo . 
Hon.  Mohamed Madundo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika mimi yangu ni kuunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa.  Vile alivyozungum za M heshimiwa Onje kwa sababu wakati Mwenyekiti 
aliyekuwa ambaye ni Hamisi M usa aliwa ambia vizuri sana sisi tumekuja hapa kuwasik iza n yinyi 
yale matatitizo mlio nayo sisi hatutasema matatizo tuliyo  nayo sisi ni nyinyi wana nchi lakini cha 
kushangaza ni kuwa wale wana nchi hawakujali na kuona kuwa sisi….mara ya kwanza  walisema 
hatuko katika T ononoka walisema hivyo sisi pia kule tulikuwa tun arekebisha tulikuwa tunapanga 
hii bajeti iwe sawa na muelewe kitu kimoja waheshimiwa wenzangu hivi sasa ni wakati wa l ala 
salama kuna baadhi hapa pia ….na wakatia chumvi ya kwamba haikufanyika na hizi miradi  
amba yo inapangwa katika kila wodi kila moja anaju a ile miradi ambayo imepangwa na ile b ajeti 
ambayo tulisoma wakati wa mbeleni kulikuwa na wengine hawana mradi.  Kwa hivyo ilienda 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 rotation  lakini katika B unge hili kila mmoja ana miradi katika wodi yake, kwa hivyo alafu kitu 
chengine cha kushangaza sisi ka ma tul ivyokubali alafu wanasema hatuku peana notisi ya siku 
saba, tusiende namna hiyo, maana hivi sasa hii b ajeti ambayo tuko nayo sasa, ni vitu tumewania 
tumalize ili tuonekane watu  wa Mombasa tumefanya miradi y etu, kwa hivyo tusilete mambo 
mengine kama hi yo notisi ya siku saba  tungoje kama hiyo 2018….  
(Laughter ) 
         Ahsante , Bwana Spika.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Wangudi.  
Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kwa fursa h ii, na mimi niweze kutoa 
mchang o wangu, kuhusu....   
(Technical Hitch ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon Mdhai . 
Hon. Oduor : Mheshimiwa Spika nasema ahsante sana kwa kunipa nafasi hii ; kwanza 
nataka kutoa shukrani kubwa kwako Bwana Spika kwa mwelekeo uliotoa kwa kuwakaribisha 
watu ambao wako kwa public gallery , wawakilishi wetu huko mashinani kuja kushuhudia . Kitu 
cha kwanza Mheshimiwa S pika kulingana na maswala haya nyeti, hao ambao wanakaa juu 
kututizama sisi ni wawakilishi wao na yale am bao tunasema hapa sio yetu bali ni kioo cha hawa 
hapo ambao tumewachagua Bwana S pika na mimi nataka kusema hivi kuto kana na b ajeti, hawa 
executive  wawe wakileta kama ni b ajeti ya B unge la Kaunti  iwe yaletwa  kwa muda unaofaa , kwa 
sababu Bwana Spika utata ambao tuko na hapa kati yetu na hizi hayo mashirika ya kijamii 
Bwana Spika ni sababu ina kua last minute rush  Bwana Spika. N a Mheshimiwa Spika mtu yoyote 
ambaye ni mzima hata mtoto wa miaka 16 ikiwa unamletea kitu leo kwa kesho huwezi mfanya 
asitie shaka  kwamba  kuna  shida  kwa hicho kitu, kwa hio B wana Spika ombi langu kwamba 
mara nyingine  kama kuna matangazo  iwe kuna muda wa kutosha  hawa wawakilishi saa  zengine 
nia zao pia ni nzuri , wana ajenda nzuri Bwana Spika  lakini mimi nataka kusema kwa niaba ya 
watu wenye ambao tumewawakilisha wapewe  muda wa kutosha.  Kwa hayo machache Bwana 
Spika, naomba  nikae, nasema a hsante ingawa sikupigiwa mawe……  
(Applause ) 
       Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  mpya nakutambua….  
(Laughter ) 
       Ahsante  sana…  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Zeinab Kithinzi.  
            Hon.  (Ms.) Zainab  Kithinzi:  Ahsante Bwana Spi ka kwa kuniona , ahsante kwa kunipa 
hii fursa.  Ningependa kusema ya kuwa hii bajeti  tusiingize siasa ndani, b ajeti hii sio ya 
waheshimiwa tu bali ni ya wananch i wa Mombasa.  Jana tulienda Tononoka kuchukua maoni ya 
wananchi wanasema nini ili  tukija hapa tuya jadili lakini Mheshimiwa S pika tulivyofika pale 
wananchi walikua wamekaa kwa utulivu lakini waliokua wakipiga kelele wakiping a ni watu 
walikua wametumwa na mashirika fulani na ni lazima maanake mshahara wao watoka pale 
wasipopiga kelele hakuna mshahara….  
(Laughter ) 
       Kwa hivyo hilo twalijua, kwa hivyo watuache sisi tufanye kazi na wao wafanye yao…  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Zeinab, civil society has been my panel and I know 
that statement has been hiting me directly … 
(Laughter ) 
       Once I was there i never made noise for me to be paid, we used to make noise for a good 
reason and if you doubt that maybe you can ask Hon.  Hudson Karume he is a Member  of this 
Hon.  House, Honorabel Serah Nyamvula was also a strong supporter …,  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 (Laughter ) 
       Have some order Hon . Ogalo! L adies and gentlemen i know that this particular petition 
wasn ’t supposed to be discussed here but i found it fit as the head of this particular Assembly to 
discuss this because the previous petition i read out I haven't heard if it was considered that 
petition and this is very serious in  terms of your integrity and how quickly you address these 
issues so that ’s why if found it fit to see whether this direct contradiction is of the true situation 
on the ground because in y our Report  it was very successful , so very successful contradicts 
something that was never done or was stopped .  
Having said that ladies and gentlemen the level where we are in  terms o f considering the 
votes in the A ppropriation Bill I want to s ay that thi s particular petition is behind schedule but 
nothing is lost so far am still reminding the directive because i cannot know how they have 
reached this particular Committee  because there is a war between the CSO ’s and this parti cular 
Committee  expediting thi s. The Committee  on Delegated L egislation is in better place to handle 
this matter, if you can avoid creating crisis you know we must not always wait for  crisis for us 
to solve problems, even though there was a comment that was made that in the next level  the 
CSO ’s can take, you know though we are not saying is  that they can go to court and  know the 
consequences in which personally i wouldn't want to propose, when you are sending your partner 
to the next level to solve problems  it means both of you have failed in leadership and i wouldn't 
want to believe you have failed in leadership . So if there is any other means that we can consider 
that what the petition advices then let ’s act as fast as possible ; infact today you should be able to 
advice us in the be st way out whether you want to have that as a memor andum, and remember  
there was a n issue that was raised by Hon.  Riziki Fundi that no single suggestion was considered, 
you know the essence of negotiation is that you let go certain things as i l et go some other issues 
as well … 
(Applause ) 
       So I want to believe certain areas ought to have been considered by us as Assembly and for 
that reason therefore Hon . Paul Onje and your Committee  can you handle this very fast and 
advice u s how best we can respond t o it. Otherwise as it is can we allow the C lerk to take us to 
the next level in terms of business of the day . 
PAPER  
Yes Akinyi . 
(Hon. (Ms.)  Akinyi laid Report  of Powers and Priviledges Committee ) 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Mr. Speaker i  beg to give a Report  from th e Committee  on P owers 
and Privilege  am giving this Report  because you up there as the Speaker you were the Chair of 
this Committee  and since you are up there that's why am asking for permission to give the 
Report . If permission is granted I can continue  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes, I can see Hon.  Mwabashiri.  
Hon. Mwabashiri:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. M heshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa 
Mary amesema yeye ni Mwanachama wa Kamati hii na ningeomba wewe kama Mwenyekiti  wa 
hii Kamati  kama uko hapo yeye aweze k utoa ripoti lakini taratibu zetu kwenye Kamati  ya 
Powers  na Privileges  naibu ni Ahmed Omar Ebrahim ambae pia ni Kiranja wa Bunge yuko kwa 
Nyumba hii….  
(Applause ) 
            Kwa nini Omar kama naibu asiweze kuitoa yeye ripoti hii?  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajway i): Yes Hon.  Ahmed . 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8             Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed  Ebrahim Omar ): Mr. Speaker as the Vice C hair of the said 
Committee , today we sat in the morning and we agreed that Mary as a Member  will present the 
Report … 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon. Mary  continue . 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. S peaker sir..  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Allow Hon.  Mwabashiri . 
Hon. Mwabashiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika ripoti ya Kamati ni ripoti ya B unge nzima y aani 
kama anasema hawezi kutoa ripoti ni aeleze  ni mgonjwa hawezi kutoa hii ripoti lakini akisema 
Kamati  imeketi ik asema Mary basi Mary arudi awe Mwenyekiti na yeye kama Naibu 
Mwenyekiti yuko sawa kabisa.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Madundo . 
Hon. Mohamed Madundo:  Vile ambavyo Ebrahim amesem a ni sawa, kwa sababu sauti 
yake leo sio nzuri kwa hivyo akimpa mwenzake sio vibaya yeye yuko lakini amepeana, a hsante 
Bwana Spika . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes the two Hon.  Member s today this afternoon have 
actually informed me they  are not in good health  to talk more than one minute infact if you look 
at your order paper the second business that is order nine , Motion  it is supposed to be moved by 
one Hon.  Mswabah Rashid . I am just informing you in advance that he will not be able to move 
the Motion , he is  in the House but he is not feeling well and he cannot talk for more than one 
minute so and the concern by Hon.  Mwabashiri is very much in  order.  The Standing O rders are 
very clear that if the C hair is not there the Vice C hair will take over if the V ice is  absent or not 
able to move the Motion ; any Member  and that Member s must not choose him or herself , the 
Committee  must sit down and agree so for that reason therefore the Committee  agreed that Hon . 
Mary is the one to move the Motion . 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Continue ? 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I  beg t o give the following Report  of Powers 
and Priviledge.  
 
COMMITTEE  MEMBER SHIP  
Hon.Thadius Rajwayi                      Chairman - Hon. Speaker  
Hon.Ahmed Ebrahim Omar             Vice Chairman – Chief Whip  
Hon. Abdallah Kasangamba            Member  
Hon. Mohamed Ndanda                   Member  
Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri                  Member  
Hon. Enock Mwinga                        Member  
Hon. Mary Akinyi                            Member  
Hon. Suleiman Boma                       Member  
Hon. Caroline Auma                        Member  
 
Committee  Secretariat  
Ms. Eve Sebby – Committee  Clerk  
Ms. Salma Maro – Principal Hansard Editor  
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9        Mr. Speaker and Hon.  Member s, I am pleas ed to present to you a brief Report  by Committee  
on powers and privileges on the issue of suspension of the three Hon.  Member s during the 57th 
sitting held on Wednesday 15th June 2016 . As you are al l aware Hon.  Member s, the P owers and 
Privileg es Committee  was tasked by the Hon.  Speaker  to come up with a comprehensive Report  
on the identified issues surrounding the conduct of the three named Hon.  Member s with a view 
to make recommendation to the House on the way for Ward . The Committee  Member s met on 
29th June 2016 and  resolved to summon the three Hon.  Member s on 30th June, 2016 from 8.00am 
so as to engage them on the issues as identified  in the communication from the C hair during the 
57th sitting of 2016.the Committee  also resolved to summon Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy who is also 
on suspension to appear before the same Committee  on 30th June,  2016.  The Member s 
subsequently  met and had fruitful engagement with Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh of Miritini, Hon.  Saad 
Faraj of Tononoka and  Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu  of Po rt Reitz Ward  from  9:20a.m to 11: 20a.m. 
Hon.  Hatimy however sent his apologies through Hon.  Faraj and Hon.  Mwalimu to the  
Committee  Member s as he was keeping a medical appointment at that time.  This Report  
therefore provides highlights of the findings, recommendations and c onclusion by the Committee  
on powers and privileges  
 
2.  FINDINGS  
2.1 Hon.  Member s of the Powers and Privileges Committee  found that the conduct of the 
leaders was in violation of the provision of Chapters Six of the constitution and the S tanding 
orders which pre scribe the conduct of elected leaders. It is important to note that even the Ethics   
and Anti Corruption Commission EACC as an oversight entity in their communication to the 
Hon.  Speaker dated 17th May 2016 took great exception to the conduct of elected l eaders of the 
County  Assembly of Mombasa and indicated such conduct is actionable under the County  
Assembly Standing orders and the County  Assembly Standing Orders.  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : What is it Hon.  Jabess?  
Hon. Oduor:  Point of cl arification, the Report  is wrongly written numbered 2 .1 then I 
think something is missing then it has gone back to 1 .1 so I request it be taken back then be 
written properly.  
Hon. Onje:  Thank you Mr. S peaker sir, now let me inform this House, the area whi ch 
Hon.  Jabess is trying to tell us here is findings,  in findings is the place where we have 2 .1 this is 
findings , then  we continue with 1.1. 
(Laughter ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Now and again Hon.  Member  such particular concerns 
allow the presentation t hen you raise that concern so allow Hon.  Mary to continue.  
(Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi resume d reading Report ) 
2.2 The summoned Hon.  Member s in their engagement with Member s of the Committee  
today expressed remorse at their conduct and have prayed that opportunities fo r peace and 
reconciliation be explored amongst the entire Member ship of the County  Assembly of Mombasa 
so as to ensure peace and harmony prevails and to ensure the future prosperity of the institution 
in general.  
2.3 The Committee  Member s have noted that th e ongoing wrangles amongst the Member s of 
this Hon.  House was derailing their given mandates of ; 
i. Representation  
ii. Legislation  
iii. Oversight and hence denying the residents of Mombasa the much desired services as 
envisaged under the evolution dispensat ion. 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 2.4 The Member s have noted that the current statement amongst the Member s of County  
Assembly was portraying the institution, and the County  Government in general  in bad light, 
and that it was high time that peace and reconciliation be given a chance  
2.5 That the continued absence of the four Hon.  Member s from plenary and Committee  
sittings was denying the County  the vibrant contribution of the affected Member s as they are 
very active Member s of this Hon.  House.  
3. RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
3.1 Committee  Member s appreciated t hat elected leaders needed to remain vigilant on the 
provisions of Chapter S ix of the Constitution and the Standing Orders which prescribe the 
conduct of leaders.  Committee  Member s pointed out that Hon.  Member s must at all times behave 
honorably and respec t the various institution s created by the Constitution, and avoid any conduct 
that will bring disrepute to themselves, the Assembly at large and the County  Government.  
3.2 Committee  Member s recommend that there is an urgent nee d for Hon.  Member s of the 
House t o find time to retreat away from the Assembly to be able to identify and resolve all 
underlying issues that have culminated in the current stalemate.  
3.3 Committee  Member s recommend that this Report  be shared with the Ethics and Anti 
Corruption Authority as re quested in their communication to the Hon.  Speaker dated 17th May 
2016.  
   4. CONCLUSIONS  
 4.1 After due consideration of all the identified issues, the Committee  Member s hereby    
unanimously RESOLVE  the following.  
 That the suspended Hon.  Member s i.e. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh of Miritini Ward , 
Hon.Saad Faraj of Tononoka Ward , Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu of Portreitz Ward  and Hon.  
Mohamed Hatimy be reinstated unconditionally.  
 That peace and rec onciliation effort amongst all Member s of the County  Assembly be 
undertaken urgently as a way to bring harmony in the institution.  
 The Clerk of County  Assembly to communicate this resolution to the affected Hon.  
Member s with immediate effect.  
 Mr. Speaker thank you and I ask Hon.  Enock Mwinga to second this Report . 
Hon. Mwinga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I  rise to second the Report .  
(Applause ) 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  After it has been seconded by Hon Enock Mwinga i beg to table .  
(Hon Akinyi tabled Report ) 
(Question proposed)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Now i propose a question that the Ho use considers  the 
Report  as has been tabled by Hon . Mary Akinyi  
(Question put and  agreed  to) 
Any comments , about the Report  Hon.  Amur .  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker,  we are glad for th is, considering that those are Member s 
representing Ward s, i want to support w hat the Committee  has done and we Member s should 
embrace that so that no future wrangles to occur in this Assembly.   
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Patrcik Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu:  Than k you Mr. Speaker first and foremost i want to congratulate the 
Com mittee . Mr. S peaker these Member s are representing Ward s they were elected,  especially at 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 this time of budget making we are really missing their inputs in the process Mr. Speaker sir and 
as a process of reconciliation of what happened as you know whatever transpired we are to 
forgive each other and work as a team,  i support this Motion , thank you . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Onje . 
Hon. Onje: Thank you M r. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity I also support  the 
Committee  on Powers and P rivileges f or the good work that they have done . Mr. S peaker sir 
when i come to conclusion part two, this is where we get more problems and here if we can agree 
together as honourable Member s of this H ouse let us strat from today, number two if you can 
allow me , ‘That peace and reconciliation efforts …That peace and reconciliation effort s amongst 
all Member s of the County  Assembly be undertaken urgently as a way to bring harmony in the 
institution. ’ 
(Applause ) 
       ….Mr. Speaker Sir today am very happy because the wr angles in this Assembly has ended 
from today and I don't think there will be any problem in this Assembly,  let us now  start 
moving and let us work for this County  Assembly, Than k you. 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes Hon. Jabess Mdhai . 
Hon. Oduor: Mr. Speaker I don't support and i don't oppose,  i feel the Report , i have the 
Report  as it is, but i want to go back Mr. Speaker to what my brother Onje has said ‘That peace 
and reconciliation efforts … That peace and reconciliation effort amongst all Member s of the 
County  Assembly be undertaken urgently as a way to bring harmony in the institution. ’ Mr. 
Speaker lets be very honest we heard such problems, our country in 2007 went through post 
election v iolence and many chaos we there.  Mr. Speaker the ke y problem that brought all this 
must be addressed because the key problem that brought this witch -hunting I will say is the 
generation or what i will call mambo ya kutoana , mtoe yule mtoe huyu  initially it was the B oard, 
it came to the Leader of M ajority , it haunted my sister Minority leader it kwangurad her a little.. . 
(Laughter)  
(Applause ) 
     …Mr. Speaker even tonight there are signatures walking, yes there are signatures walking we 
cannot say peace and reconciliation huku watu wameficha mapanga , amani na huku tumeficha 
mapanga , if it is peace and  reconciliation from today we agree mambo ya kutoana hakuna ……  
(Applause ) 
…..If it is peace and reconciliation Mr. Speaker  we give our hands most of the oppo sition are 
sitting on this side……  
(Applause ) 
       And there are people who are ready for anything, even when you see the Assembly is full 
like this Mr. Speaker it's not because people wanted to come there are my brothers like my 
brother Abu  Golo we know him when he appe ars here there is something Mr. S peaker ……  
(Laughter ) 
       I saw my brother Kalume today he came just to check that things are still okay Mr. Speaker ; 
if it is peace and reconciliation let us sit back the way we used to sit properly , we agree to 
forgive and forget, yesterday i sat here and i l ooked at Hamis i Musa,  Kasangamba is my brother 
Mr. S peaker  I didnt want to accept it but W aswahili wasemavyo, alalae na mama ndio baba, 
upende usipende . So in the same manner Mr. Speaker  if there has to be pe ace and reconciliation 
all the signatures that a re being collected at night they be burnt. All the things that we carry in 
our hearts Kamati  zitaenda vipi  we forget because t here are problems in this House. Mr. Speaker 
this trip , this is the first trip i went for the past two years ….. 
(Laughter ) 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12        It is true Mr. Speaker,  we cannot say let ’s forgive and forget then we come back to the same 
problem we will look for a nuclear bomb this time so with those few remarks thank you.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon . Nyamvula . 
Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula: Ahsante Bwana Spika, siku zote Jabess anaongea mambo 
yananipita lakini leo ameongea vizuri hongera sana ….. 
(Applause ) 
             Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasema kw a nini watu waliondolewa kwanini ikawa hivyo, 
lakini ikiwa sasa tumesema watu tuwe na amani, mimi le o nasikia vizuri sana kwa sababu 
sikuona shida gani Saad, Fadhili, Hatimy, Baya chenye wamefanya ambacho sisi hatukufanya 
mpaka sisi wengine turudi hapa tukae, hapa leo haki imetendeka na najulikana kuwa nilienda 
private  na nikas emea haswa kwanini hawa vij ana wafanyiwe hiv yo kama ni haki iwe haki unajua 
Mheshimiwa S pika wengine wetu amri hutoka kwako . Hivyo basi  mimi nashukuru na kama 
alivyosema Jabess ikiwa tumesema yameisha basi yaishe maanake yanatatiza haya mambo ; leo 
tuko kesho hatuko ya nini tuna miez i saba ya kuweza kufanyia wananchi kazi kama kweli sisi 
twataka ku hudumia Kaunti  ya Mombasa basi kesho hapa tukirudi ama jumatatu tukirudi kusiwe 
na petition  kama vile Jabess amesema , kwa hivyo kama ni kuisha yaishe na leo tutajua kama 
mambo yameisha ama b ado… 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon Mwab ashiri. 
Hon. Mwabashiri:  Ahsante Bwana Spika, mimi pia nimesimama  kuunga mkono  ripoti 
hii…  
(Applause ) 
       Ukiangalia recommendations , ‘Committee  Member s recommend that there is an urgent need 
for Hon.  Member s of the H ouse to find time to retreat away from the Assembly to be able to 
identify and resolve all underlying issues that have culminated in the current stalemate. ’ 
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia conclusion  kuna kipengele kinasema ,‘That peace and 
reconciliation efforts …that peace and reconciliation effort amongst all Member s of the County  
Assembly be undertaken urgently as a way to bring harmony in the institution.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika haya yote ni mambo mazuri yamesemwa hapa lakini kama waheshimiw a wenzangu 
walivyotangulia ku zungumza kwamba la zima haya mambo tuzungumze hii R ipoti ambayo 
wenzetu wametuletea haya ni mapendekezo yao sisi tuyatilie maanani sana  na sisi tuyatilie 
manani sana ni maneno mazito yaliyoletwa hapa na kama sisi tunavyosema ni ndugu wa moja 
Mheshimiwa Spika yale mengine yote ambayo yalipita tuyasahau tugange yajayo.....  
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika tuyasahau yale yaliyotufanya tukakwaruzana ; wenzetu kitendo 
walichokifanya cha kutoa picha  zako katika Bunge hili ilikuwa si kitendo kizuri na kama 
Waswahili wanavyosema ukitaka kutonesha kidonda kitoke damu ni lazima ukisugue na ukitoka 
damu itakuwa kile kidonda ndio kitakuwa kinapona . Lakini wakati unapaka dawa lazima ukitaka 
kupona ukitoneshe kidonda na bila kusumbuana inafaa  tuambiane ukweli hichi ni kipindi chetu 
cha mwisho kama waheshimiwa wa kwanza katika historia hata wale wengine watakaokuja sisi 
waheshimiwa ndio tumepata fursa hii kuwawakilisha wananchi kwa mara ya kwanza katika 
Bunge la Mombasa.  
       Mheshimiwa Spik a ni vizuri sisi kama waheshimiwa tukae pamoja tuelezane shida iko 
wapi? Manake  lazima watu waambiane ukweli kama tunataka kumtoa Spika kuna sheria za  
kukutoa kama vile kuna sheria za kusema Spika anafaa awe mtu wa nje basi kama kuna sababu 
za kutoridhika na wewe basi ni lazima tukutoe. Meshimiwa Spika ni lazima taratibu zifuatiliwe 
kwa sababu ikiwa hatuna imani na mtu basi ni lazima sheria ifuatwe mkondo wake haina shida 
lakini haya yaliyokuwa yamefanywa si ya sawa japo mimi pia naunga mkono kama hawa 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13 wahe shimiwa wameomba msamaha na Kamati imewasamehe basi na pia Bunge hili liwasemehe 
kwa sababu ni mwanadamu na mwanadamu ni kiumbe wa kufanya makosa ..  
(Applause ) 
       Kwa hivyo tusameheane ndio kibinadamu sisi kama viongozi ni muhimu sana tusameheane 
ili tuweze kuonyesha mfano na isiwe sisi kwa sisi tu bali hata ukikosana na mtu kule kwa wodi 
yako iwe rahisi kumsamehe. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga mkono ipoti hii na vile Kamati 
ilivyozungumza ili Jumanne Mungu akipenda tuwe pamoja nao....  
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika naona wenzangu wanataka kuunga mkono ripoti na mimi nawaomba 
Bunge nzima tuunge mkono ripoti hii lakini yale yalozungumzwa katika ripoti hii nasisitiza ya 
kuwa kuna umuhimu wa sisi kama waheshimiwa twende na tukae mahali tuzungumze masuala  
yetu Mheshimiwa Spika . Hilo nataka litiliwe maanani sana na juzi Mheshimiwa Spika wewe 
kwa uwezo wako unaweza kuonyesha ule mwelekeo si eti tunategemea Kamati moja au watu 
watatu ndio wanaenda safari lakini juzi Mheshimiwa Spika kwa heshima na taadhima ya ko 
ukaamua Bunge nzima likaondoke wakakae mahali ili kwenda kukalia masuala ya bajeti na huo 
ni mwelekeo mzuri na baada ya hapa hata sisi wenye viti kama mimi Mwenyekiti wa K amati ya 
PAC Mheshimiwa Spika nadhani ni haki ya kila mmoja wetu kuhisi kwamba yey e ni kiongozi 
wa watu Mheshimiwa. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Riziki Fundi.  
Hon. Fundi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia nasimama kuunga mkono R ipoti 
ambayo imeletwa ndani ya Bunge letu....  
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika yale mambo ambayo yalitokea ilikuwa ni mambo ya kusikitisha lakini 
kwa sababu waliyoyatenda wamekubali kitendo chao ni kosa. ..  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Hon.  Mwabashiri is up?  
Hon. Mwabashiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba waheshimiwa wenzangu waonyeshe 
umoja kwa sababu hata nikisimama na jambo la maana huwa watu hawapigi makofi.....  
(Laughter ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) :  Yes can you allow Hon.  Riziki Fundi.  
Hon. Fundi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia naun ga mkono ripoti iliyoletwa 
na Kamati ya Powers and Privileges  lakini Mhes himiwa Spika nataka kusema hivi sisi kama 
Bunge la Mombasa tukiwa waheshimiwa 43 katika Bunge hili na hivi sasa tunaongozwa na 
wewe pamoja na  Kiongozi mpya wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  Bwan a Hamisi Mwidani . Najua 
Mheshimiwa Mwidani alikuwa kwa mambo ya adminis tration  kwa muda mrefu amekuwa M eya 
wa jiji hili achukue hatua zile zinazostahili katika kuleta umoja lakini nataka niwaambie 
wenzangu ikiwa yale ambayo tulikuwa tukiyafanya huko nyuma hatutaacha basi kila siku 
itakuwa tunaregelelea mambo haya . Sisi kama Bunge  tunatakikana tuwe huru,  maamuzi yetu 
yawe yanafanyika ndani ya Bunge hili maamuzi yasifanywe nje ya Bunge hili kwa sababu 
yanayoleta matatizo ndani ya Bunge hili , sio wale W aheshim iwa waliokaa hapa ndani tatizo 
linakuja kwa sababu uamuzi mwengine unatoka nje ya Bunge hili kwamba kwa nini tusikae 
tukafanya jambo fulani ikiwa tutakuwa hatuwezi kukubali kwamba sisi ndio Waheshimiwa 
ambao tunaweza kujiamulia maneno yetu na tusimame kuli ngana na sheria basi haya 
tunayoyapitisha hapa leo yanaweza hata wiki ijayo yakabadilika ikiwa ule mtindo tulikuwa nao 
huku nyuma hatutauwacha.  
Sisi kama waheshimiwa wa Mombasa tulipawa dhamana na watu wa Mombasa na 
tunaweza kujiamulia mambo yanayohusu am a yale yanayotendeka katika Nyumba hii ikiwa leo 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 tumemchagua Mheshimiwa Mwidani sisi ikiwa hatumtaki Mheshimiwa Mwidani sisi wenyewe 
tukae chini kama wawakilishi wa Mombasa tufanye uamuzi tusingoje kesho tuambiwe 
Mheshimiwa Mwidani mtoeni bila ya kuambiwa sababu . Ikiwa haya itakuwa hatuyafuati 
Mheshimiwa Spika kila siku itakuwa tunarudi hapa tukisema tusameheane halafu baada ya siku 
mbili yale yale tuliyoyasema yanaregea . Mimi ningeweza kusema Mheshimiwa Mwidani 
ambaye yuko hapo amekalia kiti cha Kiongozi w a Walio Wengi Bungeni lazima achukue 
majukumu  tusiachie watu wengine watuamulie sisi kama Bunge tuamue yale mambo 
yanayostahili kwa ajili ya kazi ya Bunge hili . Tusingoje maamuzi yatoke nje tukiwa tunangoja 
maamuzi ya kutoka nje kesho tutaambiwa Riziki mum toe pale, yule muondoe pale na itakuwa 
haifurahishi Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nataka niwe mfupi wa maneno. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Nasser.  
Hon. Nasser  Rashid : Ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii.  Mheshimiwa 
Spika ning ependa kup ongeza hii Kamati ya Powers and P rivileges  kwa uamuzi ambao 
wameuchukua. Mheshimiwa Spika ni lazima tusameheane na sisi lazima tujue wengine tukikosa 
sheria itatuchukulia vile vile sio wale pekee yake hata sisi wengine. Mheshimiwa Spika hili joto 
ambalo li ko hapa ikiwa tukikaa na tukaongea ; hili joto litaondoka hapa ni lazima tukae chini na 
tuwe sawa kila mtu na ningependa kumpa pongezi Mheshimiwa Mwidani kuwa  Kiongozi mpya 
wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  na vile vile ningependa kumuomba Mheshimiwa Amur msamaha kwa 
kumpiga kwa kuwa huu ni wakati wa kuomba msamaha na ikitoka hapo tuangalie chini wale 
ambao hawana kamati wapewe kamati ziwe sawa hapo ndio joto la hii Nyumba ndio litaondoka.  
Mheshimiwa Spika Gavana kama anatatua mizozo ya Kaunti  zengine basi sisi tuwe na  nidhamu 
manake tunamuaibisha yeye, tunajiaibisha sisi na tunaaibisha watu wa Mombasa, Mheshimiwa 
Spika nafikiria leo itakuwa ndio mwanzo na ndio mwisho amani ipatikane. Ahsante sana.  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes Hon.  Tom Ogalo.  
Hon. Ogalo:  Ahsante Bwana Spika.  Bwana Spika mimi pia ningependa kuunga mkono 
ripoti hii. Nasema Mheshimiwa Spika kama mtu anataka kusamehe asiseme kwa mdomo na 
huku kwa roho an kitu kwa roho yake tuwaache na tukae pamoja kama vile ilikuwa tuko 
tulikuwa tukisema hvi t unaenda lakini kuna mtu ambaye aliingia hapo kati kati lakini kama 
tunaongea basi kwa nini tukosane na chama ni kimoja na sote ni watu wa Mombasa Kaunti  basi 
tukae na amani kama zamani. Ahsante.  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : From the second page ; the in a ttendance list we have Hon . 
Hamisi Mwidani, the second one is Hon . Maimuna Salim and the third one is Hon . Patrick 
Simi nyu. We need to include them in the Report  and the next is that it is does not match the 
corrections that were made that ; one is Introduction the second one should be Findings not 1. 
Findings so that we have 2.1 then the next to continue 2.2 then 2.3 then 2.4 then the last one 2.5 
those are some of the amendments that must be done here. Ladies and gentlemen the Report  is 
having a st rong message and why have mentioned the name of Hon . Maimuna Salim is because 
she was one of those particular Member s affected with the storm and she was part of that 
meeting and i congratulate Hon . Maimuna....  
(Applause ) 
       And the other person i woul d like to congratulate very much is Hon.  Abdallah Kasangamba 
he was in the meeting the first day....  
(Applause ) 
       So i congratulate you even if you are not in the House Hon.  Abdallah Kasangamba, the next 
person is myself Hon.  Speaker of this Assembly  I was the same person who chaired that 
particular meeting ....  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 (Applause ) 
       We do not know what transpired but we needed a q uite solution ; the Committee  of Powers 
and P rivileges has solutions and that is why if you look at the recommendations in fact  if you go 
to Conclusions that word should be changed to Recommendations and under Recommendation 
which it reads The peace and reconciliation efforts amongst all Member s of the County  Assembly 
be undertaken urgently as a way to bring harmony in the institu tion. Ladies and gentlemen 
maybe after this particular adoption of this Report  the Clerk is directed to facilitate for the 
process of peace and reconciliation...   
(Applause ) 
       Ladies and gentlemen i want to remind us we must all work as a team today ; it is sad that we 
have never heard anything about Mombasa but today am over has you ha ve said that the storm is 
over... 
(Applause ) 
       Before we move on to have that peace and reconciliation process I would ask each and every 
one of you Hon.  Member s to look for any person or technical staff of this institution and say i 
have forgiven you and i tell that person i want to forgive you.....  
(Applause ) 
       And that is the only way we can move for Ward . Yesterday i received two phone calls from 
Hon.  Member s and they talk to me about peace and reconciliation and they asked me Mr. 
Speaker with all due respect they say we must forgive the four Hon.  Member s. Before then Hon.  
Amur Murfad came to my office he talked to me earlier and he asked me Mr. Speaker i want you 
to forgive the four Hon.  Member s it is not too very long one Hon.  Hamisi Musa Mwidani came 
inside and said these words and it did not take long and the four MCA 's told me. Ladies and 
gentlemen when i went home last night i decided to think about Mombas a County  and i had no 
option than to forgive and reconcile with the Hon.  Member s..... 
(Applause ) 
       Now Hon.  Member s am urging from today on Ward s any changes that you want to do, do in 
the Committee  level don't do it here and you should make sure the w hole team is aware....  
(Applause ) 
       If you want to make a decision the same make sure all the 43 sit down and make that 
decision that is going to be in the right way.....  
(Applause ) 
       First I would like to say that i have forgiven those four Hon.  Member s unconditionally.....  
(Applause ) 
       Ladies and gentlemen and let me now put this into question that the Report  of the Powers 
and Privileges be adopted with amendments.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
       Yes Next . 
PAPER  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajw ayi): This stands as the peace and reconciliation process. Thank 
you. 
(Applause ) 
        Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
The Motion  mover communicated to me earlier so he will communicate when the Motion  
will be brought in the House.  
 
 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16 BILLS  
MOMBASA COUNTY  APPROPRIATIO N BILL, 2016  
SECOND READING  
Yes Hon.  Hamisi Musa Mwidani.  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to move a Motion  for the 
Mombasa County  Appropriation Bill, 2016 for the Second R eading. Thank you, Mr . Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : The Bill is committed to the Whole House Committee  for 
the Second R eading.  
(Sergeant At Arms lowered the Mace)  
(The House Dissolve d to the Committee  of the Whole House)  
ORDER OF COMMITTEE  READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
 (Mr. Speaker ( Hon.  Rajwayi ) in the Chair)  
 (Laughter ) 
Chairperson:  Have your seats Hon.  Member s, yes Hon.  Mwidani?  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity to present the Appropriation Bill, 2016 . With your permissio n may you allow me to 
read the M emoran dum of the Bill...  
(Leader of Majority ( Hon.  Mwida ni) read Memorandum of the Bill)  
Memorandum of Objects and Reasons  
       The Appropriation Bill, 2016 makes provision for giving Statutory sanction for public 
expenditure for the year ending on the 30th June, 2017, on the basis of the Estimates of 
Expenditure 2016/17 (Development) and for the appropriation of those amounts.  This sum 
includes the sum of Kshs.6,849,882,919 for Recurrent Expenditure and Kshs. 3, 075,871,374 for 
Development Expenditure as per the First and Second Schedule Respectively.  
        Thank you.  
Chairperson:  Yes Clerk.  
Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir the Second R eading of the Mombasa County  Appropriation Bill, 
2016 . 
(Clerk r ead the Bill for the Second Time)  
SECOND READING  
       A Bill for an Act of County  Assembly to authorise the issue of certain sums of money out of 
the County  revenue Fund and their application to Ward s the service of the year ending on the 30th  
June, 2017, and to appropriate those sums for certain public services and purpos es. 
Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Mwidani.  
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker i beg to move the Bill for 
a Second R eading.  
Chairperson:  Now I pr opose that this Bill be read a s econd time.  
(Question proposed  and agreed to ) 
Now this Bill , under  Standing Order no. 122 is now committed the Whole House 
Committee .  
(Silence ) 
       I want to believe the Hon.  Member s have the copy of the same Bill. Yes Clerk.  
(Clerk read the Bill for t he Second Time ) 
       A Bill for An Act of County  Assembly to aut horise the issue of certain sums of money out 
of the County  revenue Fund and their application to Ward s the service of the year ending on the 
30th June, 2017, and to appropriate those sums for certain public services and purposes.  
ENACTED by the County  Assembly of Mombasa, as follows - 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17 This Act may be cited as the Appropriation Act, 2017.  
1. The County  Treasury may issue the sum of Nine Billion, Nine Hundred and Twenty Five 
Million, Seven Hundred and Fifty Four Thousand, Two Hundred and Ninety Three Shillings 
only, out of the County  Revenue Fund and apply it to Ward s the supply granted for the service of 
the year ending on the 30th June, 2017.  
2. The sum granted by Section 2 shall be appropriated for the several services and purposes 
specified in the second column of the First Schedule, in the amounts specified in the third 
column of that Schedule.  
3. In addition to the sum granted by section 2, the sum specified in the fourth column of the 
First and Second Schedules shall be applied for the several services and purpos es specified in 
the second column of those Schedules, out of revenue directed to be applied outside the 
Consolidated Fund under Article 206 (1) of the Constitution.   
The supply granted for the services of the year ending on the 30th June, 2017, in respect  of  
Votes R3011,  R3012,  R3013,  R3014,  R3015,  R3016,  R3017,  R3018 , R3019,  R3020,  R3021,  
R3022,  R3023 and D3011,  D3012,  D3013,  D3014,  D3015,  D3016,  D3017,  D3018,  D3019,  
D3020,  D3021,  D3022,  D3023  in accordance with the Appropriation Act, 2017.  
 
Recurrent E xpenditure  
R3011, the  amount required in the year ending 30thJune 2017, for salaries and expenses of  
Executive HQs’ office; Mombasa, including expenses on general administration and financial 
management services of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  Administrators . 
Supply  338,231,611  Appropriation in Aid  144,373,899 . 
(Question proposed)  
       Chairperson: I now propose a question that R3011 be now considered by this House.  
(Question pro posed and agreed to)  
       Yes any comments, any amendmen ts? Yes Hon.  Murfad?  
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker we are all aware that we go one by one clause but this is a 
procedure so we should continue reading because we are confident what was put here it is the 
amount that we agreed upon.  
       Chairperson:  It is a Motion  i don't think you are trying a Motion  so we will have to 
continue with the same statement. The procedure is to read the clause one by one that is one ; 
alternatively you can do the entire  Bill and thereafter propose the question to that effect. Y es 
Hon.  Patrick Siminyu.  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker I agree with Hon.  Amur to go clause by clause and then you put 
a question, thank you.  
       Chairperson:  I now propose in the House that the request by Hon.  Amur and seconded by 
Hon.  Siminyu.  
(Ques tion proposed and agreed to)  
   
       R3012 , the amount required in the year ending 30thJune 2017, for salaries and expenses of 
County  Assembly, including expenses on general administration and financial management 
services of the County , Sub County  Admi nistrators , and Ward  Administrators . 
Supply  - 618,543,360  
Appropriation in aid  - 264,024,750    
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 18 R3013 , the amount required in the year ending 30thJune 2017, for salaries and expenses of 
County  Public Service Board.  
   Supply  - 107,384,365  
  Appropriation in a id - 45,836,932  
R3014 , the amount required in the year ending 30thJune 2017, for salaries and expenses of 
Finance and Economic Planning including salaries for the City of Mombasa.      
Supply  - 1,069,958,79    
Appropriation in aid  - 411,604,964  
 R3015 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for expenses of Tourism 
Development, including expenses on general administration and financial management services 
of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  Administrators . 
Supply  - 118,510,365  
Appropriation in aid  - 50,586,057  
R3016 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for expenses of Education, 
including expenses on general administration and financial manageme nt services of the County , 
Sub County Administrators, and Ward  Adm inistrators . 
Supply  - 830,743,824  
Appropriation in aid  - 354,602,139  
R3017 , the amount required in the year ending  30th June 2017, for salaries and expenses of  
Health Services, including expenses on general administration and financial management 
service s of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  Administrators . 
Supply  - 2,339,643,755  
Appropriation in aid  -  539,176,689  
 R3018 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for salaries and expenses of  
Water Environment & Natural Resour ces, including expenses on general administration and 
financial management services of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  
Administrators . 
Supply  - 46,865,815  
Appropriation in aid  - 20,004,636             
R3019 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for salaries and expenses of  
Youth Gender and Sports, including expenses on general administration and financial 
management services of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  
Administrators .  
Supply  - 163,415,320  
Appropriat ion in aid  - 69,753,702  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 19 R3020 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for salaries and expenses of  
Trade, Energy & Industrial Development, including expenses on general administration 
and financial management services of the County , Sub County Administrators , and Ward  
Administrators  management services of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  
Administrators .             
Supply  - 329,585,083  
Appropriation in aid  - 140,683,135  
R3021 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for expenses of  County  Planning 
Land & Housing, including expenses on general administration and financial management 
services of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  Administrators . 
Supply  - 217,768,303  
Appropriation in aid  - 92,954,230  
R3022 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for expenses of Transport  and 
Infrastructure, including expenses on general administration and financial management 
services of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  Administrators .      
Supply  - 490,916,847  
Appropriation in aid  - 209,547,473  
Development Expenditure;    
Supply - KSh. 3,075,871,3  
Donor Funds - Ksh. 3,150,000  
Appropriation in aid: KSh. 1,148,541,914  
R3023 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for ex penses of Agriculture  
Livestock and Fisheries, including expenses on general administration and financial 
management services of the County , Sub County  Administrators , and Ward  
Administrators .                          
Supply - 178,315,976  
Appropriation in aid - 76,114,035  
D3011 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for the Governor’s office for 
capital expenditure.  
Supply - 191,195,979    
Appropriation in aid  - 86,607,021  
D3012 The amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for the County  Assembly 
Development purposes.    
Supply  - 40,613,408    
Appropriation in aid  - 18,396,863  
D3013 , the required for Development in the year ending 30th June 2017,  including Strategic 
Planning and Human Resource policy formulation, by the County  Publi c Service Board.  
Supply  - 19,197,984     
Appropriation in aid  - 8,696,209        
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 20 D3014 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017 for the Department of Finance and 
Economic Development capital expenditure, including general administration and planning . 
Supply  - 475,005,592     
Appropriation in aid  - 215,165,714  
D3015    The amount required in the year ending 30th June, 2017 for the Department of Tourism 
Development . 
Supply  - 33,442,835    
Appropriation in aid  - 15,148,772  
D3016 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June, 2017, for the Department of Education 
Development needs.  
Supply  - 393,606,748    
Appropriation in aid  - 393,606,748  
D3017 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June 2017, for the Department of Health 
Services for capital e xpenditure.  
Supply  - 350,075,022  
D3018 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June, 2017, for the Department  of Water 
Environment & Natural Resources . 
Supply  - 60,000,000      
Appropriation in aid  -  27,178,507  
D3019 , the amount required in the year  ending 30th June, 2017,     for the Department  of Youth 
Gender and Sports . 
Supply  - 352,458,256    
Appropriation in aid  - 159,654,820  
D3020 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June, 2017, for the Department  of Trade, 
Energy & Industrial Develop ment . 
Supply  - 120,341,126   
 Appropriation in aid  - 54,511,536  
D3021 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June, 2017, for the Department  of County  
Planning Land & Housing . 
Supply  - 173,669,448     
Appropriation in aid  - 78,667,939  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 21 D3022 , the amou nt required in the year ending 30th June, 2017, for the Department  of Transport 
and Infrastructure . 
Supply  - 827,711,617     
Appropriation in aid  - 288,756,758  
D3023 , the amount required in the year ending 30th June, 2017, for the Department  of 
Agricultu re Livestock and Fisheries . 
Supply  - 38,553,359  
Appropriation in aid  - 17,463,712  
       Chairperson:  R3012 any comments? R3013 any comments ? R3014 any comments ? R3015 
any comments ? R3016 any comments? Yes Hon.  Mary Akinyi . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Mr. Sp eaker i need to know if the Environment will be included in the 
Educ ation expenses, b ecause garba ge collection was taken to the e ducation docket.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Amur Murfad?  
       Hon. Amur : Here is about the salaries expenses of Education i t's just that a certain section 
of garbage collection was taken to the department of Education.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon. Mary.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Yes i think it should be included here, because R3018 of water, 
environment and natural resource i  think Education should just keep that part of Environment.  
      Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya.  
       Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa kwa kumueleza Mheshimiwa mwenzangu ni 
kwamba katika vote ya R3018 mambo ya mazingira na maji yako katika wizara y a maji 
isipokuwa ni kitengo kimoja cha taka pekee yake ndio kiko upande wa elimu lakini mazingira 
yapo baado na wizara yake. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu.  
       Hon. Siminyu:  The education department is deali ng with the garbage collection even we see 
that the Chief Officer of Education is doing great with the garbage collection and the 
management stand on the department of Education so i think we should the votes as it is.  
       Chairperson:  Hon.  Caroline.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mr. Chair it was just part of environmental which was taken but it is still 
in the water, environment department although it was hidden but it can be included here.  
       Chairperson:  Enough the explanations are okay because Hon.  Amir has explained what 
Hon.  Mary wanted and it is not like for example Kadzandani or Nyali that have been allocated 
more funds i believe Hon.  Mary you are okay up to there. Yes Next vote we are at R3017 any 
comments? R3018 any comments? R3019 any comments? Y es Hon.  Hudson Karume?  
       Hon. Karume:  Through the Chair i don't have this document so i would like to request 
clarification on the department of Y outh, women and people living with disabilities because they 
are having a crucial evaluation so i don’t k now whether they are appearing here .  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu.  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Chair this is a House of procedure so it will be better if the Hon.  gets a 
soft copy of the Bill to follow what we are being deliberating.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Caroline.  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 22        Hon. (Ms.) Auma : The department of youth was supposed to be given 21% of the funds 
which we agree which is 21M and that 21M was in that vote Mr. Chair we cannot see it here but 
it is included in the vote.  
(Applause an d Laughter ) 
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Hudson.  
       Hon. Karume : Through the Chair i need to know what is that hidden so i want it to come 
out clear and am fighting the rights of my people so let it be clear if the vote of my people was 
indicated.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya.  
       Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Bwana Mwenyekiti yangu ni  kumhakikishia Mheshimiwa 
Siminyu na Mheshimiwa Hudson Karume nataka kuwahakikisha ya kwamba tarakimu ambazo 
ziko kwa bajeti hii zimezingatia masuala hayo na tul ikuwa kule Kikambala na tukahakikisha ya 
kwamba wale ma  Chief officer  wametekeleza yale ambayo Mheshimiwa Hudson Karume 
amesema yameweza kuzingatiwa na kina mama, walemavu na vijana wote wamewekwa katika 
hiyo vote.  
(Applause ) 
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Mary. 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nashangaa na huyo kiongozi aliyetoka 
kuongea manake Kingozi wa Walio W engi alituambia kuwa ataenda kuhakikisha kama hiyo vote 
imeendana sambasamba na vile anahitaji lakini yeye hawezi kutuambia kuwa atah akikisha kwani 
yeye ndio waziri.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Murfad.  
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Chair Hon.  Karume was assured that the Chief Officer  is going to take 
care of the issue.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya.  
       Hon. Thoya : Mheshimiwa Sp ika....  
(Interruption ) 
       Chairperson:  Hon.  Amir Thoya you dont need to reply.  
       Hon. Thoya : Mheshimiwa Spika haikuwa kumuelezea bali yangu ilikuwa ni kumtoa wasi 
wasi Mheshimiwa Karume kumhakikishia kwa sababu masuala ya ndugu zetu na nilikuwa ni  
kuhakikishia pia malengo yake yamesikizwa ya kwamba maneno yametekelezwa yale 
tuliyopitisha kule Kikambala kupitia kwa Chief Officer  kuhakikisha yamepitishwa kama kule 
tulivyoyapitisha.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon.  Tom Ogalo.  
       Hon. Ogalo:  Mheshimiw a Mwenyekiti mimi nilikuwa nataka kuwaambia kuwa hiyo 
tulipitisha na amendments kwamba ingawanywe kwa elimu na mazingira.  
(Laughter ) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mr. Chair this is an Appropriation Bill everything cannot be included 
here.....  
(Applause ) 
       All those proposal s were done at North Coast and everything was written and the Hansard 
was there we should know that this is an Appropriation Bill , we should understand that.  
       Hon. Siminyu:  The budget followed the right procedure so it is important t o clarify the 
figures of the people living with disabilities. Thank you.  
       Chairperson:  Yes Hon . Hudson.  
       Hon. Karume : I would like to appreciate my colleagues for that clarification.  
       Chairperson:  Can we allow us to continue vote R3020, R3021, R3022, R3023 we move to 
the Development Expenditure D3011, D3012, D3013, D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, 
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 23 D3019, D3020, D3021, D3022, D3023. Now ladies and gentlemen any comments? None so am 
going to put this to question so that it can be taken to  the next level.  
(Question put and agreed to) 
(Applause ) 
PLENARY RESUMED  
(Sergeant At Arms raised The Mace)  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Rajwayi) in the Chair)  
 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Member s have your seat, yes Hon.  Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majori ty (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker i would like to take this  
opportunity to appreciate the Member s of the A ssembly who deliberated to the Bill in the right 
way and i think it is for the betterment of the people of our County  so i would like the Membe rs 
to support the Appropriation Bill, 2016 to have our budget which will start from tomorrow. 
Thank you very much.  
(Applause ) 
       Thank you very much Mr. Speaker allow me to move the Bill for the Third Time.  
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Pursuant to Standing Order Number 132 you need to move 
the Motion  for the T hird Reading.  
MOMBASA COUNTY  APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016  
THIRD READING  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker Sir i take this opportunity to move the 
Appropriation Bil l, 2016 for the Third R eading. A Bill for An Act of County  Assembly to 
authorise the issue of certain sums of money out of the County  revenue Fund and their 
application to Ward s the service of the year ending on the 30th June, 2017, and to appropriate 
those  sums for certain public services and purposes.  
       Thank you.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well before that Standing Order 129 the Motion  is moved 
that the County  Assembly do agree to the Committee  in the said Report . 
(Ques tion put and agreed to ) 
       Any comment up to that point. Yes Clerk?  
(Clerk r ead the Bill for the Third Time)  
A Bill for An Act of County  Assembly to authorise the issue of certain sums of money out of the 
County  revenue Fund and their application to Ward s the service of the year ending on the 30th 
June, 2017, and to appropriate those sums for certain public services and purposes.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Well we will only consider those amendments before passing 
the Bill but there's one thing that i want to highligh t that last page of the Act it should be 2016 
instead of 2017 so that correction should be made, any recommendations? Yes Hon.  Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker i think we need to pass the Bill for the 
Third time because there are no more any amendments. Thank you, Mr . Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon. Caroline.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : On the same point when you look at the Act down there it should be 
2016.  
June 30, 2016                              COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 24        Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Yes that amendment has  been done thank you so much, ladies 
and gentlemen i now put to question that this House on the 30th June, 2016 that this House do 
approve this Bill. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Ladies and gentlemen this House stands adjourne d until  next week Tuesday at exactly 
2:30p.m. 
The House rose at  5:28p.m 
           
  
     