August 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 14th August , 2018  
The House met at 2:37p .m. 
 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you  may be seated. Yes, Clerk . 
 
NOTICES OF MOTION  
INSTALL ATION OF HIGH MAST LIGHTING I N DENSELY POPULATED AREAS  
 
 Hon. Charles Kitula.  
 
(Silence)  
 
 He is not around? Yes Hon . Bwire . 
 
 Hon. Bwire: Thank you Mr.  Speaker. I  am not standing on behalf of Chief Whip 
instead I was raising a concern over the de lay of the distribution of the Order paper before 
this House. I t has become a tradition in  this County Assembly that the O rder paper comes last 
even after you have seated a s the Speaker of the House. K indly we need whoever is in  charge 
to take up the responsibility with a  lot of seriousness, thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Bwire. C lerk I think  you have heard the 
Hon. Member ; what  he is complaining about in  fact he is not even complaining about he is 
raising a very serious issue , the Members should have the O rder paper and I  think it is very 
clear in the S tanding order that you should publish t his even in the website as well. So please 
Clerk can you do your work please. I do  not want to hear this complain t anymore, thank you. 
Yes Hon. Charles K itula pleas e give the notice of M otion . 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . I beg to gi ve notice of the 
following Motion . 
  

August 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 THAT AWARE THAT high mast lighting is the most effective and convenient  way 
of illuminating large outdoor areas for instance in densely populated areas.  
 
FURTHER AWARE that hi gh mast lighting does provide a conduc ive environment 
for productive economic activities  as well as enhancing  security surveillance  in 
densely populated areas.  
 
NOTING  THAT some of the areas in Mombasa County which are densely populated 
are yet to be instal led with high mast lighting.  
 
CONCERNED THAT the lack of high mast lighting may lead to high levels of 
insecurity while also negatively imp acting the  enabling environment necessary for 
productive economic activities.  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to resol ve that;  
 
The County government to install high mast lighting in densely populated areas in 
order to provide security and surveillances while also creating a conduc ive 
environment  for productive  economic activities . 
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Than k you Hon Kitula . Yes Clerk. 
 
STATEMENTS  
STATUS OF MOMBASA YOUTH FISH PR OJECT  
 
 Yes Hon . Wambua, Chairperson Committee on Agriculture , Fisheries and Livestock 
Cooperation , is the response ready?  
  
 Hon. Wambua:  Yes it  is ready . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You may continue . 
 
 Hon. Wambua: The County government of Mombasa initiated and funded a fish 
farming project called Momba sa youth fish farming project.  The idea  was generated from the 
fish farming experience under the Economic Stimulus Program ESP of n ational  government 
which had shown that in addition to capture fishe ries, fish farming can be an alternative 
source of fish production and can create sustainabl e employment for youths in the County.  It 
was expected that the establishment of the fish project wi ll contribute to the following  very 
critical  strategic  themes of the department : 
  
a. Increase fish production in the County by supplementing what is harvested from the 
capture of fisheries ; 
 
b. Create employment oppor tunities for both men and women ; 
 
c. Contr ibute towards food  security and poverty reduction ; 
 
August 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 d. Diversification  of income source s to both the youth and Women ; 
 
e. Raise revenue for the County from trading in fish and fishing products.  
 
 The government of Mombasa County  developed this creative idea ( Wanting to 
develop aquaculture in the County) after finding out that there were not enough suitable sites 
for earthen ponds in the County.  The production system is semi -intensive us ing a stock 500 
catfish in 39 m etres squar es fish tanks (38 catfish per m etre square intensive feeding with 
floating pellets). Integrated fish farming and agriculture/gardeni ng where possible small stock 
(Goats) husbandry to be practiced by women .  
 Attached here below is summ ary on the status of the project/tanks.  
 
1. Show ground, Nyali , one tank. The tank has few catfish and ready for harvesting. This is 
a tank that is used by a demonstration…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think may be just to remind the Hon. 
Member that since we have the copies and I find it unnecessary for him to go through while 
each and every Member has its own copy. So maybe he has done his part we are also going 
through our copies to save time. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are satisfied Member 's with the copy?  
  
(Silence ) 
 
 Thank you Hon. Wambua, so you can just wi nd up. 
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Thank you, maybe way forwa rd. The Department is planning to  
procure liners, fingerlings and fish feed to operationalize the dormant fish tasks.  The 
Department also had engaged an expert to review the operations and management of the 
tanks and came up with recommendations to improve performance of the tanks. Among the 
recommendations included installation of solar pumps to pump water circulation, bio filt er to 
clean the water for re -use and intensification of fish farming. He also recommended that this 
will be piloted first before being rolled over to the other tanks.  
 The Department is also planning to hand over the management of aquaculture tanks 
and mari culture to identified active women groups. The youth will be capacity built to 
venture into capture fisheries in the deep sea. This will be done through the procurement of 
deep sea fishing vessels that is on -going.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :Thank you Hon. Wambua. Yes Clerk?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
August 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           67 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I seek your indulgency on 
the report if it has already been adopted by the House or it will dealt as the agriculture 
Committee as my Chair has responded to the statement. Members have said they have the 
copies they will go through but have they adopted or they have some questions on it. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think we give time to the Members to go through to the 
report ... (Technical hitch) . Hon. Mwamwiri I think according to the Clerk this is supposed to 
be just a response to the statement so I think it has been done in the right way . Yes Clerk ? 
Hon. Shebe Athuman is not in the House to give out the Statement . Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
DEMOLITION OF STRUCTU RES AND HOUSEHOLD BU ILDING S AT KASARANI AREA IN JOMVU  
 
 Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri:  He has asked me to represent him he has an emergency , 
if you will allow me Mr. Speaker.  
 
            The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sure! You can go ahead.  
 
 Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri:  Statement o n Demolition of structures and household 
buildings at Ka sarani area in Jomvu Kuu Ward. Request, Mr. Speaker Sir I seek to know 
from the Chairperson on Committee on Lands , planning and Housing if he is aware of on -
going demolition  at Kasarani area on Jomvu Kuu Ward and what steps the County 
government has put in pla ce to remedy the situation  caused by the demolitions. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri . I think the Honorable 
Member for Committee of Lands , planning and Housing will respond to that by next week. 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNM ENT  
 
 Honorable Members this House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 15th of August of 
2018.  
 
The House r ose at 2:53p .m. 
 
 
 