July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 5th July 2016  
The House met at 3:31p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker ( Hon. Thadius Rajwayi ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi) : Hon.  Members kindly have your seats.   
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       First of all ladies and gentlemen all ow me to deliver this par ticular communication from the 
Chair, it is not written  it is verbal,  and I want to really take this important opportunity to 
apologize  that we were not able to commence our business by exactl y 2:30 p.m as the re in the  
Standi ng orders . That was actually necessitated  by the fact that we really had some pressing 
issue s that we had to sort out;  one a s a family and two as a party  because as you are all aware this 
particular Hon.   House, some people  call it one eyed  Assembly , but we know that is not the  case 
if we have more than two and for that reason therefore today it was quit e unfortunate that w e 
could not do what is  required by the law b ut on behalf of the  entire team I want to submit that 
particular apology . Thank you.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Well again at this juncture  ladies and gentlemen you will  realize that this O rder number six 
is talking of placing a Notice of Motion  and that same N otice of Motion  is talking about the 
removal of one  Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi as a S peake r of this great Assembly and so  by all 
standards  to demo nstrate  what democracy dictates  is that I cannot preside over this same matter 
as this same Hon.  person that is standing and  speaking is the one that is affected. So it wou ld be 
very much  in order that I allow this Hon.  House to exercise  its democratic right without .... We 
want this decision  to be made without  due interest and you must not be pushed to make some 
decisions and for that reason therefore  I want to do something  that is of great to w e..., this is 
what democracy dictates and wants.  For that reason there I know  it is the re in Standing O rder 
number 58, paragraph three that you elect  any other person to come in as a S peaker that will 
stand in when the S peaker is not on the seat. Again also in A rticle 11 section 11 of the County 
Government Act of 2012 asks the same ; lucky enough in our case, we did it long time ago, we 
pre empted the  situation and we elected the Deputy S peaker a nd for that reason therefore I  want 
to be lieve we are not going to start fighting on who is to take  or occupy the position , the Deputy 
Speaker who is Hon. Mswaba h will now come to preside  over the A ssembly ... 
(Applause ) 
       And it is important la dies and gentlemen that I would not want to appe ar to be selfish in that 
matter, i will not come back imm ediately after that particular O rder number six, I will allow the 
Deputy S peaker to finish up the en tire remaining business in the O rder paper …. 
(Applause ) 
       Ladies and gentlemen I now beg to le ave.... 
(Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Rajwayi)  exited  the Chair)  
(Members stood)  
(Hon.  Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid)  in the Chair ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Members  you may be seated.  Yes Hon.  Patrick  
Simi nyu. 
July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 NOTICE OF MOTION  
REMOVAL OF HON . THADIUS RAJWAYI AS SPEAKER OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF 
MOMBASA  
       Hon.  Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker I  want to give Notice of Motion  on removal of Hon.  Thadius 
Rajwayi as the  Speaker of C ounty Assembly of Mombasa.  
(Hon.  Siminyu  read Notice  of Motion ) 
       Mr.  Speaker Sir, I beg t o give notice of the following Motion ; 
       THAT AWARE that Hon.  Thadius A. Rajwayi was  elected the Hon.  Speaker  of the County 
Assembly of Mombasa to preside over the plenary and other select committee proceedings as per 
the Standing orders and the law .  
       FURTHER AWARE that Standing Order  58 and S ection 11 of the County Government‘s  
Act 2012 provides for the remova l of the Speaker of the County A ssembly  by a resolution 
supported by not less than 75 per cent of all Members o f the County A ssembly  which is annexed 
hereby .  
       CONCERNED that the Hon.   Rajwayi has  committed various acts which  are serious and 
gross violations of the law , the Constitution and the S tanding Orders including incompetence and 
abuse of office in th e performance of h is duties as the Speaker of this  August House which  
renders his continued stay in office untenable .  
       NOTING the following grounds for the re moval of Hon.  Rajway i as the Speaker of the 
County A ssembly as follows ;  
A. ABUSE OF OFFICE  
1. The Hon.  Rajwayi as Speaker of the County Assembly o f Mombasa,  allowed and 
presided over a sitting of  this A ugust H ouse on Wednesday 11th May, 2016 in the 
absence of the officially designated M ace and allowed the use of a wooden bed  stand as 
an improvis ed M ace without  notifying M embers contrary to  parliamentary practices an d 
traditions in  Kenya and the C ommonwealth of nations .  
 
2. Hon.  Thadius A. Rajwayi  as S peaker of the County Assembly  o f Mombasa ignored a 
communication from the Chief Whip of the Ma jority  party  vide his letter dated 16th June 
2016 which communicated  the sole parliamentary party ‘s  position on the membership to 
Committees which was p ursuant to Standing  orders 154( 1) and 157(1)  and purporting  to 
uphold the list passed through the de fective Motion  as evidenced by the minutes of an 
informal  non binding Kam ukunji  meeting h e presided over on Monday 13th June, 2016.  
 
3. The Hon .  Thadius A. Rajwayi as Speaker o f the County Assembly o f Mombasa on 
Tuesday 10th May, 2016 and through written  communication suspended some  Members 
from County A ssembly sitting indefinitely without citing specific grounds and Standing 
Orders which he had invoked to suspend them and therefore was acting outside the law .   
 
4. The Hon.   Thadius A. Rajwayi as  Speaker  of the County Assembly of Mombasa  in 
suspending Members indefinitely pending investigations  and  availing of  a report  by the 
July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Powers Privileges  and W elfare C ommittee was acting outside the powers given to him . 
Under Standing  Order 104 an d 107 Under Stan ding Order 104 M embers should have  
been  suspended from  the County Assembly‘s sitting  for the rem ainder of the day’s 
sitting since it was the first occasion .  
 
5. The Hon.   Thadius A. Rajwayi as the Speaker of the County Assembly of Mombasa  
has from ti me to time and in the specific instances cited herein  breached the provision  of 
Standing Order  1 which states as follows :  
 ‘(1) In all cases where matters are not e xpressly provided for by these S tanding orders  
of the County Assembly any procedural qu estion shall be decided by the Speaker .  
(2) The decisions made in paragraph  (1) shall be based on the Constitution of Kenya 
statute law and the usage s forms precedents , customs , procedures and traditions of the 
County Assemblies of Kenya ...   
(Interrupti on) 
              Hon. Oduor : Point of order Mr. Speaker!  
              Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah  Rashid ): What is it Hon.  Jabess?  
(Loud consultation ) 
              Mr. Jabes s this is a N otice of Motion  and it will have specific time for debate …. 
(Inter ruption ) 
(Loud consultations on the floor of the House ) 
              ….and we cannot allow that, just a minute let him finish reading first.  
              Hon. Oduor : But there is a court order!  
(Jeering ) 
              Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah  Rashid ): Yes Mheshimiwa Simi nyu? 
(Hon . Siminyu resume d reading the Notice of Motion ) 
              Hon. Simi nyu: …and other jurisdictions in the extent that these are applicable to 
Kenya.  The Hon. Thadius A. Rajwayi even in cases where matters have been expressly  provided 
for has ruled otherwise in clear and brazen contravention of the Standing orders.  
       6. The Hon. Thadius A. Rajway i as a S peaker of the County  Assembly of Mombasa allowed 
a Motion  to be passed on 11th May 2016 purporting to amend the list of the County Assembly 
Committees as moved by the then Leader of M ajority, Hon. Abdalla M. Kasagamba.  The Motion  
purported t o re-constitute the House committees with M embers different from the list previously 
approved on 3 1st March , 2016 by the County Assembl y Party in consultation with the Committee 
on Selection. In the 31st March , 2016 list  a letter was transmitted from the local Orange 
Democratic Mo vement (ODM) branch nominating M embers to the C ommittees while t he 
purported approved list of 11th May 2016 ha d no blessings from the party or a letter to that effect.        
The Motion  on amendment of the County Assembly Committee s moved by the then Leader of 
Majority, Hon.   Abdalla M. Kasagamba on 11th May, 2016 was in breach of Standing Order  
July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 54(1)  as it was not  seconded by any M ember hence it was null and void since the said Standing 
Order made consulting the party compulsory.  
7. The Motion  on amendment of the County Assembly Committee moved  by the then Leader of 
Majority  Hon.   Abdalla M. Kasa ngamba on 11th May, 2016 was in breach of Standing Order 
44(2) as it was not in writing and not signed. The Hon. Thadius A. Rajwayi Speaker negligently 
did not exercise his prerogative under Standing Order 44(3) to reject the Motion . 
8. Hon.   Thadius A. Rajwayi as Speaker br eached Standing Order No.50(1) and (2) when he 
straightforward put the question in the same terms as moved when a defective Motion  on 
amendment of the County Assembly Committees was moved by the then Leader of Majority, 
Hon.  Abdalla M. Kasagamba on 11th May, 2016.  
9. The defective Motion  on amendment of the County Assembly Committees passed on 11th 
May, 2016 in proceedings presided over by Hon.  Thadius A. Ra jwayi as Speaker where in some 
Committee M embers were  purportedly replaced by other M embers contrary to the list of 31st 
March , 2016 was in breach of Standing Order 157. The said Standing Order provides that it is 
the County A ssembly Party that nominates a M ember to a Select C ommittee to give a notice in  
writing to the Speaker that a Member be discharged from a S elect C ommittee . 
10.   The defective Motion  on amendment of the County Assembly Committees of 11th May 
2016 passed in proceedings presided over by Thadius A. Rajwayi then the  Speaker where in 
some Committee M embers were  purportedly replaced by other M embers contrary to the list 
of 31st March , 2016 was in breach of…..   
 
(Interruption ) 
(Hon.  Oduor  passe d over a paper  to Hon.  Siminyu) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Hon.  Jabess you are not in order , anything 
coming to the  County A ssembly must pass through the C lerk so if you ha ve anything you take it 
to the C lerk then he will bring it, so you are out of order in that. ... 
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Siminyu : Thank you Mr. Speaker for protecting me . 
(Hon . Siminyu resume d reading the Notice of Motion ) 
       Standing Order no.174 , the said Order provides for the due procedure to be followed if 
majority of the M embers of a C ommittee have no confide nce in the Chairperson or Vice 
Chairperson of a Co mmittee to elect/ replace him/ her . 
11.  The defective Motion  on amendment of the County Assembly Committees of 11th May 
2016 passed in proceedings presided over by Hon. Thad ius A. Rajwayi as Speaker some 
Committee M embers were  purportedly replaced by other M embers contrary to the list of 31st 
March 2016 was in breac h of Standing Order 154 which requires that nomination  of 
Members of S elect C ommittees is to be done by the County A ssembly party in consultation 
with the Committee on S election . 
 
12.  The defective Motion  on the amendment of the County A ssembly C ommittees of the 11th 
May be passed on in proceedings presided over by the Hon.  Thadius A. Rajwayi as S peaker 
July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 where by some Committee M embers were  purportedly replaced by other M embers contrary 
to the list of 31st March , 2016  which was in breach of Standing O rder 187 which requir es 
that the County Budget and Appropriation Committee constituted by the County A ssembly 
immediately following the general election  shall serve for a period of three calendar years  
shall serve for the remainder of the County A ssembly term . 
 
13. The defective Motion  on the amendment of the County A ssembly Committee of the 11th 
May, 2016 presided over by Thadius A. Rajwayi as Speaker where in some Committee 
Members were purportedly replaced by other  Members  contrary to the list of 31st March , 
2016 wa s in breach of Standing O rder 46 which requires that no Motion  may be moved 
which is the same in substance as any question which has been resolved (either in the 
affirmati ve or negative) during the prec eding six months in the same session. A Motion  
regardi ng the change  of Members of the H ouse C ommittee had been alread y moved and 
agreed upon by the H ouse on 31st March 2016.  
 
14. The Hon.  Thadius A. Rajwayi as  Speaker relayed misleading information to the Clerk of 
the County Assembly that the purported change of Members of the House Committees on 
11th May, 2016  was approved on 10th May, 2016  yet no such business was transacted in the 
House on 10th May, 2016.  
B. GROSS MISCONDUCT  
1. The Hon.  Thadius A . Rajwayi as Speaker , acting contrary to Standing Order 15 pre sided over 
proceedings in the County Assembly touching  on the issue of nomination of L eader of Majority 
when the issue was an  internal political party issue which shoul d not have been debated in the 
House.  
2. The Hon.  Thadius  A. Rajwayi as Speaker unreasonably  and unla wfully failed to recognize the 
Leader of M inority and declared her seat vacant while knowingly that he had no powers to do so 
since  the amended Standing O rder 16 provides that where the re is no minority party in the 
County A ssembly, the leader of minority p arty shall be deemed to be the C hairman of the Public 
Investment C ommittee.  
C. GROSS NEGLIGENCE  
1. The Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi as C hairman of the County Assembly Service Board failed to 
ensure prudent use of public money and compliance with procure ment procedures leading to 
inflated pricing of quotations and tenders occasioning loss of public funds in many situations 
including the following instances:  
(a) Procurement of vehicle stickers at inflated price worth Kshs.1 ,905,500 /= vide LPO 
No.21615662 b y Komenya Agencies.  
(b) Procurement of 2 go wns at inflated prices for the S peaker at Kshs. 800,000/= vide LPO No. 
2254665 by Whirwind Agencies Limited.  
(c) Procurement for a non -existent website Kshs . 470,000/= vide imprest no.2176393 given to 
Trizer Mwany ika. 
July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 (d) Procurement of 250 vehicle stickers at Kshs.1,850,000/=at inflated prices vide LPO 
No.2298112 given to Afzal Deliveries Enterprises . The stock was rejected by the procurement 
office but through his instructions  the same was received  by his office on 18th December 2015.  
(e) Procurement of 10 Kaspersky antivirus software items at inflated prices each at Kshs. 25,500, 
Kshs.24, 500 /= sorry . The average market price  for Kaspersky anti -virus software for single user 
is Kshs.1500.  
(f) Procure ment of 2 and 6 robes for the S peaker and Clerk's respectively ; split into two different 
supplies. Though the items were the same and procured on the same date they were split to avoid 
procurement procedures. This is contrary to Section 30 of the Public Procurement and  Disposal 
Act 2005 which prohibit entities from structuring procurement as two or more procurements for 
the purposes of avoiding procurement procedure.  
(g) Cancelation of medical insurance contract on 26th June, 2015 occasioning the County 
Assembly  a liabi lity of Kshs.4 ,8941 ,571. 
(h) On 12th August , 2014 vide imprest no.  2176287 issued to Kevin Oduor a P ersonal Assistant 
to Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi received Kshs . 200,000 for breakfast and lunch for MCA 's for non -
existent meeting/fictitious purpose.  
(i) Vide imp rest no.2176386 dates 20th January , 2015 issued to Hon. Thadius Ra jwayi amounting 
to Kshs.60.400 purportedly  to attend a County Assembly Forum meeting in Nairobi. The 
supporting documentation w as through a letter by his Personal A ssistant, Kevin Oduor date d 13th 
January 2014 . The County Assembly Clerk approved the request on 20th January 2014 .  At the 
same time he signed in the County Assembly plenary attendance register as having attended 
plenary sittings on the respective dates.  
(j) Vide imprest no.224201 1 dated 27th January 2015 amounting to Kshs.43,600 payable to Hon.  
Thadius Rajwayi purportedly to attend a County Assembly Forum meeting in Eastlands Hotel, 
Nairobi. In this case and on diverse dates through the years, Hon. Thadius .A. Rajwayi 
purportedly attended the County A ssembly forum meetings in Nairobi while at the same time he 
signed attendance register as having been present at County Assembly plenary meetings.  
(k) Failure to  provide leadership and advise M embers appropriately by when he organized a trip 
to South Africa Gaute ng Provincial L egislature occasioning the payment of a total of Kshs.  5 
million to a few M embers . The trip did not take place . Hon. Thadius Rajwayi was one of the 
beneficiaries.  
I therefore urge this County A ssembly to RESOLVE t hat; 
1. That pursuant to Standing Order 58(3) and S ection 11(3) of the County Government Act 
2012  the Hon.  Thadius  A Rajwayi shall not preside over the sitting of Tuesday 5th July, 
2016 and the Deputy Speaker shall preside instead.  
2. This County Assembly of Mom basa hereby and with immediate effect removes from 
office Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi as Speaker of the County A ssembly of Mombasa on the 
foregoing stated grounds.  
July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7        Mr. Speaker  thank you.  I beg to give notice.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Thank you Hon.  Siminyu, pursuant to Standing 
order 58(4) that this  is a Notice of Motion ...  
       58(4) before the debate and voting on a Motion  under paragraph (3)  The Speaker shall be 
accorded an opportunity to respond to the allegations on the floor of the Assembly.  
       So we have to give the Speaker an ample time to study all the alle gations to form his defense  
so therefore this Motion  Hon.  Patrick Siminyu you  bring it on Tuesday afternoon. Thank you . 
(Applause ) 
STATEMENT  
(Hon . Oduor stood ) 
       I have already sealed this so if there is anything you will debate it on Tuesday ... 
(Loud Consultations ) 
MOTION  
       Leader of M inority , Maimuna Salim . 
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker on behalf of Madam  Maimuna the Minority L eader of t he County 
Assembly of  Mombasa  I would like to take this opportunity to read on her beha lf the Procedural 
Motion  on adjournment. Mr. Speaker.  
(Hon.  Faraj m oved the Procedura l Motion  on adjournment)  
       Pursuant to Standing Order number  25(3) and sec tion 49 (b) I beg to move t he following 
Motion ; 
       THAT AWARE THAT the H oly month of Ramadhan is coming to end and thus there will 
be Idd ul Fitr celebrations which are likely to commence either today evening or tomorrow 
depending on sig hting of the moon;  
       THAT in Order to  accommodate all the Muslims  in the Idd celebrations including those who 
may have commenced their fasting a day before others, I urge this A ssembly to resolve that : 
       I therefore urge this County A ssembly to RESOLVE that;  
       The Assembly adjourns its normal sittings today for celebrations of Idd  ul Fitr and resume 
its normal sittings on Tuesday the 12th of July, 2016.  
       I beg to move. I want to take thi s opportunity to ask Hon. Abdallah Ahmed Kasangamba to 
second this Motion , thank you so much Mr . Speaker.   
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon.  Kasangamba . 
       Hon. Kasangamba: Hon. Speaker  I second the Motion . 
(Applause ) 
(Question proposed)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members then  I should propose a question  that 
this H ouse should adjourn  for Eid celebrations .... 
July 5, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 (Question p ut and agreed to ) 
       Yes Hon.  Fadhili Makarani.  The floor is open for debate on the Motion .  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Bwana Spika mimi nashukuru K iongozi wa Walio  Wachache aliyeleta hoja 
hii, akiungwa mkono na Mheshimiwa Abdallah Kasangamba ili tuweze kupata wakati wa 
sikukuu. ..  
(Loud c onsultation ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Yes Hon.  Mwabashir i what is it?  
       Hon. Mwabashir i: Ahsante Bwana Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. Mheshimiwa S pika 
nimesimama kumuun ga mkono Mheshimiwa Fadhili….  
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika aliyetoa  Mswada huu Mheshimiwa amesema labda mwezi utaonekana 
leo tushauona  tayari hatuangalii mwezi . Kwa hivyo ni muhimu Mheshimiwa Spika B unge hili 
tuliahirishe ili tuanze kusherehekea Eid. Jambo lengine Mheshimiwa Spika sijui kwa Kiti chako 
maanake jana tulikubaliana, maanake wiki iliyopita tulipitisha u le M swada w a maridhiano  na 
katika mkutano wa House Business jana naona ili wekwa hio kuan zia jumapili tw ende tuka e kwa 
retrea t sasa sijui itaingiliana vipi na  hii, naomba muongozo wako.   
(Applause ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Hatimy ? 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Naomba ...(Inaudible)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): I did no t hear you Hon.  Hatimy.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Naomba kupitia kiti kusema kuwa Kanuni za Bunge nambari  54, 
1 uulize swali  ili tumalize jambo hili Mheshimi wa S pika.  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Hon.  Kasangamba we have alre ady decided, but 
Members I think this Motion  cannot be put to a question ; we debate it and then ... so if you have 
finished  to debate it then we adjourn the House.  This H ouse stand s adjourned until Tuesday next 
week , thank you.  
The House  rose at  4:10p.m. 