June 7, 2017                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  MEMBER  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 7th June, 2017  
The House met at 2:35p.m. 
 (Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Saad Faraj) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Member s have your seats. Yes Clerk.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
(Silence|)  
Hon. Fadhi li Mwalimu ? 
Hon. Odari:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon. Speaker in accordance to your instruction or 
your order that this Motion  or this S tatement request be brought in the afternoon session, I 
hereby again request that for a notice regarding bursaries within  the Mombasa County  I hereby 
request for information from the g overnment concerned or the Committee  concerned in regard to 
bursaries that have been requested by the Assembly of Mombasa.  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Hon. Jimmy can you read the notice of Motion .  
Hon. Odari:  Notice of Motion , alright.  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
BURSARIES WITH IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
(Hon. Odari moved the Notice of Motion  on behalf of Hon. Mwalimu ) 
THAT AWARE  that the County  government sets aside a certain amount of money, in its 
budget, for bursaries;  
FURTHER AWARE that the aforesaid bursaries assist the needy students to access 
education, which is vital in our County  and the society at large;  
CONCERNED that the said bursaries are yet to be disbursed to the accounts of various 
schools and /or colleges/universities; thus risk students from missing classes/lectures, due to lack 
of offsetting their fee balance ;  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that; 
The County  government of Mombasa, through the Department of Environment and 
Education , expedites the process of disbursing the funds allocated for bursaries to the respective 
schools and/or colleges/universities. Hon.  Speaker I beg to move and I wish to call upon...  
(Interruption)  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Sorry this is a Notice of Motion  and not Motion . 
Hon. Odari:  Thank you.  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
Hon. Mohamed Ndanda , Chairperson of Committee  on Administ ration of County  
Security…  
(Silence)  
 If he  not available , is there anybody that is part of that Com mittee  who has information 
that will guide this Hon. House?  
(Silence ) 
Yes Clerk ? 
MOTION  
June 7, 2017                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Hon. Jimmy Odari .  
RESTORATION OF CHANGAMWE YOUTH RESOURCE CENTRE  
(Hon. Odari moved the M otion)  
Hon. Odari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I wish t o move the following Motion entitled  
Restoration of Changamwe Youth Resource Centre.   
THAT AWARE that Youth Resource Centers  provide services and /or programmes, for 
instance, but not limited to, mentorship, empowerment, career development and computer 
studies;  
FURTHER AWARE that the  aforementioned Centers  offer short courses, prevent 
idleness and the Youth from engaging in drugs and are generally educational and motivational;  
CONCERNED that the Changamwe Youth Resource Centre located in Changamwe 
Ward, is no lo nger functional, render ing the youth idle; d espite previously having equipment, 
such as computers it is now being used by the County  ''Askaris''/Inspectorate ;  
Hon. Speaker , I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
The County  government of Mombasa, through the Department  of Gender, Youth and 
Sports,  restores/revamps and provide the necessary equipment and resource personnel of 
aforesaid facility for the betterment of our Youth.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker and I beg to move this Motion  and call upon Hon . Priscilla 
Mumba to secon d. 
Hon. (Mrs.) Priscilla Mumba:  I second . 
(Question proposed)  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : You know that the Motion  has been seconded , I will 
take this opportunity to propose the question that the Motion  on restoration of Changamwe 
Youth Resource Centre  brought by Hon. Jimmy Odari be debated .  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Hon. Jimmy . 
Hon. Odari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimeleta suala hili la 
kuhusiana na kituo cha vijana cha Wodi yangu ya Changamwe kutokana na kilio cha vijana 
wangu am bao hivi sasa wengi wao wanahangaika ijapokuwa kimejengwa kile kituo ilikuwa mara 
nyingi wakija hapo kufanya masuala mengi kujifundisha komputa na vifaa mbalimbali na ni 
mahali ambapo kuwa panawajumuisha ili pia kuwaepusha na madawa ya mihadarati na mambo 
mengine mabaya mabaya katika jamii.  Mheshimiwa Spika hivi sasa hiki kituo kimechukuliwa na 
maaskari wa Kaunti na pia kiko katika hali mbaya sana ndio maana nimekuja kuwasilisha 
Mswada  huu ndani ya hili Bunge ili Idara ya Kaunti inayohusiana na masuala ya v ijana na idara 
ya michezo tutashukuru tu watakapochukua hicho kituo na kukirudisha kwenye mikono ya 
vijana ama mikono yao ama idara na pia wakiboreshe hiki kituo kwa vifaa kama komputa na pia 
kuwatafuta waalimu ama watu wa  kuja kuwasaidia vijana katika hal i ya kuwakuza vipawa vyao.  
Ndio maana Mheshimiwa Spika nimeleta Mswada  huu na naom ba Bunge hili tukufu, nawaomba 
Wabunge watukufu ambao wamekuja kwenye B unge hili tupitishe huu Mswada  ili kile kituo 
kirudishwe katika mikono idara inayohusika na vijana wetu  waweze kupata mahali pazuri pa  
kujiendeleza. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Hon.  Patrick Siminyu.  
Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this opportunity.  Mr. Speaker I 
support the Motion  that has been brought by  Hon.  Jimmy Odari simply because it is going to 
give our youth s peace and also give guidance to our youth s who lack guidance from the society. 
Mr. Speaker it will give the youth s opportunit ies to learn more and infact we have several roles 
June 7, 2017                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 in this County , and I think it will be for the best everywhere as a whole, let us have a great 
personality for our youth s, in fact I re Member  when we were young we had social hall s, what is 
the meaning of the social hall s? These  halls were to bring us together , people  together so that 
they can tal k issues pertaining to their liv es, especially youths when they have free time, they 
have somewhere to go. Always there is this maskani , I don’t know if I can call it in English but I 
know it is called maskani  where youth s take bh ang, they take drugs . Mr. Speaker I fully support 
this Motion  and in fact I can say in Tudor we have a social hall where we can have facilities like 
television, bringing Wi -Fi for our youth s where they can come and go through the internet, they 
can have co mputer , this we are progressing as a Country and as a County  001 we have to do 
something so that others can come and learn from us, It’s a good Motion  and I beg this House to 
support. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Yes Hon. Priscillah Mumba.  
Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika hata mimi nimesimama 
kuunga mkono Mswada  huu, kwa sababu ninaona makosa yaliyokuwa ; hall hii imechukuliwa na 
Inspectorate  na hali kuna vijana ambao walikuwa wanatumia hall hii na ona si  sawa . Sisi tunajua 
ajira imekuwa cha ngamoto  kubwa na tuna hifadhi vijana  ambao tukifungua center  ya kuweza 
kukaa pamoja wakijadiliana, wakiweza kupeana ushauri, wakiweza kutafuta wale wenzao wenye 
vipaji tofauti wakiungana pale, wakijadiliana mambo  ya mitaani kwao na kusaidiana na hata 
viongozi kuweza kuwapata kiurahis i wakijua kuna centre  fulani ambayo vijana huwa 
wanakutana pale. Kwa hivyo ikiwa centre  kama hii inaweza kufungwa, na ikapewa askari na 
askari wengine wana sehamu zao wanatengewa za ku fanya kazi zao hivyo naona si sawa kabisa. 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika inatakikana  hapa pahali hata kama ni sisi W aheshimiwa  tuweze  
kwenda tukapaangalie, na tuone jinsi palivyo ili na vile panavyo tumika ki sasa ili tuwe na 
ushahidi kamili wa  kujua kuna t atizo ambalo liko mahali pale, sababu tunajua ni centre  ya vijana 
ni muhimu kuwa na vijana haswa sasa tunaelekea kufan ya uchaguzi, ni wakati muafaka w a kuwa 
pale mahali paregeshwe kwa sababu itakuwa urahisishaji wa kuona vijana na kuweza kusaidika, 
kwa vil e wanakuwa wanasiasa wanajaribu njia ya kuita vijana kwa miradi mbalimbal i. Kwa 
hivyo wakipatikana  pale kwenye zile centre  zao itakuwa urahisi kuboresha juhudi zao, kazi zao 
na vile wanapokuwa wanataka kukabili vikundi vyao  vile watakavyokuwa wakijipanga.  Kwa 
hivyo nimesimama kuunga kikamilifu ili centre  hii iweze kuregeshewa vijana wa Changamwe … 
(Applause)  
  Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Yes Hon. Wangudi.  
 Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nachangia Mswada  ambao 
umeletwa na Mheshimiwa Jimmy Odar i; ni Mswada  mzuri, kwa hivi sasa ningependa 
kufahamisha Jumba hili ya kwamba hakuna kituo chochote cha vijana kimejengwa , hali ilioko 
kuna majengo walijenga kituo kimoja iwapo wanataka kung ’ang’ania kuregesha sehemu ambayo 
hakuwezi kutoshea viti vitano. Mswada  ulioko ni kutaka ujenzi wa kituo cha vijana ambacho 
kitakuwa kikubwa na sio kung ’ang’ania kile kisehemu ambacho ni kijumba kidogo katika 
sehemu kilioko kuna social halls  kwani ile sehemu ni sehemu ambayo haiwezi kujaa vijana 
wengi . Tunahitaji mpango mzuri na Mheshimiwa Spika kwa upande sitaki kitu ambacho ni cha 
kuharakisha harakisha tunahitaji kufanya ukaguzi, kuna shirika ambalo si la kiserikali na 
linashirikiana na serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa kwa hivi sasa wanaregesha  vijana wetu kwa 
kuwafundisha  kazi baada ya kupata ujuzi wanapewa pia nafasi ya ajira . Mheshimiwa Spika hio 
ni sehemu moja ambayo inaweza kutilia mkazo tuweze kuona vijana tuhakikishe kuwa ofisi 
ambazo zimejengwa na kuona kwamba kila sehemu kumewek wa ofisi ya kuweza kuhakikisha 
June 7, 2017                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 vijana  waweze kujiajiri wenyewe, u takapoita vijana uwakalishe mahali uwawekee Wi -Fi 
uwawekee nini na nini …Mheshimiwa Spika hazija wasaidia baada ya kwisha utatafuta kijana 
ajisaidie mwenyewe . Mheshimiwa Spika suala ambalo …  
(Interruption)  
 Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Yes, Hon. Patrick .  
 Hon. Siminyu: Mr. Speaker the Hon.  Member  is misleading the House. Mr. Speaker 
this Wifi and the things that we have nowadays it  will create jobs opportunities ; even in Europe , 
even in Kenya now a days the world is full of tech nology if you say it is not helping then you are 
misleading. Thank you.  
 Hon. Wangudi:  Mheshimiwa Spika ningezungumza kwa ufahamu mkubwa ni….  
(Interruption)  
 Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Hon. Wangudi can you utilize your microphone so 
that you can be au dible .  
Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nikizungumzia suala 
hili kwa ufahamu mkubwa nilioko nao serikali hii ya K aunti ya Mombasa ingepewa grant ya 
kutengeza mradi mmoja ambao ni wa serikali. Mradi huu bila shaka ulibahatika kama w akaazi 
wa Changamwe mradi huu kuja kwetu na mradi huu ulikua na mapendekezo maw ili; moja ilikua 
tujenge youth centre  ambayo ilikwisha ndio ya wale vijana ama tujenge chuo cha kiufundi . 
Mheshimiwa Spika tulibahatika katika eneo la Changamwe kuelekea Port  Reitz kuna sehemu 
moja inatwa M wingo imejenga chuo cha ufundi yaani Polytechnic . Polytechnic  ile Mheshimiwa 
Spika inahitaji itwae vijana wetu wajiandikishe wapewe mafunzo ya kiufundi unapotoka pale 
wana ujuzi watafute ajira . Mheshimi wa Spika nimetoa masuala mawili;  suala la kwanza ni 
shirika ambalo linaendesha shughuli zake likishirikiana na serikali ya Mombasa kwa kuchukua 
vijana wetu na kuwapa mafundisho ya kikazi. Jambo la pili chuo cha kiufundi ambacho tunakiita 
polytechnic  kinachukua vijana na kuwafunza mambo ya ufundi ; kuna chenye kiko eneo la Likoni 
na eneo la Kisauni na vyuo vile vya ufundi viko Mheshimiwa Spika na ningependa vijana wetu 
wajiandikishe wapate mafundisho na wakitoka pale wanajua kila kitu na sio kuwa na kituo cha 
vijana cha kukaa kupiga hadithi za Abunuasi . Mheshimiwa Spika itakuwa ni cha kujinufaisha 
inatakiwa tuwe na jamii itakayotufaidisha kukaa pamoja na kupiga gumzo na kuweza kukaa 
kufanya mambo ya maana iwapo watapata mafundisho itakuwa ni jambo muhimu. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika  na napenda kupinga Mswada  huu na tuwaambie vijana hao waende kwa 
vyuo vya kiufundi ili waweze kupata manufaa fulani.  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : There being no other deliberations we allow Hon. 
Jimmy Odari who is the mover of this Motion  to respond t o this Motion . 
Hon. Odari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza nataka 
kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa aliyetoka kuongea sasa hivi kwamba kuna kazi katika idara ya 
elimu ambayo ni idara tofauti na kazi za vijana na jamii ziko katika wizara ya jin sia na michezo. 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naongea kuhusu masaibu ya W odi yangu . Mheshimiwa Spika resource 
centre ziko tofauti na youth polytechnic , youth resource centre  kuna mambo ya counselling , 
mambo ya saiokologi, mambo ya kijamii na ushirikiano  na ile internet  ama Wi-Fi ikiwa pale 
inawapa vijana mambo mengi ya kufanya . Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa Spika kazi ya youth resource 
centre  na kazi nyengine za youth polytechnic  ni mambo tofauti na mambo yao ni tofauti na kitu 
nataka kusema ni kuwa baadae Kaunti ikipata uwez o iweze kujenga zaidi na iweze kusaidia 
vijana wengi , naomba Wizara ya vijana na michezo waweke komputa kwa vituo hivyo ili 
kusaidia vijana wetu ili wapate kujumuika jioni ama asubuhi wasikae maskani kuvuta bangi, kula 
miraa wanafaa wakae kule kusaidiana k imawazo . Bila hicho kituo vijana watakaa maskani 
June 7, 2017                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         68 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 kufanya mambo fulani fulani ya kimtaa , hichi kituo kiwe na kiimarishwe kusaidia vijana wetu. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Faraj) : Now having concluded on our deliberation on this 
Motion  I have no otherwise but to put a question on this Motion  to have a consensus on 
restoration of Changamwe youth Resource Centre moved by Hon. Jimmy Odari.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause)  
Before we go to the next item today we are honored  to have students and teachers from 
the Bridge International Academy ; as you understand whenever t here are visitors in this 
Assembly when you come here it is a period of learning and we hope you get something from 
this experience and we have set a precedence wh ereby whenever a school visits us then we take 
it up to us to make sure that every single person or every student is recognized . Therefore we 
shall mention each and every name of the pupils that a re available here with us today:   
(Applause)  
 
1. Mercy Mtana  
2. Zahra Yahya  
3. Janet Lewah  
4. Elizabeth Kadzo  
5. Erick Ronald  
6. Damaris Lewah  
7. Neema Charo  
8. Zena Musa  
9. Anne Awuor  
10. Juma Ibrahim  
11. Brian Gideon  
12. Shelly Wanjiru  
13. Everline Mwanyuma  
14. Martin Gideon  
15. Evan Mwiruri  
16. Tom Munyasua  
17. Calvins Michura  
18. Dancun Matela  
19. Charlies  
(Applause)  
 We want to welcome you all to this Mombasa County  Assembly and we hope that the 
experience that you will gather here will be able to assist you in the future in modeling  you to 
becoming leaders as the on e’s who are here today , and for those who have other ambitions we 
hope God willing that your paths become open for all of you , thank you. Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
 There being no other business the House st ands adjourned until tomorrow 2: 30p.m, thank you.  
The House rose at 3:04 p.m. 
  
 
 
    