June 8, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om th e Hansard Edito r 
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 8th June, 2017  
The House met at 2:39p.m. 
 (Temporary  Speaker  (Hon.  Saad Faraj ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
 Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Faraj) : Member s you may sit . Yes, Clerk . 
STATEMENTS  
 Hon. Mary Akinyi,  
(Silence)  
 Yes Hon. Amir Thoya . 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nimeweza kupata 
mawasiliano kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa Mary kwamba ameshikika kwa dharura , kwa hivyo 
ameniomba niweze kumsomea taarifa  yake kwa ruhusa yako . 
 Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Faraj) : Go ahead . 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir on behalf of Hon. Mary 
Akinyi I beg to make the following Statement on commemoration of the World Environment 
Day. Mr. Speaker Sir I seek to know from the Chairperson, Committee of Environment, how 
the County government of Mombasa commemorated the World Environment Day.  Thank 
you Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Faraj) : Okay, the Chair directs that the Committ ee on 
Environment to bring the Report with regards  to the commemoration of World Environment 
Day as requested by Hon. Mary Akinyi and therefore we are going to give them up to 
Thursday, next week to be able to rely  on that message to respond back to this Hon.  House.  
 Yes Clerk ? 
MOTION  
(Interruption ) 
 Just a moment Clerk, yes Hon. Paul Onje . 
 Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, kidogo nimesimama lakini kidogo 
sijapata vizuri . 
 Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Faraj) : Kindly resume your  seat, Hon. Thoya . 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika yangu pia ilikua 
nataka kutoa taarifa ya kwamba kulingana na orodha ama taratibu ya Miswada  na taarifa  
ambazo bado ziko pending  katika Jumba hili yangu ilikua ni kuomba iwapo kupitia kwa Kiti 
chako tun aweza kuruhusiwa kuweza kuongeza idadi ya siku za Bunge ili niweze kuhakikisha 
ya kwamba Miswada  hii inaweza kukamilika kabla  kufungwa rasmi kwa vikao vya Bunge 
hili. Ahsante sana , Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Faraj) : Yes Majority Leader Hon. Hamisi  Musa 
Mwidani .  
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I have no objection and the 
request from the Member  actually we have to follow the rules of the House, it has to be raised 
now to the House Business Commit tee so that it can come for the direction  in this House . 
 Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Faraj) : Thank you Hon. Majority Leader I think the 
House is  in agreement that this cannot be brought as a Statement but it has to come here as  a 
Procedural Motion and it has to pass through the House Business Committee and because you 
have requested you make sur e that the Chair facilitates that  process so that it can be included 
in the House Business Committee tentative paper. Yes Clerk . 
(Applau se) 
June 8, 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained fr om th e Hansard Edito r 
Page 2 ADJOURNMENT  
 Memb ers there being no other business the House stands adjourned until next week 
on Tuesday . 
The House rose at 2: 46p.m. 
 
 
    