July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 31st July, 2019  
The House met at 10:32 a.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICA TION  FROM  THE  CHAIR  
 
Hon. Members good morning again . Hon. Members on Wednesday, 24th of July,  2019  
during the m orning Sitting, I delivered a Message from the IEBC on the Transmission of the 
draft Punguza Mizigo (Constitutional Amendment)  Bill, 2019 to Co unty Assemblies vide a 
letter dated 18th July, 2019.  
Hon. Members, I commit the draft Punguza Mizigo  (Constitutional Amendment) Bill, 
2019 to the Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs. The Committee will be required to subject 
the Bill for public particip ation as Article 196 (1) of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 requires 
that th e County Assembly involves the p ublic in its legislative functions and other businesses. 
The Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs will thereafter be required to table a comprehen sive 
report before this and for adoption within the timelines set by Article 257 of the Constitution of 
Kenya, 2010.  Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY A MEMBER OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOA RD (CASB ) HON. 
MURFAD AMUR ON INSTAL LATION OF RAMPS AT T HE ENTRANCE OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY 
BUILDING  
 
Yes Hon. Murfad , please give the response to the Statement.  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir i rise to respond on 
behalf of the Board . Mr. Speaker Sir I rise to respond  to the question request of S tatement raised 
by Hon. Ramla during  the 66th Sitting on the County Assembly and the matter was directed to 
the County Assembly Service Board.  

July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Mr. Speaker Sir the County Assembly Service Board is mandated to look into the w elfare  
of the MCAs, the staff and the extension or any visitors who is in the County Assembly 
presence. Mr. Speaker Sir , the Board is discharging its various mandate that is required by the 
County Assembly Act  to ensure that it upholds the h uman right s of all an d observed equality. 
Mr. Speaker Sir the County Assembly Service Board has foreseen the need to have ramps 
installed so that the County Assembly of Mombasa building can be accessible to both Members 
of the County Assembly, staff and the resident s of Mombasa who are physically challenged.  
Mr. Speaker Sir , the County Asse mbly Service Board through the Clerk  wrote a letter 
dated 27th March , 2019 to the Chief Officer in the D epartment of Infrastructure and P ublic 
works, requesting for a Bill of Q uantity for the two ramps. Mr. Speaker Sir no reply h as been 
received and hence the C lerk wrote a reminder dated 29th July, 2019. Once the Bill of Q uantity is 
received the process o f installing the ramps will be fast tracked  Mr. Speaker Sir.  Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Murfad. Yes Clerk , next order?  
 
 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY A MEMBER OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOA RD 
(CASB ) HON. MURFAD AMUR ON STATUS OF WORKING TOO LS AND EQUIPMENT IN THE PUBLIC 
RELATIONS DEPARTMENT  
 
Hon Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker S ir the respon se on behalf of 
the Board agai n I wish to respond  on the status of working tools and equipment in the Public 
Relations Department. Mr. Speaker Sir I rise to respond with the above mention ed re quest for the 
Statement;  in the County Assembly budget for the year 2018/2019 there was an allocation of 
Kenya shillings one million allocated for the purchase of the equipment in the Public Relation s 
Department , however  the va lue of the equipment which th e Department required exceeded the 
amount which had been budgeted for.  
Mr. Speaker Sir during the re -allocation of votes through the supplementary budget, the 
money was re -allocated for  foreign travel which remain un utilized ; towards the end of the 
financ ial year and it was not sufficient to buy t he required equipment. I n this f inancial year , an 
allocation has been made to purchase the equipment and the process will commence as soon as it  
is practicable. Mr. Speaker Sir I would like to inform the County As sembly that  its prudent to 
forward any matter within the mandate of the County Asse mbly Service Board through the 
Secretary of the Board for reaction.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Murfad Amur . Yes Hon. 
Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimesimama kwa ajili ya 
kutoa taarifa katika Bunge hili. I dara hii ni idara muhimu zaidi na ningependa kuarifu 
Mheshimiwa anayetuwakilisha sisi katika Bo di yetu ya Bunge la Kaunti kwamba shilingi milion i 
moja kwanza tungeweza kuangalia kama bajeti yao ni kubwa lakini priority  ilikuwa ni gani 
katika Idara  hiyo. Mheshimiwa Mwenyek iti kama saa hizi hakuna picha katika Bunge hili, kama 
saa hizi hakuna video , tukitoka hapa inastahili kulingana na Tek nolojia t uitishe video  zetu 
tuonyeshe wananchi wetu tumeweza kuongea nini na hiyo tayari milioni moja ni pesa nyingi kwa 
camera , video  na kipakatalishi cha  kuweza kuhakikisha ya kwamba kila Mheshimiwa anapotoka 
hapa anapata .  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, ndio bajeti ilik uwa kubwa lakini tuweze kuangazia priority  
hiyo ni taarifa tu nampatia Mwakilishi wetu. Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members. Y es Hon. Renson?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ndio niliweza kuitisha na kut afuta 
majibu ya hiyo  Taarifa , ninashukuru kwa jibu ambalo limeweza kujitokeza, hata hivyo tukiwa 
tunazungumzia kuhusu milioni moja  tungependa tuzungumzie kuhusu hata kama ni elfu hamsini 
inaweza kununua kitu gani kwa dharura ambayo iko pale, vile vile ames ema hawa wafanyi kazi 
wa idara ya Public Relation huja hapa na simu, wakati mwengine hata hawako kabisa , kwa hivyo 
mbali na makadirio makubwa ya millioni moja ikiwa hata kuna laki moja ambayo inaweza 
nunuliwa hata ile picha halafu tuendelee kulingana na vi le pesa zinapatikana, itakuwa ni vyema 
kabisa ili tuondokee hii aibu hii ambayo kwa saa hii iko. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you H on. Renson Thoya.  Hon. Members I think we 
need to understand the rules and procedures of this House and we need  to know what are the 
things that need to be brought in this House and the things not to be brou ght in this House. First 
of all  I wish to echo the Hon. Amur Murfad who has said in regard to issues which can best be 
addressed by the County Assembly Service Board as a body co rporate. There are matters Hon. 
Members which can b e raised in the County Assembly;  those matte rs should be directly 
beneficial to the resident s of Mombasa County , then again there are matters which are internal 
and the best avenue of add ressing such is through the County Assembly Service Board  and not in 
the House.  
 Hon. Members, if we look at S ection 12 (a) of the Government Act, 2012 and together 
with the County Assembly Service Act, 2017 provides; ‘That the County Assembly Service 
Boar d is responsible for providing services and facilities to ensure efficiency, effective and 
functioning of the County Assembly.”  So Hon. Members as the Chairperson of the County 
Assembly Service Board of Mombasa, I assure you that our doors are always open and to listen 
to any issues that you may  have  in regard to our mandate and we are ready to provide appropriate 
solution s and I also encourage that we continue raising issue s of concern for  our resident s in this 
Honourable  House .   
Hon. Members,  another iss ue that we need to understand  is that  the same staff wh o we 
are talking about  if they have issues they should write  a letter  to the C lerk and complain about 
the issues that they are facing not to co me and talk to the Hon. Members , let us know what is our  
duty please . Hon. Members even  you as an MCA you can write to the Board directly instead of 
bringing these issues in the House I do  not think it  is the right channel to bring this issue, not 
unless maybe if you think that the Members we do  not perform as th e Board and we have fail ed 
you then that  is another is sue you can bring in this House.  
So please Hon. Members it  is okay to involve ourselves with the staff but we do  not go 
that deeply because if you ask the staff they  have wr itten the reminde rs to the C lerk and what the 
Clerk has answered, am sure the C lerk has given t he same answer to them and the D epart ment. 
So Hon. Member please let u s make use of this House to the resident of Mombasa and the Board. 
 Thank you Hon. Members . Yes, Hon. Mwamwiri I can se e there is  something burning 
you want to say.  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker It  is just a point of 
inform ation that we never get involved with the staff, but it  is an observati on when a session is 
on the PR D epartment we do  not see them here and during our first sitting or earlier when we 
were  being swore in they were always in sessions. S o it was just an observation so the staff 
kindly Mr. Speaker they did  not give any information to us it was just an observation  because the 
Hon. Member raised t he question so kindly the staff  should not be compromised or taken for 
granted or understood somehow they gave information to us to raise the issue , it was just an 
observation by the Members. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : I think  maybe Hon. Mwamwiri you did  not unde rstand what 
I was trying to say;  I was trying to say that there is no issue for M embers to have observation we 
have no problem at all but what we are saying is the staff should channel those issues through the 
Board instead of us Hon. Members we are sitting and discussing issues of cameras, we need to 
bring important matter affecting our people in Mombasa in this House.  
Those issues of camera etc  we know their challenges and even me am aware of that 
sometimes I receive visitors and we don’t even have that coverage, I know I can see other 
Counties Assemblies whereby the Speaker post those things, we have our own website I don’t 
see those things functioning you know I agree there is a problem but what am trying to say let’ s 
channel these things through the Board because the Board is the one in char ge of day to day 
business . Yes, C lerk next order please?  
 
MOTION  
CONTROL OF PUBLIC BEACHES  
 
Yes Hon. Amriya Juma please move the  Motion.  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I beg to move of the following M otion;  
 
THAT AWARE that, the Kenya Constit ution 2010, vide part 4 of the Fourth S chedule 
provides that County parks, beaches and recreational facilities are  a function of County 
government;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that, the County g overnment is committed to improve both its local 
and international tourism and the beaches are the key tourist attraction in Mombasa;  
 
CONCERNED THAT, there has been recent rise of cases of harassment of beach goers 
and children by beach touts or beach boys  along our County beaches;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that there are rampant and rise of cases of alcohol and drug abuse 
among children visiting the beach;  
 
CONCERNED that, the beach has become a no man’s land that has facilitated a breeding 
ground for crime in the Co unty;  
 
I therefore urge this County Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
 
 1. The County g overnment of Mombasa to conduct an  audit of genuine beach traders;  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  2. Enforcement unit to ensure that alcohol is not sold to underage p ersons;  
 3. The County g overnment to ensu re that all public beaches are f ree from harassment of 
beach goers and children by the beach touts.  
 
 And I call upon Hon. Leila to second Mr. Speaker.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  I second.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members . I now propose a question tha t 
the Motion by Hon. Amriya Boy Juma on Control of Public Beaches be considered by this 
House as the same terms as moved . 
 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Juma  Boy please contribute on the M otion.  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you very  much  Mr. Speaker once again and thank you Hon. 
Members for giving me a go ahe ad for us to proceed with this Motion. Mr. Speaker this M otion 
is informed by the fact that our public beaches are our source of public entertainment in 
Momba sa and Mombasa being a tou rist hub whose main source of t ourist attraction is the 
museum and the public beaches, it  is important that we give weight to our public beaches .  
 It is a concern Mr. Speaker , both to our international and local tourist s that when they 
visit the beaches  there is a lot of disturbance on the ground , we have so much unregulated beach 
touts, there are people selling everything ; people selling beads, drinks, what a view and there are 
even people selling love in the name of beach boys .  I am concerned  that this could inhibit or 
refrain our tourist from v isiting our beaches Mr. Speaker , that is on the point of our visitors, they 
have  become a nuisance for them to take leisurely walks .  
 You know when I was growing up we use d to see the tourists  walking around the 
beaches, but now it has become very difficult to see them because there is a lot of harassment by 
the beach tout s, because one ; the County has been unable to regulate . What am  saying  is that we 
need to regulate the beach touts ; they should be identified, t he genuine beach traders should be 
identified like they should have like , maybe reflectors with a number  so that you are able when 
you go to the beaches there is a so rt of organization  to see that this is a trader that he has an 
identification number so wh en there is a problem with (??) so you can be able to report. S o those 
are the issue s that this M otion is all about and secondly Mr. Speaker even our beach tout s or the 
beach boys,  the people selling love we are not saying that they should not do it but th ey should 
do it in a proper form, they should not go around and surrounding ladies as if you know ... it is 
becoming a nuisance…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Amriya can you make that point clear so that ..., you 
are saying there  is no pro blem for people to sell love ? 
 
Hon. Amriya Juma :  I am not saying there  is no problem people selling love . 
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : I thought ... can you just come out cl ear? 
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : No! No! Let me come out clearly, am saying the beach touts o r 
beach boys should be identified, should be earmarked that here…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ningependa Mheshi miwa Mwenyekiti  Mheshimiwa 
ambaye anazungumzia H oja yake afafanue zaidi penzi lin auzwa vipi? Tuweze kufahamu, penzi 
linauzwa vipi au mapenzi yanauzwa vipi?  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Amriya, maybe you may explain to this House 
that selling of love . 
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : What usually happens Mr. Speaker those people who have bee n 
visiting the beaches will tell you our fellow residents are at the beaches in the name of beach 
boys so when am saying that they are selling love is just a connotations because we have beach 
boys and beach touts…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon. Moses?  
 
Hon. Aran:  Hon. Member ...the Hon. Member who is in the floor is misleading this 
House , we also have beach girls not only beach boys so stop being bia sed Hon. Member please . 
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes so you may continu e, so are you withdrawing that 
word of selling  love I thought love is for free.  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : True Mr.  Speaker love is free of charge.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : I have never heard of someone paying for love . 
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : True to it Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Maybe not unless Hon. Kizito Opeya will tell us . 
  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 (Laughter)  
 
He is not around. Yes Hon. Raphael?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I appreciate your directive but I 
would wish to tell my fellow Hon. Member instead of just withdrawing look for some  good 
terms to replace the word.  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Otherwise we need to know more about what you are stating Mr. Speaker thank you, do  
not just withdraw , replace it . 
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  I think I need to echo whatever Hon. Bwire has articulated , let if the 
Member mea ns prostitution come out very clear to mean prostitution because prostitution is the 
only activity which engages money what soever but love is somethi ng bigger because love may 
mean  what we mean  filial love,  parenting love and so ever, so let her come out clear to speak 
about corruption or whatsoever . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Milka?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speake r. I have just stood to put a query to the male in the 
House that at this r ate if they keep criticising the M otion mover and whatever she is putting 
across they might scare he r. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Point of information . 
 
Hon. Nga re: Mr. Speaker protect me . 
  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Let the Hon. Member finish . 
  
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , at thi s rate of interfering with the M otion that Hon. 
Juma Boy is putting across I fear that you are trying to intimidate her , unless you have certain 
interest s that you are digging for more information for your own treasure could you please give 
the Hon. Member time to put across…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Milka I think it is very clear, it is not the Hon. 
Members , am the one who raised that issue, it is not even the Hon. Member who said…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Hon. Ngare: It is the Hon. Member, he said later Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Am the one who raised that issue about selling love so I 
wanted to know the issue of selling love…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare:  And Mr. Speaker Sir there  is selling of love, yes yes and the men know it 
best and yo u are the clients,  they are the clients. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Loud c onsultations)  
 
The Spe aker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka. Hon. Moses please, yes Hon. 
Renson?  
 
Hon. Thoya: What we are saying here I should believe that in this House we are equal, 
there  is no woman, there  is no man, we are Hon. Members here as much as we are male and 
female so that issue of fear, of intimidation must not be here. I want to applaud the women who 
are here they are Hon. Members and just feel free like Thoya or so ever, so what is very 
important even if we decide to go to the grammar or whatsoever love is big ger so let  us talk 
about sex or prostitution . We want the Mover to come clear  and we will support but do  not say 
that. I know Hon. Milka you might be playing your role as the Chair of Women Caucus but 
sometimes please spare us. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : Yes Hon. Milka on the same note when you are saying that 
men do buy love, have (??) even see n women buying love…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 So please I think we need to make that clear and you know that very well…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare: Mr. Speaker Sir … 
  
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Not unless you are confirming to this House that women are 
the most people who sell love , is that what you are trying to say ? 
  
Hon. Ngare:  Mr. Speaker Sir my sentiment was that a lady or a woman cannot sell l ove 
to herself it has to be the opposite sex therefore if we are protesting on the same what are we 
protecting ? Because if you are selling love, you are selling to the opposite sex unless it is that 
practice that is not constitutionally allowed. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Members I think let us continue, yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker actually I would just ask my Hon. 
Member to withdraw the word that we are the clients, that means we the Hon.  Members here . Let 
her find another term to use but referring to Hon. Member s as the clients Mr. Speaker it should 
be withdrawn from the Hansard. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Milka unless maybe you explain to this House 
what…  
 
(Loud c onsultations)  
 
Just relax Hon. Members . 
  
Hon. Ngare:  Mr. Speaker protect me, shouting is not allowed in this Hon ourable House.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Milka do you agree that you said that the men are the 
most clients?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  No I said men , I did not say the Hon. Members...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : You said men . 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Men. 
  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : And what is the price?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Hon. Ngare:  The price yes am ready to defend that the price ranges from how you have 
bargained and also…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hono urable… ! 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare:  And also Mr. Speaker am still explaining and it also depends on how well 
you are endowed so that you can bargain. Thank you Mr. Spea ker. 
 
(Loud c onsultations)  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Members let us not go deep on this issue I think 
Hon. Amriya just continue and try and make things transparent so that Members understand what 
you are talking about . 
  
Hon. Amriya Juma : Mr. Spe aker I think this M otion has taken a very interesting twist 
but anyway the second point was with regards to our children . Mr. Speaker, there  is a concern 
that our children find out that our public beaches are a source of entertainment when they go 
there ; there is negative exposure because there  is no regulation on the conduct of these beach 
touts and how these beach traders or even the grown -ups how they are conducting themselves . 
And also this M otion is built on the concern that the beach traders camouflag e themselves ; you 
find that one is appearing to be selling one thing but in the real sense there are selling another 
which is probably illicit drugs . 
So this M otion is a call first on our Members that it is high time that we conduct an audit 
of all traders  at the public beaches and ensure that they are all licensed or they have an 
identification number and they are selling what is on the face of it what they are selling they 
should not be purporting to sell other things and also if where others that are lic ensed under the 
liquor licensing Act were license d to sell the alcohol they should not sell it  strictly at the public 
beaches,  they should not sell it to our school going and children who are not of that age Mr. 
Speaker.  
Finally the beach touts Mr. Speaker  should be designated that this is an area of beach tout 
and I can see the House is well informed  on the nature of the business of the beach tout s so I will 
not go to details but beach tout ing should be earmarked, identified and even if need be they 
should  be licensed and they should have a modern super ior mode of operations so that they do  
not inhibit our tourists and our children from enjoying the facilities of our public beaches . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Amriya. Yes Hon. Hamis i 
Mwidani, the senior, the Majority Leader . I think you have more experience on this issue of 
beach boys?  
 
 
(Laughter)  
So please give your contribution . 
   
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Ahsante Bwana Spika infact  hata mimi 
naiunga mkono  hii Hoja … 
 
(Applause)  
 
Na naiunga mkono  kwa sababu ni kweli ni lazima ieleweke ni nani anafa nya kazi gani na 
shughuli gani, hususan  sehemu kama ya ufuoni . Bwana Spika singependa kugusia yale ambayo 
yamezungumzia kwa urefu lakini ukweli wa mambo na mambo yanafanyika…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Hakuna haja eti kuwa wengine waruka huku wakiruka huku na siku hizi kina mama ndio 
wanawafuata wazee ! Kwa hivyo hii ni ishu ambayo…  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11 (Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare: Point of order ! 
 
(Loud c onsultations)  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Nimezungumza kina mama sio 
Waheshimiwa…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare: Point of Order ! 
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Wale kina mama wako nje kule . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Milka yes?  
 
Hon. Ngare: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Once again I want to req uest that our Majority 
Leader , the senior m ost in this House , an Hon. Member that we respect so much to withdraw that 
statement that women are the one 's who follow men…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Milka there i s no problem with tha t, I do  not see 
any problem with that he is talking through experience…  
 
(Laughter)  
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare:  No he is demeaning…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Milka, this is a senior; he is a Majority Leader so I do  
not see any proble m with that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Hon. Ibrahim Omondi (Bomoa)  am still on the floor…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Milka you can give your opinion on the side…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Oh he is giving his own experience so…  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : He is giving his own experience . 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Probably that calibre  of women he meets they approach him. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : You will give your opinion yourself there  is no issue. Yes 
Hon. Mwida ni continue?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker in fact . Sasa 
nitakuwa nikitumia simu na ni hao hao itakuwa nikiwapiga picha halafu niwaonyeshe mwaona 
vituko hivyo … 
 
(Applause and l aughter)  
 
Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika sisemi kwa ubaya  ni mambo mazuri kwa sababu haswa kwa 
umri kama wangu huwa sifuati na fuatwa tu…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika kulingana na  ujuzi w angu na ninavyojua kule ufuoni  kulivyo 
nawaambia W aheshimiwa nawaomba mkitaka ku timiza haya yangu ni ya ukweli W aheshimi wa 
tutembeeni kule ufuoni  nyinyi msiseme mtaona badala ya kufuata utafuatwa hayo ni mambo 
ambayo yako ukweli k ule ufuoni.  
Hayo tunazungumzia mambo ya ufuoni  sio mambo ya Bunge lakini Bwana Spika hii 
imefikia wakati wa kutoa mapicha sasa kuja kuonyesha wat u je angalia kama ilikuwa nasema 
urongo angalia.  Kwa hivyo naku unga  Mheshimiwa Amriya kwa hii Motion  na in fact utaona 
itakapotekelezwa yataonekana hayo tunayoyasema.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwidani.  Yes Hon. Milka Moraa?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker once again I stand in support of the Motion in this 
House brought by Hon. Amriya Boy Juma because I believe that we have total control of our 
public beaches and parks and those areas we are going to enhance the tourists acti vities which in 
turn is going to improve our economy so that we have our County still shining . Now however I 
am glad that we have the Chairman Youth Gender and Sports (YGS) here , Hon. Samba and 001 
Youth Commander this raises a red flag for us because of t he many youth s that are loitering 
around those beach hotel s… 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Milka , who is 001 Youth Commande r? I think that 
name is strange...  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 (Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Hon. Moses Aran, the youth Leader…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : I do not think that is the right word, Youth Commander?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Yes Hon. Moses Aran, who is the youth leader in Mombasa County . 
  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you. It  is a connotation, it  is an acrony m that we have given him so it 
has becom e his real name but I do take note of the same, thank you. This raises a red flag of 
many youth s that are loitering along the beaches in way of getting; a way of living, trying to do 
things in order to make a living for their d aily bread.  
As much as we want them to have controll ed and removed from those areas  we also need 
to have an alternative of where we shall take them ; what shall we do  so that these young people 
do not now get into the villages and start doing mu gging, all types of robbery and killing people, 
to snatch their handbags and what have you, snatching their handbags that our Hon. Members are 
saying those ladies who are moving along the hotel beaches to approach the men for whatever 
they want .  
So we rea lly need to have plan B, yes we want to remov e them from there but what next, 
where are we taking them? Because it is a ticking bomb waiting to burst.  Otherwise the M otion 
is a wonderful one but that kind of improvement a little bit Hon. Amriya would have really 
serve d this House well. Thank you so much I support the Motion.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Moraa. Yes Hon. Rosemary Mukavi?  
 
Hon. Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me t he opportunity to support this 
Motion. It is a good one an d most of the time when am free, when i finish what am doing in my 
ward I usually go to those beaches and actually you can see a lot of youngsters loitering in 
Kongowea Ward…  
 
(Silence)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you may continue it is fine . 
 
Hon. Muk avi: Mr. Speaker Sir protect me they are asking which Ward, Kongowea 
Ward…  
(Interruption)  
(Laughter)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Maybe, she is n ot referring as an MCA to that W ard, maybe 
she is referring to her home there; she stays there in Kongowea Ward . 
 
Hon. Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes just tell us the experience at the beach. Yes?  
 
Hon. Mukavi:  I have seen a lot of those youngsters loitering around and usually they sell 
funny things Mr. Speaker and as Hon. Milka Moraa has just said if we move them from that area 
then we should be able to give them something to do because that is where they earn their living.  
Mr. Speaker I would also like to support the issue of ..., they also mug people, they also 
ask yo u for money  i have had that experience, they want to sell you funny things . I think it is a 
good M otion if implemented. With those few remarks I beg to sit down and support it fully.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. S peaker. F irst and foremo st I would like to support the 
Motion but I also have a number of issues to inform the mover of this Motion; f irst maybe in her 
observation it will be better if she would have indicated, if these  observations, observed from 
which be ach because I remember we have several.  
Now talking of the major be ach which is almost next to my W ard which is Pira tes, Jomo 
Kenyatta Public Beach;  I have the following observations , first all the beach boys as she has 
stated in her statement have identi ficatio n cards to allow them operate at  the beach and all those 
who are illegal beach boys are normally arrested daily so she should also have observe d that all 
the beach boys most of them in fact now they have cards to allow them op erate at  the beach, yes  
they have and if you want evidence I can bring it next week, they have beach operation cards.    
Secondl y there is an enforcement unit ; there is a County enforcement unit at the beach , as 
we speak I have gone there several times to release my youth s who h ave been arrested by County 
Askaris and it is the re until now so enforcement of l aw and order at the beac h especially the 
Jomo Kenyatta Beach is on and the C ounty is aware of that because ever since Governor Joho 
went and lifted the face of the beach I thi nk you saw  cabro while going to the beach. I t is well lit 
at night so Governor improve d the face of the beach, the unit of the enforcement was also put 
there, it is there up to now , I think Hon. Maimuna can also prov e that because it is in her W ard.  
Third  no drinking of alcohol or chewing of Miraa  is allowed at the beach and if you have 
gone there and you can go even today in the evening, if you want to chew miraa  you chew in 
your car, you cannot go to the beach and chew or drink alcohol, selling of alcoho l is only 
allowed at the clubs which are along the beach , not anywhere else.  
Fourth all those people operating businesses ; even those who are selling biscuits, they all 
are registered business ladies and men, nobody goes there to sell anything from anywhe re 
anyhowly , all those selling kachiri , mihogo they are registered an d they pay rates to the County 
government of Mombasa, that is another observation . 
So Mr. Speaker what happens and what am sure the Member observed is during the 
festive season or during the holidays where people flo ck the beach we normally have disruption 
because of the multitude of people. A lso i was there once in this C hristmas season and I found 
boys who were snatching phones ; there is normally robbery that happen when people are many,  
but I want to inform this House that if you go there  during  the normal days like today, like now 
in this hour and you go to the beach you will see that all the  tourists  that (??) are saying, they are 
there, they ar e moving around the beach and whoever fol lows the  tourists are  registered beach 
boys who sell those handicraft and they are registered they have I dentification cards.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 So it is an observation yes but she sh ould also be informed that the C ounty has taken the 
beach seriously and operations are very well maintained and the beach  too, so I support this 
Motion in th e notion that we not only have P irate beach, we have other public beaches  we do not 
have enforcement of law.  I want to mak e myself clear, I support this M otion in the notion that it 
does not talk all about the major beach which people think about because there are Hon. 
Members who do not know that there are some other beach es apart from Pirates so if this thing it 
should be operational in other beaches because we have some public beach in Nyal i we have 
one, we have one in Tudor Creek, we have one in Likoni so this House should resolve that, may 
be resolved that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Nyiro you are talking about beaches only not 
anything to do with the offices as we ll. 
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Sorry.  
 
The Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : You are not talking about this issue to do with offices ; it is 
just the beaches, you are touching about the beaches only , right?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  But the M otion is talking about public beaches Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay . 
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Yes the M otion is talking about public beaches so I am also contributing 
about the public be aches because the major one is P irates, the Jomo Kenyatta public beach but 
we also have some other beaches, in Nyali th ere is a public beach, in Tudor there is one, Liko ni 
there are others so if this l aw has not been enforced in the other beaches then it should be 
extended to the other beaches b ut there is total order at the P irate beach as we speak. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon.  Athman  Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika sitaki kuwa 
mnaf iki kuangukiwa na jumba mbovu, Hoja hii ilioko mbele yetu kwa mu jibu wa waliotangulia 
kuzungumza wameu nga pasi na ufahamu kwa sababu H oja hii imekosa utafiti wa  kutosha.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ni kweli katika sehemu ya nne, katika ratiba ya nne sehemu ya pili 
ama Fourth Schedule  Part 2, Sehemu ndogo ya nne kuna majukumu ambayo yamegatuliwa 
ikiwemo suala la mbuga,  fuo za bahari, bustani na burudani  ambazo zipo katika serikali G atuzi  
lakini Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti masuala haya yaliyogatuliwa mengi yapo hayajap ata kanuni 
sahihi za kuendeshwa.  
Kwa mfano katika sehemu ye nne kuna sehemu ndogo zilizotajwa ambazo ziko ch ini ya 
idara mbali mbali;  kunazo zip o katika Idara ya Michezo, kunazo zipo katika Idara ya Kilimo, 
zipo katika Idara ya B iashara, kwa hili swala la fuo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuna washika dau  
kadha wa kadha katika fuo zile.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 Tunaposema kuwe na usukumaji wa sheria, ni idara gani inachukua dhamana ya 
kutekeleza yale moja, mbili kwa kanuni ipi ambayo itakuwa imewekwa barabara ya idara zote 
hizi kuweza kutekeleza majukumu yao pasi kuwahujumu hawa washika dau.  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tangu Babu na Babu sisi tukiwa  vizalia vya Pwani  tunajua 
kwamba ndugu zetu na wazee wetu wengi wamepitia katika fuo zile wakiwa wavuvi, wakiwa ma  
Beach Boy , wakiwa watalii, wakiwa kadha wa kadha na katika haya Mheshimiwa wapo walio  
bahatika  kuunga udugu na baadhi ya watalii wa  kigeni na kuowana ima ma  Beach Boy  kuoa 
wazungu wa kike ama wazungu wa kiume kuwaoa dada zetu katika fuo hizi na kuendesha 
maisha yao pasi na bughdha Mheshimiwa.  
Mheshimiwa leo kwa Muendesha H oja hii akisema kuwekwe kanuni na kutaka kuwekwa 
sheria kali dhidi ya watumizi wa fuo zile, tutakuwako tunawanyima uhuru wao, tunawanyima 
haki wengineo wanat afuta maisha yao katika sehemu zile na Mheshimiwa ifahamike katika 
mbuga ile, si tu kuwa imegatuliwa iko chini ya Gatuzi bali pia kuna shirika la wanyama pori ama 
KWS wa na sehemu wanasimamilia na kumiliki katika sehemu zile.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa ni sambamba ama ingekuwa muafaka ya  kuwa na kanuni 
barabara ambayo ingewe za kuchambua ni tatizo gani ambalo lingeshughulikiwa na idara gani. 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kukurupu ka kwa s ababu labda aliendesha H oja binafsi ama 
aliishuhudilia ama alipewa malalamishi kuna mmoja alihujumiwa katika watembezi wa  fuoni  na 
kurupuka kutaka kuwaadhibu watu wote itakuwa sio muafaka.  
Mheshimiwa ifahamike ndugu zetu wachuuzi wanaofanya maeneo yale wa mekuwa 
wakipata taabu, mfano ulioko hai eneo la Mheshimiwa Amur, ameshuhudia wachuuzi wote 
wakifurushwa na askari wetu pasi na ilani, pasi na taa rifa pengine mtu alisikia kuna H oja hii yaja 
ya ku  enforce  shughuli fulani wakatangulia kuyatekeleza ambayo ina kuwa ni hujuma na dhulma 
kwa wakaazi wetu ambao ni walala hoi Mheshimiwa.  
Mheshimiwa kupitisha baadhi ya H oja kiholela kama hizi, zinapelekea wananchi  wetu 
wa Mombasa kutaabishwa, kupatishwa dhiki, kup atishwa taabu, kwanza arudi na H oja yake, 
akatambue h ususan ni kitengo kipi ambacho kwake yeye kina walakin na kipo chini ya idara 
gani, asilete swala la kijumla kupelekea nafasi ya ndugu zetu kuhujumiwa na kudhulumiwa 
katika shughuli zao za kila siku. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na napinga kwa nguvu zote.   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Yes Hon. Mwaka 
Mwalundonda?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. M imi naiunga mkono, naiunga 
mkono kwa yale ambayo nayaona ambayo yanatendeka ndani ya fuo zetu, mbali na Mheshimiwa 
Mwamwi ri kuzungumzia mambo na vipengel e fulani ambavyo amevitaja hapo. K wa kusema 
kweli ni jambo la kusikitisha mwanzo kama mimi katika W odi yangu kuna  shule mbili ambazo 
ni Maji S afi Primary na Mwahima Secondary hawana uwanja, uwanja wanaotumia ni ule wa 
ufuoni , wakitumia uwanja ule ule ndio uwanja wa starehe, hatuna uwanja wa shule kwa hivyo 
wanavuka barabara wanaenda kufanya mazoezi katika uwanja ule wa  ufuoni , pale pale utapata 
watu na sta rehe zao ambao kwamba  walaji miraa, wale w engine wamepakatana, wale we ngine 
wanafanya vipi , sasa…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17 Hon. Athman  Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti naomba kumtaa rifu Mheshimiwa 
ya kwamba kwa m ujibu wa kanuni za maswala ya elimu shule haipaswi kuendesha shughuli zake 
kama haina kiwanja, kwa hivyo ingekuwa muafaka kwa  shule zake ambazo hazina kiwanja 
zifungwe mara moja.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwalundonda?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana kwa kutoa taarifa hiyo lakini ningeomba  Idara  ya 
Elimu  iniruhusu kwa shida zilizoko ndani ya Wodi ya Timbwani, Idara ya Elimu  waliachia na 
shule hizo zikajengwa . Kwa hivyo huduma hiyo walikuta kwamba wanafunzi ama wananchi wa 
Timbwani hawana sehemu isipokuwa sehemu ile wakaona pia wanaweza kufanyia michezo, tena  
vile vile sehemu ile ni kiwanja ambacho kwamba ni kizuri, ina michanga mizuri ambayo 
kwamba watoto wakifanya m azoezi hawawezi kuumia.  
Kwa hivyo naunga mkono H oja ile kwa sababu kwangu mimi itaniletea natija pindi 
itakapofuatwa sheria za  fuo ili wanafunzi waweze kupata kile kiwanja vizuri na niseme pia zile 
starehe ziko lakini pindi itakapokuwa tumetoa zile sheria za upande fuo inaweza kwamba 
kutengewa sehemu za wale walaji miraa kando na kile kiwanja kikapata kuwafaidisha wale 
wanafunzi wa pale.  
Jengine n ataka kumwambia Mheshimiwa Nyiro amezungumzia hapa kulingana na 
wachuuzi wa pale ufuoni waweza kuwa na namba na pia vile vile ku charge , mimi nasema 
upande wa namba ama wa  kupata stakabadhi za kuweza kuuza biashara zao ni sawa lakini kwa 
upande wa kuwa  charge mimi nasema hilo nalipinga, tena nalipinga sana kwa sababu kuna kina 
mama ndani ya Wodi yangu ya Timbwani ni wamama walala hoi ambao kwamba wanafanya 
biashara zao kujikimu ki m aisha kwa hivyo hilo nalipinga Mswada huu.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes H on. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  I like to be understood clearly.  I did not say that they are going to be 
charged, whoever operate s a business in Mombasa County must pay for a business permit and 
those who are doing business at the beach are curren tly doing that, s o it is not a l aw that is 
coming up with Hon. Nyiro, whoever is doing business has stalls at the beach , they are paying 
normal rate s as a business person.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Yes Hon. Mwaka?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Kusema kulipa n dio ku charge , it is not you but Mombasa County , 
kwa hivyo ikiwa watakuwa wanalipa ni kama ku charge  kwamba wapate h uduma ya kufanya 
zile biashara. Kw a hivyo mimi na hilo na mimi nalipinga.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Ibrahim Oyugi?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I hono ur your Chair and this one has really 
touch ed me and I want to say that am going to oppose this particular Motion with facts. First of 
all before I give my facts, I am going to inform the Member who was just stan ding that first you 
need to know the definition of a beach . 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 A beach is a place which is set aside specifically for people, people may go there to enjoy 
themselves, people may go there to relax, people go there to release even stress Mr. Speaker and 
I being  one of them sometimes when home affairs have become so much hard on me I normally 
take a leave and go and relax around the beach and relaxing around the beach does not mean or 
does not dictate you need to go with who, you are free to go with anybody who c an make you 
happy and relax your mind and therefore I want to say such a place should not be a place where 
the school children should even be allowed around that particular place…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 And this one has really annoyed me when the Ho n. Member said t hat there is a s chool 
which is utilizing that particular field, they are using a beach field to play and Mr. Speaker I want 
to assure you with the power given by this House a m going to investigate with my C ommittee to 
find out how the school came to find i ts field in a beach and that school will be unable and in fact 
will be closing it very soon Mr. Speaker Sir.  
  
(Applause)  
 
Mr. Speaker let me go to my point the reason as to why am opposing this Motion, I want 
to say we did not come to this world to fear t he future but we came to shape up the future, I don’t 
know why Hon. Member who has come up with this Motion is fearing what is happening at the 
beach . Mr. Speaker Sir, what is there is that we have , our able I nspectorat e which is being guided 
by the l aw wh ich is made by t his particular House and those l aws are already in place…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Point of order Mr. Speaker , under Standing order 104, 
(f)… 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry under Standing Order?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Chini ya Kanuni za Bunge  104 (f), Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti, Mheshimiwa anayeo ngea sasa hivi twaomba kupitia K iti chako tuangazie 
resolution  Amriya a lizokuja nazo katika Bunge hili. T unap oteza muda wa Bunge kuongea nje ya 
mada Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti. Resolution ; 
(1). The County Government of Mombasa to conduct an audit genuine of Beach T raders,  
kama anapingana na hiyo Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti ni bora aje apinge Hoja na mba moja.  
(2). Enforcem ent unit to ensure that alcohol is not sold to under aged person,  kama 
anapinga hiyo apinge kwa misingi gani Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
(3). The C ounty government to ensure that all public beaches are free from harassment of 
the beach goers and children by th e beach touts .  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hizi ndio H oja za kupingwa, asiende nje ya mada kupoteza 
muda wa Bunge, hizi ndio resolution  za Mheshimiwa Amriya. Ahsante sana.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Oyugi?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I do not agree w ith the Hon. Member and remember 
when you are in this House each and every person is entitle d to give his views freely without 
objection, without fear and freely and therefore…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  You know Mr. Speaker we are learning everyday and it is good if you are 
corrected you follow the path, you give views in accordance to the rules and regulations laid here 
so Mr. Bomoa  I know you are very good writer or so ever a lot of grammar and English  but 
kindly oppose in accordance to the factor that have been enumerated b y the sponsor of the 
Motion, stop that grammar, drama what so ever it won’t help.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nyiro, I don’t think you want to say the same 
issue again.  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  No Mr. Speaker as a teacher . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes but Members you are talking about the same issue and 
you yourself are repeating the same issue.  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  No. No Mr. Speaker we cannot sit as the education fraternity is being 
intimid ated;  first I want to inform Hon. Bomoa  being the Chair of E ducation that he has n o 
powers or so ever to close a s chool, he has no p owers neither does this County government of 
Mombasa have powers to close a school because a Primary s chool  is a function of  the National 
government.  
 Secondly the field which is at the beach  is the public land, t he children of Kenya are 
citizen s of this Country ; they can use any land, anywhere as long as it is public. There is no 
restriction; yes there is no restriction that s chools should only use field s along the schools or 
along in their compound. So this field is vacant and the school has no compound for them to use; 
it is only good for them to use the field which is nearby. So whatever the Member is saying the 
mover of the  Motion that this place should be secure so that if the children can go to use it it can 
be safer for them . As a teacher Bomoa and a Chair of Education you should be able to see that 
children using the field because they do  not have a field are protected b ut to say yo u are going to 
close the school,  we have problem with the Chair of Education.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Hon. Members , let’s get serious now please! 
Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I will not go into what the Hon. 
Members are discussing because we are almost getting out of the business of the day and we 
have started discussing something else. Mr. Speaker the Motion is good but according to the 
contributions of the Members and also the expe rience I have  one or two public  beaches it is like 
the Hon. Member who has just…  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20 (Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Bwire, I thought you are o n a point of order?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  No. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Can you just let the Hon. Member to finish then s o that I can 
give you the chance, please?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I am not going to listen to side shows but I am going to 
go straight to my points because side shows will not prevail me from...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Just contin ue Hon. Member.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I am an elected Member presenting Airport Ward and therefore I am 
speaking on their behalf.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  
 
Hon. Omondi : Okay Mr. Speaker Sir, I am opposing this Motion with reasons: Number 
one; when th e Member talked about the issue of alcohol, the prohibition , we know that alcohol 
first of all is not prohibited in this Country, alcohol is allowed but it should not be abused. Mr. 
Speaker Sir it should not be abused because it is allowed in the law and I ’m 100  per cent sure 
that the I nspectorate section is doing its work well therefore the issue of sayi ng that we should 
increase the I nspectorate at the side of the beach…  
  
(Interruption)  
 
 Wait first I am on the floor speaking. It is just going to bring i ssues and harassment 
around our beaches Mr. Speaker Sir. You know very well that the se Inspectors or these 
policemen when they are given an i nch of power, they use or utilize too much; more than what 
they have been given and therefore to me as an elected M ember in Airport Ward…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mohamed?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kwa point of information . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nataka kueleza Nyumba hii kuwa 17th July, 2017  Gavana Joho 
aliidhinisha sheria  ya Utalii  na ukienda ukiangalia Part five, S ection 24 of our Act  mtakuta 
maneno haya tunayoyazungumza hivi sasa yamo kwenye ile  sheria .  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa aliyeileta hino Hoja  ni kusema kuwa kutilia nguvu yale man eno 
ili Kaunti ipate kufanya kazi vile inavyotakikana. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim p lease wind up?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  As I am winding up, I have already talked about the issue of alcohol. Mr. 
Speaker Sir now I am talki ng about the issue  of local tourism. Mr. Speaker S ir local tourism 
should also be promoted and I have said that we know the nature of the Kenyans they tend to 
develop fear towards the policemen o r towards the I nspectorate and the moment we officialise 
this we now say that we should do more enforcement at the beach most of us will not be able 
even to reach at the beach , that is true.  
Mr. Speaker Sir another thing we know our Country and we know our County people 
look for money and when this is going to be e nforced more than the way it is now as the Hon. 
Member has just said this law is already in place and I am saying that these people are going to 
take the advantage of the innocent people who are going to the beach and start extorting money 
from them...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, you are opposing. Thank you.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir and I oppose it as an elected Member.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Oyugi. Y es Hon. Kitula?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti mimi nimesimama kuweza kuunga mkono H oja ambayo imeletwa na Mheshimiwa 
Amriya an kusema kweli Mhes himiwa Mwenyekiti k wanza ningependa labda kupitia K iti chako 
Serjeant aweze kumpatia maji Mheshimiwa Bomoa maana naona ni pressure  imempanda...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Hoja iliyoletwa katika Bunge letu iko wazi na 
mimi nitaweza kuzungumzia kipengele baada ya kipengele. Kipengele c ha kwanza Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kinazungumzia kwamba serik ali ya Kaunti  waweze kufanya audit  tayar i 
wanabiashara wako pale tunafahamu lakini je are they genuine  au je ni wale wanastahili kufanya 
kazi hizo? Sasa leo hii Mheshimiwa Amriya amesema kwamba Idara  yetu ya Inspectorate  
ambayo tayari tunafahamu katika baa dhi ya ufuo wako katika bahari hizo. Lakini je kupitia I dara 
ya Biashara  na Utalii  waweze kufanya audit  kwa kuchunguza hawa watu ambao wanamiliki au 
wanaofanya  biashara katika fuo zetu ni wale wanastahili na wale wanaolipa kodi katika Kaunti 
yetu.  
Vile vile Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Enforcement U nit ningependa vile  vile ku weza 
kufahamisha Mheshimiwa Bomo a kwamba haw aongezewi tayari twafahamu wapo;  Mheshimiwa 
Amriya ameweza kuzungumzia vizuri sasa hivi kwa kusema kwamba ile pombe inayouzwa 
katika ile sehemu iwez e kuangaziwa kuhaki kisha kwamba haiuzwi kuwa watu chini ya umri wa 
miaka 18. 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22 Hilo tu Mheshimiwa Amriya ndilo ameweza kuzungumzia na Mheshimiwa Hatimy pia 
ameweza kuzungumzia kuwa tayari hii ni sheria  lakini leo hii tunaipitisha kama Hoja ili iende 
moja k wa moja kwa Waziri  na yeye ataangazia kulin gana na vile sisi mapendekezo yetu katika 
Bunge tumeweza kupitisha kuhakikisha kuwa anatoa huduma kulingana na sisi mapendekezo 
yetu tukiyapitisha katika Bunge letu katika siku ya leo.  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kusema kweli kipengele ambacho kimenigusa mimi zaidi ni 
cha tatu ambapo kusema kweli wakati hivi sasa fuo yetu hususan  ya Jomo Kenyatta ; nashukuru 
kupitia Serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa waliweza kutengeza barabara na kukawekwa kamera za 
kisasa watu wakiwa katika o fisi ya Shimanzi wanaweza kuona kinachoendelea pale katika 
shughuli za Jomo Kenyatta.  Lakini la kushangaza Mhesh imiwa Mwenyekiti ni kwamba katika 
kiingilio  ni mahali ambapo watu wanaingia ovyo hujui anayeingia ni yupi na hujui atokae ni 
yupi? Na ile ni seh emu ya umma Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sasa pendekezo langu ningependa 
baada ya hapa labda Mheshimiwa Amriya aweze ku hakikisha ya kwamba kupitia I dara hii iweze 
kuangazia  angalau  pale katika kiingilio kuweze kuwa na hizi mashine za kisasa za  kutambua 
wanaoingia  kama yuko salama na anayetoka pia kama yuko salama.  
Vile vile pia ningependa Mheshimiwa Amriya aweze kukutana na Waziri baada ya 
kupitisha Hoja hii maana nitamuunga mkono kwa sababu sehemu ile ni sehemu ya burudani na 
sehemu ile ni sehemu ya utalii kuweze  kuwekwa mitambo ya  WiFi ili watu wakiwa pale 
wananchi waweze  kutuma  picha ili tuweze kuwahakikishia bure ya wamba utalii wetu unazidi 
kuendelea kwamba itazidi kusambaza nchi nzima kwamba Mombasa kuna bahari ya kisasa na 
wananchi wengi wako Mheshimiwa Mwen yekiti.  
Kwa hivyo huo ndio mchango wangu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na vile  vile ningependa 
kuhakikisha kwamba W abunge wenzangu tuweze kuweka nia nzuri kwa Hoja hii nia yake ni safi 
tusome vipengele tusiende nje ya mada. Tuangalie hivi vipengele moja hadi cha t atu mimi sina 
shida na Mheshimiwa Bomoa kwa sababu yeye alipoingia tu tayari alisimama nikashindwa tayari 
hajapata Order P aper tayari ashasimama angezungumzia nini? Kwa hivyo singependa kumkosoa 
lakini ana  haki ya  kuweza kuongea kwa niaba ya wananchi wake…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon. Oyugi?  
 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir the Member who has just stood should stand and give his 
views. Mr. Speaker Sir  he is debating this particular M otion he is not here to debate the Hon. 
Member of Airp ort for his information. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes I agree with you.  Hon. Charles Kitula!  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hili ni Bunge…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think you are here you don’ t know maybe he was reading 
the Order P aper outsid e there. So I Know you are the Chief W hip maybe when you were trying 
to whip the Member he was not around but please!  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ukitaka kuthibitisha maneno 
yangu a naangalia tai yake alivyovaa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti…  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Tazama ameingia na presha katika Bunge hili hatujui ametoka mahali gani hadi kuingia 
mahali hapa. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hili ni Jumba la debate mimi naunga mkono 
na nitahakikisha kw amba tutaweza kuunga mkono na kuweza kuhakikisha kuwa pia H oja hii 
imeweza kupita. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker Sir it is not right for Hon. Member s to look at the way 
the Hon. Member is dressed; he i s well dressed , very smart with the way  he has dressed. T hank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : So are you contributing on the M otion Hon. Amur?  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur : No I was just saying that he should no t inter…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : What is your contribution because since we know that you 
are also another experience d man in this House?  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker!  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : So just give us your contributions ple ase! 
 
Hon. Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker the prayers by the mover ... I want to say alcohol is not 
for sa le for people under 18 years and it  is a law in this Country; t hat is nobody should sell 
alcohol to any person who is under age. Mr. Speaker at the same time  we have security teams at 
every point of luxury entertainment places, the wording should be to enforce or the security 
enforce their laws but we have laws and maybe to say we put additional booths in those places 
for security purposes. Thank you Mr. Speak er. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Amur I thin k that the right word she used 
'enforcement'.  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So that it is what she said , 'enforcement going to ensure'  and 
to ensure is to enforce.  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur:  As much as we have the enforcers b ut the enforcers themselves  are 
not enforcing these laws Mr. Speaker.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
24 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So that is what she said. She said the enforcement unit to 
ensure; to ensure is to make…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Murfad Amur : We build some booth in these places whereby offenders can be 
caught and taken to either police custody or anywhere else Mr. Speaker. So we put a booth Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon. Renson . I think you have already 
contributed or? 
 
Hon. Thoya:  No. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Not yet, Okay?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think it is very important to ensure that wherever 
we have good things like the beaches or a lot of entertainment there must be law and or der and I 
want t o support this M otion which again Hon. Hatimy has articulating that already there is an 
Act and therefore  it is just to give energy to the CEC in cha rge of tourism to ensure all these  
thing s do happen. We understand that some of the beaches already are fol lowing the rules and 
regulations of this Act but for those beaches which I think very soon the new found Kibarani 
beach if at all this thing will be realized very soon will be having surging numbers of people 
which I expect these points to be addressed the re.  
So I support it but as much as I support it Hon. Speaker sometimes take  an opportunity to 
protect the M embers because there are some M embers that need to address their points through 
the Speaker they do  not need to become physical by turning around sh owing fingers ... please Mr. 
Speaker protect us from this one Hon. Ibrahim Oyugi sometimes he gets physical and I think if at 
all you do  not put your power.  Kindly…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :   Hon. Renson the accusation I am sorry I didn’ t see that and 
I don’t know maybe you can tell this House , what was he doing?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I think as much as maybe you have not seen the said man was 
turning around showing fingers from that end to this end and I want to say in the near futur e if 
you are allow him he will be jumping to the other end, so please protect this House.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think yes . Hon. Ibrahim is it true that you have been doing 
those things?  
 
 Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir first it is not true because first of all the M ember who 
just spoke is abusing your Chair . Remember Mr. Speaker S ir you were there and you were facing 
this side , you are seeing everybody. He is able to see when I am turning around and you are not 
able to see that he should apologise fo r that.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
25  Mr. Speaker Sir number two I want also to urge Hon. Members that let us respect one 
another in this Hono urable House…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Just hold on Hon. Ibrahim, relax! Yes Hon. Renson?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  I think maybe the pr oblem is the place he is seated. I think he is just 
repeating the same thing , kindly address the Speaker do  not turn around and show us fingers 
some of us will run away. He is repeating the same mistake Mr. Spe aker, p lease protect the 
House and if at all l et him be at the last chair so that if he points he points to the wood.  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  (Off Microphone )…that not all the characters Mr. Speaker S ir, all the 
chara cter traits are the same. Mr. Speaker Sir.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi...  
nasimama chini ya kifungu namba 94, ya limitation of debate . Itabidi Kiongo zi wa Walio Wengi  
aje na Mswada  kabla Hoja  haijaanza ya kupeana wakati kwa sababu sasa imekuwa Mheshimiwa 
Spika it is only Leader of M ajority  anapatiwa wakati mwingi kuongea ndani ya Bunge.  Wale 
wengine hupatiwa dakika tano dakika tano it is not fair  mweng ine azungumze dakika 20 mmoja 
azungumze dakika  10 na bado kuwa mtu anasimama anazidi kuongea tena kuongea . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika nafikir i 94 hiyo sasa ifanye kazi,  Standing O rder 94  ili tuwe na  nidhamu 
ndani ya hii Nyumba. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Taarifa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Hatimy I think no one has spoke n more than 20 
minutes but the Members keep on r ising and saying I have a point of information, point of 
information! So Hon. Membe rs let us be serious. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Vile vile Katiba kulingana na kifungu au Standing O rder 
yetu inatoa ruk hsa Mheshi miwa kuweza kuongea lugha ya Kii ngereza, kuongea lugha ya 
Kiswahili na vile  vile pia  lugha ya ishara. S asa ikiwa lugha ya ishara ama ikiwa Mheshimiwa ana  
uwezo zaidi kutumia mikono anaweza kunyamaza ili aweze kutumia mikono na tutaweza 
kumuelewa pia. Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir I am sorry!  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
26 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Leila, are you o n a point of information?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I have point of information Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You want to contribute on the debate and you Hon. 
Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi : Point of in formation Mr. Speaker Sir. T he Member … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Information on what?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  He is pointing fingers at me Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 He seriously talked about me and I want to inform you Mr. Speaker Sir that let him 
concentrate on the facts on what has brought us t oday. Number two Mr. Speaker Sir it is not to 
be good for M embers to start intimidating one another , remember while in this House we are 
concerned with what is here; personal issues should remain outside. Thank you and protect the 
Members Mr. Speaker Sir a s every Member has a right to speak and again the character traits 
that are built in him are not the character traits that are built in you…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Member again just stop pointing fingers on other 
Members , just relax.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir pointing fingers is feature of enforcement and there is no 
order…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Oyugi you j ust complained that  you don’t like that 
Hon. Kitula was pointing fingers to you. You have ju st said that now that you don’t like it and 
again you are doing the same thing to him.  
 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker S ir he was intimidating me and therefore when he come 
back I need protection.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : You are protected!  
 
Hon. Omondi : I should give my views freely.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : You have given out your views.  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
27 Hon. Omondi : As an elected M ember Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyache : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi h ii ya kuweza 
kuchangia. Mimi pia nimesimama kidete kuunga mkono Hoja hii iliyokuja na Mheshimiwa 
Amriya , ni Hoja nzuri sana kwa sababu hata mimi pia naweza kuelezea kuhusu masuala ya 
baharini. Mimi mwenyewe nishakwenda  ufuoni  na wanangu na nikaona mambo yo te ambayo 
yametajwa hapa yakitendeka pale, watu  wamekaa vipembeni wakila  miraa, wengine wamekaa 
vipembeni wakinywa, yote hayo ni mambo yanafanyika . Mheshimiwa Spika yanafanyika mtu 
asibishe aseme hayafanyi ki yanafanyika. Sisi hapa kama W abunge ni tusukume  vile 
imesemekana kuna sheria  ya Kaunti  na pia…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Leila if you make it clear kukula miraa na kunywa  is a 
normal thing , it is not something which is...  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Naongea hivyo kwa sababu ya watoto wetu amb ao wako chini ya umri wa 
miaka 18… 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So when you are saying ..., just express it  so you are talking 
about watoto ambao wako chini ya miaka  18, yeah.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Naongea kwa ajili ya watoto walio chini ya miaka 18, ni hatari sana 
Mheshimiwa S pika kwa sababu wakiona watu wakifanya mambo kama yale wanaweza kuingia 
katika huo uraibu na pia wanaweza kuharibikia hap o hapo hicho kizazi chao kinaweza kuwa 
kizazi cha wal evi, kizazi cha miraa, ambapo m toto pia maisha yake ya naweza kuharibika. Kwa 
hivyo mimi naongelea kupitia hawa watoto na imesemekana pia Kaunti yetu usalama  iko huko 
inawajibika. Ni sisi basi tuisukume  Idara ya Usalama  yetu iweze kufuatilia hii pombe yaingia 
vipi pale au hu yu m toto mdogo kwa nini anauziwa kil eo? Tufuatilie tusukume waweze 
kuwajibik a zaidi lakini mimi Mheshimiwa S pika nimeunga mkono mia fil mia.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Ramla? Y es Hon. Raphael?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am Raphael not unless you are Ramla Raph ael, 
thank you Mr.  Speaker. Mr. Spe aker I also beg to support the M otion and all the prayers made by 
the Motion Mover are genuine and fundamental.  
We have as a County, we have much focused on one public beach which is Kenyatta 
Public B each but we have ign ored other public beaches t hat is when you find much of these  evil 
things are happening, the Shelly B each, the l ikes of Kongowea, the likes of Small Beach I have 
in my W ard, also Junda B each, Mavimavi B each called Mavim avi B each.  
Mr. Speaker  I think that it is high time the C ounty government put emphasis in all the 
public beaches we have around, that these  vices do not arise and as the earlier speaker had said 
we need to emphasize . 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
28 This is  because it is like there is already a policy but maybe we are slow  in implementing 
the policy, s o we need to emphasize on the stakeholders and the authorities in charge to take 
charge and fully implement the policies that are within. Otherwise Mr. Speaker I would also 
wish to echo the sentiments raised by Hon . Chief W hip and some other Hon . Member s 
concerning the char acters of some of us here. Mr. S peaker we need to know who to sit where , 
sometimes it is very dangerous if I am here and get personal I can even jump there, so maybe 
Hon. Ibrahim should b e allocated somewhere near the S erjeant-At-Arms so that in  case of 
anything Serjeant-At-Arms takes control of him. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Raphael Bwire. Yes Hon. Said Ramla?  
 
Hon. Said:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa hii nafasi. Nataka kuiung a hii Hoja 
na H oja zote hapa ni muhimu na nataka kusema kuwa kulikuwa na kesi ya mlemavu auza bidhaa 
zake ufuoni  na kuna Manispaa  walikuwa wanamsumbua kwa sababu hana idhibati yoyote akaja 
ofisi yangu na tukaweza kumsaidia. Kwa ufupi ni kuwa watu wako amba o wanafuatilia vitu 
ambazo zinauzwa kitu ambacho nataka tufanye ni kuwa wawe na proper  enforcement  au hawa 
Beach  Boys wanauza wapewe sare ambayo itawatambulisha  kuwa hawa watu wana vitambulisho  
vyao wametambulika na Mombasa Kaunti na wako kw enye kazi ambay o inatambulika. Vile ile 
naunga kuwe na Police B ooth ambayo itasaidia kuleta usalama kwenye mazingira ya ufuoni. 
Kwa hayo machache naunga huu M swada. Ahsante sana.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes H on. Mwaka.  
 
Hon. Mwaka Zahoro:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker for giving me this chance. I stand to 
support the M otion Mr.  Speaker; we  all know that Mombasa is known to be a tourist destination 
and it is also known for its sandy beaches. For this we need to put sanity i n our beaches and 
restore order in these  places. Mr. Speaker, most of the S peakers were going out of the order but 
we want to  restore sanity in our beaches; i ssues of inse curity have been reported in these  beaches  
and it is high time that as a C ounty we take charge of the beache s that are entitled to us as a 
County.  
Mr. Speaker S ir, issues of rape cases have been reported i n these  beaches, our women and 
children have been mistreated in these beaches, we need to put things in order by iden tifying 
those people operating o n the beaches and tagging the m at places where  these things are not 
done. As H on. Speaker has said, an Act is already in place, we need to emp hasize in this and 
enforce the Motion that the H on. Speaker has just brought to the H ouse, and with this Mr.  
Speaker I beg to support the M otion. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker to have given me this opportunity to also air my 
views. Mr. Speaker Sir I stand to oppose the M otion…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 With the following reasons. Mr. Speake r Sir it is very well known in all angles that a 
repeat of event which is already in measure is a big problem, so bringing such issues in  form of 
Motion I do  not think they are well placed.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
29  The mover of this M otion Mr.  Speaker I do really respect her bec ause I understand she is 
in the Legal Committee, w hat is lacking here is the word control; c ontro l has gone out of hands 
of the E nforcement Department, that means they have relaxed . Now I do  not think it is prop er for 
this to be brought as a M otion, I thin k the label led D epartment would have as well written a 
letter to the same Department to show cause of action as to why already the mandate has been 
given to them and yet they cannot enforce it…  
 
(Applause)  
 
  Once a policy has been passed, once another has  been also presented in the public by His 
Excellency th e Governor, then the D epartment in charge, if it will relax then I do  not think Mr.  
Speaker it is right for  such to be brought again as a M otion. It is as well as diminishing our 
effort. I would r ather  tell my colleague in the L abour to take action ; in fact because of this 
because he has all the tools to follow up.  
 Mr. Speaker S ir, a beach without touts i s not a beach, a beach without Beach Boys and 
Beach girls can never be a beach. When you see, Mr.  Speaker the most international world 
beaches, nationwide like the one in Singapore and Malaysia, going to the beach means you are 
going there fully relaxed, that means you can go naked, you can go anyhow , any style depending 
that you are safe secure and yo u do not have anybody. Let  us call a thief to be as a thief, but not 
take such act ivities to be a penalty to the B each touts and everybody else.  
 What I want to say is that already both t he national government and the C ounty 
government has already put gre at mea sures and rules on our beaches, w hat remains is the control 
and en forcement from our D epartment which we have them h ere, so I stand to oppose this 
Motion because it lacks basic a nd merit to be brought in this H ouse, thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon . Khat ri): Thank you H on. Nzai. Yes H on. Tobias.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you H on. Speaker. Hon . Speaker I have heard M embers 
contributing and also there are also thos e who are of opinion that this M otion is not good. Hon . 
Speaker I have just a few observations; most of the Members who are opposing the M otion I do  
not know their bas is of argument but the prayers...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honorable that is not your busine ss, you give your 
contributions.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker I am building my Mo tion, I am building...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Samba just do your contribution because there is no 
need fo r you to do observation of the Members, w e will do that and if  it comes to vote and even 
the M embers will vote, there is no i ssue with that, we will do that part and just give us your 
contribution if you are either opposing or proposing.  
 
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
30  Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker as I have said before I sat down and I observed, whate ver I 
observed I will tell the M embers so it is upon them to b uy or not. Hon . Speaker, the prayers;  
  
1. The County government of Mombasa to conduct an audit of genuine beach traders , that is 
a genuine request.  
2. Enforcement unit to ensure that alcohol is not sold to underage persons , that is a genuine 
request.  
3. The C ounty government to ensure that all public beaches are free from harassment of 
beach goers and children by the beach touts.  
 
 Those are three genuine requests of which the measures ...they are already measures when 
put in place well, I think the M otion mover had good intentions, so I fail to understand why we 
debate a lot and the prayers are as good as we would have ado pted them as e arlier as yesterday. 
Thank you H on. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Samba. Hon . Members I think that 
everyone had a chance to contribute. So we are now going to give it to the Motion Mover to give 
her replies. Yes Hon . Amriya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I t is evident that our public 
beaches is a matter that is very close to our hearts, based on the time we have spent deliberating 
on the same Mr. Speak er. Whatever the position that M embers have taken it is because the public 
beaches are  very dear and we need to bring sanity as well as one of our Members have stated Mr.  
Speaker .  
 Mr. S peaker my prayers were quite straight forward that we know in some beaches there 
are traders who are licensed but w hat we want to achieve by this M otion is that we want to do an 
audit, an audit means an inspection or an investigation of those lice nses; are they genuine  for 
those who at all have licenses . Are they genuine? Are they operating? Because as earlier stated 
there are others who appear to be selling A while in essence they are selling B to our kids which 
is a matter close to all of us, our  children are our future  Mr. S peaker.  
 So I urge this House and all M embers  in good faith to support this M otion on the 
understanding of the three crowns that have been brought forward ... that I have brought forward  
Mr. S peaker, that one ; our enforcement should be at the A game and exercise diligence and high 
integrity in the enforcement that children should not by any chance be exposed to . I know the 
law is there but my M otion is about enforcement and if it passes it goes directly to the 
implem enters whic h is in the various D epartments to act on it because this is a matter that i s very 
crucial to us and those Beach T outs that are those that are registered, we make sure that all of 
them are registered.  I hear one of the Members that has just left ...Hon. Mem ber from Bamburi 
has applauded one of the beaches, that is Pirate B each that is public bea ch but there are other 
beaches H on. Members that als o need these laws and even the Pirates Beach is not at the 100 per 
cent.  
 So we nee d to work on it, so I urge H on. Members to support this M otion in good faith 
and also the ba ck will stop at Implementation Committee to see that these  sentiments ha ve been 
implemented, otherwise t hank you very much.  
July 3 1, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           69 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansa rd Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
31  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Juma. Hon . Members I now pu t the 
question that this House adopts the Motion by Hon. Juma Boy on c ontrol of public beaches . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
 Yes C lerk, next order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Thank you Honorable Members, honourable members this house stands adjourned unti l 
Wednesday 31stJuly, 2019 at 2: 30p.m.  
 
The House rose at 12:09p.m.  
 
 
   
 
 
 