March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 1st March , 2018  
The House  met at 2 :45p.m. 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 The Deputy Speaker:  Have your seats. Yes, Clerk?  
PETITIONS  
 Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you for your indulgence Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker Sir, I wish to bring to the attention of the House  that the Committee on Justice and 
Legal Affairs has on the 27th February , 2018 received a petition from one Ber nard Obera. Mr. 
Speaker the petition request s the review of the interview process of the 4th and 5th Member of 
the County Assembly Service Board. Mr. Speaker with your permission if I could s kim 
through the petition it reads as follows.  Mr. Speaker the p etition is dated on the 19th February , 
2018 and it has been addressed to the Chairperson Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs, 
County Assembly of Mombasa.  
 
(Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya Juma read)  
 
Dear Madam,  
Request for review of the interview process of the 4th and 5th Member to the County 
Assembly Service Board .  
 It goes ahead and says ; 
I would like to request your Committee to look into the above mentioned matter 
how each candidate who turned up for the interview on Monday 6th November, 
2017 and Tuesday 7th November , 2017 performed, qualifications and marks scored 
during the interview by listening to the Hansard records to find out how each 
candidate answered the questions asked and whether all candidates who turned up 
for the interview had all the clearance d ocuments on the interview date from the 
following institutions ; 
The Criminal Investigation Department  
The Higher Education Loans Board  
The Kenya Revenue Authority  
The Ethics and Anti Corruption  
 
The letter goes ahead and says ; 
The investigation by your Committee will make those who attended the interview to 
be satisfied by knowing how they performed, ranked and finally who emerged top 
during the interview and become 4th and 5th Member of the County Assembly 
Service Board.  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 Finally the letters says ; 
I her eby attach the names of those who were shortlisted for the above interview and 
I am looking forward to expeditious response and many thanks indeed in advance.  
Yours faithfully  
Mr. Bernard M. Obera  
Cc.  The Clerk of the County Government  
 Speaker  
 Secret ary, County Assembly Service Board  
 Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs had a subsequent meeting 
on the 20th February , 2018 at 2 :30p.m after looking at the petition and discussing in depth it 
was unanimously resolved to dismiss the peti tion up initial on the following grounds Mr. 
Speaker.   
 That the petition has failed to meet the requirement of the Standing Or ders and the 
law in this manner; t he petition has been brought out of time contrary to Section 7(10) of the 
Public Appointments Co unty Assembly Approval Bill , 2014, the second ground for the 
dismissal Mr. Speaker is that the petition was submitted to the Committee on Justice as 
opposed to the Clerk of the County Assembly pursua nt to the Standing Order 195(1). L astly 
Mr. Speaker the f inal ground on the dismissal by the Justice and Legal Committee of the said 
petition is that the petition was not accompanied by an attachment of signatures as required 
by the Standing Order 200.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to rest the report on the peti tion. 
 The Deputy Speaker:  So the Clerk to communicate to the petitioner Mr. Bernard 
Obera on the grounds as to why the petition was dismissed by the Justice Committee. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
LAYING OF PAPERS  
 
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I request the Chair 
to grant me permission to consolidate orders  number 5 and number 6 so that I can table the 
report.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Hatimy as this is a House  of rules and procedures 
we would like you to pr oceed as per in the Standing Orders ; you can lay the papers as they 
appear in the order paper.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ok Mr. Speaker, I wish to table th e report on the vetting 
of the N ominee for 4th Member for the County Assembly Service Board.  
 
(Paper Lai d) 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Clerk?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker on behalf of the Committee on 
Appointments I wish to table the R eport on the vetting of the 5th Member. Thank you.  
(Paper Laid)  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Members before we proceed I acknowledge the 
presence of the Hon . Members from Kiambu County Assembly and I wi ll name as per the list 
with me. S o if the Hon . Member is in the public gallery he/she will stand and bow.  
Hon. James Kimani   
Hon. Joackim Njama  
Hon. Thaki Macharia  
Hon. Philip Njoroge  
Hon. Sophia Mutuguti  
Hon. Susan Muigai  
Hon. Margaret Njeri  
Hon. Margaret Gatonye  
Hon. Joseph Karichu  
Hon. Kaben Daniel  
Hon. Eunice Mwega  
Hon. Chris Karumba  
Hon. Gathemu Mbiwi  
Mr. Kenneth Mwiti    Clerk Assistant  
Mr. Sam uel Nganya Muchai  Hansard Reporter  
Mr. David Kungu    The Serjeant -At-Arms 
 
(Hon . Members and staff from County Assembly of Kiambu  bowed before the House ) 
 
 Thank you and you are much welcomed to the Mombasa County Assembly. Yes 
Clerk you may proceed.  
 
SPECIAL MOTION  
 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker on behalf of the 
Committee on Appointment I wish to give a notice of the following M otion a pproval for 
Appointment of the N ominee for 4th Member of the County Assembly  Service Board. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Clerk?  
 
APPROVAL FOR APPOINTM ENT OF THE NOMINEE FOR  4TH MEMBER OF THE COUNTY  
ASSEMBLY  SERVICE BOARD  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speake r. Mr. Speaker I am here again to 
give a notice of Motion approval of the N ominee of 5th Member of the County Assembly 
Service Board. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma Boy.  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Hon.  (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Spe aker. Pursuant to Standing Or der 
41 (2) I wish to table the Notice P aper the next week commencing 28th February , 2018 to 2nd 
March , 2018 .  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes proceed?  
 
 (Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Clerk just a minute, the Hon . Member is sti ll on the floor.  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya Juma : Ok, thank you again Mr. Speaker . Pursuant to the same 
order 41(2) I wish to read out the Notice paper commencing 26th February to 2nd March , 
2018. Mr. Speaker the Business of Tuesday 6th March , 2018 at 2: 30p.m wil l be a M otion of 
installation of security light in every building or House  in Mombasa  County by Hon. Charles 
Kitula M ember of County Assembly Frere Town Ward.  Mr. Speaker further the Business of 
Wednesday 7th March , 2018 at 9:00 a.m we will have a paper on Chikungunya  fever by the 
Chairperson Committee Health that is Hon. Kibwana Swa leh Baya. On the same date at 
9:30a.m you will also have a paper on sponsorship of W ard soccer tournament by the 
Chairman on Committee on Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affai rs that is Hon. Moses 
Aran.  On the same date Wednesday 7th March , 2018 at 2 :30p.m we shall have a notice of 
Motion on the status of cleanliness in the County by Hon. Shebe Athuman, Chairman 
Committee on Environment, Waste Management and Energy. Further Mr.  Speaker on 
Wednesday at 2 :30p.m. we shall have a N otice of M otion on the status of b ursaries within the 
County by the Chairperson on Committee on Education, IT and MV 2035 , that is Hon. 
Ibrahim Omondi. Finally Mr. Speaker on Thursday, 8th March , 2018 at 2 :30p.m, w e shall 
have Statements from M embers of the County Assembly. Thank you so much.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Amriya but for Hansard records it will be 
5th March , 2018, the b usinesses will commence next week then correct yourself please.
 Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya Juma:  Ok, thank you Mr. Speaker I wish to amend my 
previous statement by saying the Notice P aper on 5th March , 2018 to 8th March , 2018. Thank 
you very much.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Clerk?  
 
STATUS OF THE SECURI TY LIG HTS IN THE COUNTY  
 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Tobias Samba . 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes thank you Hon. Speaker. P ursuant to Standing Order 41 2(c) I 
rise to seek a statement from the Chairperson , Committee on Transport Infrastructure and 
Public Works on the status of the security lights in the County. Hon. Speaker despite the 
tremendous efforts by the County Government in lightening up the City, some of the security 
lights have not been properly maintained as a result cases of insecurity have been reported in 
the Count y in places where there are no proper lightings . Hon. Speaker i made an inquiry at 
the D epartment of Transport and I nfrastructure and the response was that the supplier had not 
brought the bulbs, the House  wishes to establish the following from the  County Government 
of Mombasa Mr. Speaker.  In the statement the Chairperson should inquire into the report on 
the status of al l security lights in the county, t he measures that the County Government is 
taking in order to fix the problem, and w hat was the agreement  between the County 
Government and supplier on the maint enance of lights.  Thank you Hon . Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Chairman Transport? Any Member from the Transport 
Committee?  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 (Silence)  
 
It seems the C ommittee has no information . Yes Hon . Mwaka?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I request to give us one week.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Okay thank you.  Yes Clerk.  
 
PROMOTION AND EXHIBI TION ON WOMEN ENTERP RISES  
 
Yes Hon Milka.  
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I request to read a statemen t on 
promotion and exhibition on women enterprises. Pursuant  to Standing Order 41.  2 c, I wis h to 
seek a statement from the Chairperson, C ommittee on Trade, Tourism and I nvestments 
regarding the need on promoting and exhibiting women enterprises.  Hon. Spea ker women are 
now on the for efront of opening and running t heir own businesses  but despite this milestone 
women businesses have not been properly promoted or exhibited . Hon. Speaker in the 
statement the C hairperson should inquire into and report on the mea sures the County 
Government is taking on promotion and exhibition of women enterprises . Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Okay Chairman Trade any response? Any M ember from Trade 
Committee? Yes Hon . Ahmed.  
Hon. Ahmed Khamis Salim: Thank you Mr. Spe aker. I request the Honorable  
Members to give us two weeks.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon Ahmed, there are two M embers standing . Hon 
Ahmed have you seat.  
Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare:  I stand to state that I think two weeks is too long a period, this is 
something that can be don e within at most one week because he is not going to look for  
information from out of the  country it is just within the C ounty and we require an answer 
almost immediately, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Okay the Committee on T rade the House  will give you a 
week's time , so next week Thursday make sure you have the response from Hon. Milka 
Moraa. Next order . 
 
HOW BEST THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY CAN FOSTER G OOD WORKING RELATION SHIP 
BETWEEN HON. MEMBERS AND STAFF  
 
Hon Fatma Mote . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fa tma Swaleh : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to 
make a statement . The statement relate to ..., Mr. Speaker this is my second term serving as a 
Hon. Member , serving in this Assembly.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Members you  are not supposed to read a speech, it is as 
if you are reading a speech in the House ; Just make a statement, it is your statement and your 
statement belongs to you.  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Mr. Speaker I Thank God this is my second term to b e in 
this Assembly, I kindly request for induction with Hon . Members and staff of the Assembly . 
Thank you  Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  So who is to respond to your statement ; the Service Board, the 
Speaker or the Hon . Members?    
Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : I think you a re the one who is going to respond.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Okay it will be discussed in the House  Business Committee, 
Next order .  
 
CONSTRUCTION OF FRERE TOWN SAREJEVO MWANDONI ROAD  
 
Yes Hon . Charles Kitula.  
Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Pursuant to Standing ord er 41, 
sub section 2 c, I aris e to seek a statement from the Chairman Committee on Transport 
Infrastructure and Public Works on the construction of Frere town Sarejevo Mwando ni road. 
Hon. Speaker the Frere  Town Sarejevo Mwandoni road is in  a dilapidated condi tion and has 
affected both the motorist s and pedestrians ; this is despite the importance of the road which 
connects Bamburi Kisauni Road and Mombasa Malindi road. Hon . Speaker in the statement 
that Chairperson should examine into and report on if the County  Governmen t is aware of the 
condition of Frere Town Sarejevo road , when will the County Government start the 
construction of Sarejevo Road . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  I understand the Committee, Transport Committee  are not 
ready so we give  them one week ... 
 
(Inte rruption) 
 
Hon. Ibrahim I have already ruled on the same . Next order . 
 
NON REMITTANCE OF ME MBERS AND EMPLOYEES DEDUCTIONS  
 
Yes Hon . Athman Mwamiri.  
Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Pursuant to Standing order 41 
section 2 c I ris e to seek a statement from the Chair Committee  on Finance , Budget a nd 
Appropri ation on the non remittance of Members and employees deductions . Hon. Speaker 
every month both Members and employees are deducted moneys from their salaries with the 
proceeding going to , for instance loan  services ; NHIF, LAP TRUST, LAP FUND among 
others, however it is emerging that the County treasury has not been dutiful ly remitting the 
deductions . As a matter of fact some Hon . Members and staff won't access their salaries this 
month due to delay s in remittance of their personal loans.  Hon. Speaker i seek the statement 
from the Chair , he should inquire into and report on; 
a. Reasons for t he delays in the remittance of Members, employees deductions , 
b. When will they remit the deductions for Hon orable Members  and staff  for the 
month of February for them to ac cess their February salary.  
c. Measures the County Treasury will take to ensure that salaries deductions are 
remitted to the respective entities promptly.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 (Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  The concerned Committee to respond to the stat ement from 
Hon. Mwamiri in a week's time.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
What is it Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Is he requesting the Finance Chair to respond? I think Mr. 
Speaker  you can give me until Tuesday this week i will respond.  
The Deputy Speaker:  It's okay till next week Tuesday , Clerk.  
 
MOTION  
EXEMPTION OF BUSINES S FROM THE PROVISION S OF STANDING ORDER ORDER S 35(2),  
41(2) (A) AND 228(2) 
 
Hon. Kitula . 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, exemption of b usiness from the 
provis ions of Standing order order s 35(2), 41(2)  (a) and 228(2).  
THAT, not withstanding Standing order  35(2), 41(2)  (a) and 228  (2) this Hous e orders 
that the business appearing under Order Nos.  4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, 17, 18 and 19 be 
exempted from those Standing orders du e to the urgency of fulfilling County 
Government business and to meet statutory timelines  set in the appointment of the 
Fourth and Fifth Members of the County Assembly Service Board.  
Mr. Speaker may I ask Hon. Moses Aran to second.  
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker Sir I second the Motion.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Members  as Order number 15 i s a Procedural Motion I 
stand to put a question. T hat the Motion by Hon. Charles Kitula on exemption of business 
from the provisions of Standing Order order s 35 (2), 41(2)  (a) and 228  (2). 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Hon. Members as per the Motion we will proceed to a Special Motion. Next order . 
 
SPECIAL MOTION  
APPROVAL FOR APPOINTM ENT FOR THE NOMINEE FOR FOURTH MEMBER OF COUNTY  
ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOA RD MR SWABIR MASOUD ABD ALLAH  
 
Yes Hon . Hatimy.  
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved the Special Motion)  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker  I wish to table the following 
Motion ; that this House  adopts the Report on the vetting of the Nominee for the position of 
the Fourth Member of the C ounty Assembl y Service Board as laid on the Table of the House  
on Thursday 1st March , 2018. An d pursuant to the provi sion of Section 9 (1) and 46 of the 
County Assembly Service Act , 2017 CAP 24 and Section 12(3)  (d) of the County 
Government Act , 2012 CAP 17 o f Laws of Kenya , approves the appointment of Mr. Swabir 
Masoud Abdallah to be the Fourth Member of the County Assembly of Mombasa, County 
Assembly Service Board. I beg to move Mr. Speaker.  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 I request Hon. Kitula to second the Motion.  
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): I stand t o second the Motion Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  I propose a question that the Special Motion on ap proval for 
appointment for the Nominee for Fourth Member of County  Assembly Service Board be 
debated in this House . Yes Members.  
 
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika ili kutafuta Fourth Member  wa bo di na 
walifanyiwa vetting  na wakaonekana kuwa hawa Members  wako sawasawa kabisa, 
Mheshimiwa  na kulikua na makaratasi mengi sana kama tunavyojua Mheshimiwa  Spika 
ripoti zote ziko kwa website zetu tangu juzi zime wekwa . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa  Spika 
tumeona pia hawa wawili Fourth  na Fifth tumewafanyia ili...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Hatimy you are on the Fourth Member.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Fourth Member  ili tuweze kupitisha leo Mheshimiwa 
Spika, ahsante  sana.  
The Deputy Speaker:  It seems Members  you are all in support of the Fourth Member  
so i stand to put a question.  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Next order ? 
 
APPROVAL FOR APPOINTM ENT FOR THE NOMINEE FOR F IFTH  MEMBER OF COUNTY 
ASSEMBLY SERVICE BOA RD MS. LYNETTE K AMADI  
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Hatimy . 
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved the Special Motion)  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to give the following 
Motion on approval on appointment of the Nomin ee for Fifth Member of the County 
Assembly Service Board.  That this House  adopts the Report on the vetting of the Nominee 
for the position of the Fifth Member of the County Assembl y Service Board as laid on the 
Table of the House  on Thursday 1st March , 2018. And  pursuant to the provisions of Section 9 
(1) and 46 of the County Assembly Service Act , 2017 CAP 24 and Section 12(3)(d) of the 
County Government Act , 2012 CAP 17 of laws of Kenya , approves the appointment of Ms. 
Lynette Kamadi to be the Fifth Member of the County Assembly of Mombasa, County 
Assembly Service Board. I beg to move Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Who is your seconder?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I request Hon. Moses to second the Motion.  
Hon. Oindo : I second the Motion.  
The Deputy Speak er: I now propose a question that the approval for the appo intment 
for the Nominee of the Fifth Member of the County Assembly Service Board be debated in 
this House . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 Yes Hon . Hatimy or any other Member . Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika nilitaka ku consolidate  hizi Hoja  lakini 
ukanikatalia naona mpaka sasa watu bad o kidogo wako usingizini ; kwa hivyo maneno ni yale  
yale Kamadi tumempata am bae alikuwa vetted  na akawa ni mama mmoja ambae yuko 
ngangari kabisa na yuko vizuri na huyu alikuwa Karani nafikiri  wa Chama cha Walimu na ni 
mama ambae atat uletea mambo mengi sana katika Kaunti yetu hii . Kwa hivyo naomba 
Wanachama  wamuunge mkono  ili tuweze ku msaidia  kumuweka huyu kwa haraka vile 
yawezekan a tupate msaada ili tupate kuendeleza mambo yetu.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Amriya . 
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya Juma:  I stand on a Point of order ; under  Standing order 73 Mr. 
Speaker the Hon . Member  has used both English and Swahili in this House  contrary to 
Standing order 73. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Yaonekana kuna Waheshimiwa wamelala,  nimemaliza 
kutoa Hoja  nikakaa chini ndio nikainuka nikaongea Kiswahili , kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika 
nataka Wakili  asome Standing order  sawasawa .  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Samba . 
Hon. Samba: I think the Hon . Member is out of Order by terming that Hon . Members 
are sleeping, we do not have beds here!  
 
(Applause and laughter ) 
 
He should use Parliamentary language to address us. We are Hon . Members. Thank 
you.  Mr.  Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Hatimy withdraw your statement for the House  to 
proceed.  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I am sorry I cannot withdraw sleeping is not 
abusive la nguage , so I am sorry I cannot withdraw . 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Tobias?  
Hon. Samba:  Mr Speaker we are not sleeping. I think sleeping entails many things 
we need to close our eyes, we need to have blankets, and we need to  have mattresses. Mr. 
Speaker sir we are not sleeping and if you allow that to go unchallenged I think we will get 
ourselves in bad books , we are not sleeping and perhaps maybe some are sleeping but Mr. 
Speaker I am not sleeping I am awake...  
 
(Laughter ) 
Thank you Mr. Speaker  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Raphael . 
Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. S peaker I think we have a lot of …. 
 
(Interr uption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  You are up on ...! 
Hon. Bwire:  I am up on a Point of order.  
The Deputy Speak er: Then there is no Point of order on a Point of order. Yes Hon . 
Hatimy proceed . 
Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Hon. Speaker can  Hon. Samba tell us if he is a Lawyer 
because he said that he is not sleeping so why talk on behalf of other Members ? 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Hatimy proceed with your Motion.  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  (Off Microphone ) 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 The Deputy Speaker:  It seems Hon . Members you are also in support of the 5th 
Member to the Service Board but Mr. Hatimy in future when I say apolog ize you have to do 
so before I put a question ; apologize to the House  for me to proceed.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I respect your Chair Mr. Speaker 
but I am ready to apologize if that is in the Standing order ; under which Standing Order Mr. 
Speak er? 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Hatimy, I have said apologize to the House  for the 
language that you have used in this Honorable House . The Hon . Members did not take your 
statements lightly so please and it is also under Standing Order 84 so Hon . Hatimy apologize 
to the House  for the House  to proceed with its business.  
Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker if you are insisting.  
The Deputy Speaker:  You just apologise Hon . Hatimy!  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  If you are insisting that i just apologize, it is o kay I 
apologize. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Applause and laughter ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  I stand to put a question on the Special Motion on appro val for 
the appointment of the Nominee for the 5th Member of the County Assembly of Mombasa 
Service Board . 
 
(Question pu t and agreed to)   
(Applause ) 
 
Yes next order . 
 
ROOTING OF SUB COUNTY ADMINISTRATION  IN THE DEPARTMENT OF DEVOLUTION  
 
Yes Hon . Moses Aran . 
Hon. Oindo:  I wish to move a Motion on rooting of Sub County administration  in the  
Department of Devolution .  
 
(Hon. Oindo  move d the Motion ) 
 
Mr. Speaker Sir AWARE THAT the Cou nty Government Act, 2012 establishes a 
number of administrative structures for the pr oper functioning of the County 
Government , the Sub County administration being among them.  
 
FURTHER AWARE that section 50(4) of the County Government Act , 2012 
specifies that  the Sub County Administrator shall report to the relevant Chief Officer.  
 
NOTING THAT the County Government has established a Department of Devolution 
and Public Administr ation whose head is the County Executive Member and whose 
functions and portfolio inclu des overseeing the Sub -County Administration.  
 
DEEPLY CONCERNED that the Sub County Administration which had previously 
been working under separate arrangements has not adjusted to the current reality and 
is yet to be cognizant of the new hierarchy and repo rting structure.  
 
 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 Mr. Speaker, I urge this Assembly to resolve that:  
 
1. The Sub - County Administration including all other staff working thereof shall 
be rooted/domiciled in the Department of Devolution and Public Administration.  
2. The County Public Service Boar d shall ensure compliance with this resolution 
and take necessary action to enforce the same.  
 
I request Hon . Kitula to second the Motion . 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Honorable?  
 
(Hon. Kitula bowed in seconding the Motion ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  I now propos e a question that the Motion on rooting of Sub 
County Administration in the department of Devolution be debated in this House . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
 
Yes Hon . Aran . 
Hon. Oindo : Ahsante sana Mhes himiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika Hoja hii iko wazi 
sana vile nimetangulia kusoma hapo na twajua kwamba mambo na usimamizi ulikuwa au 
kazi ya usimamizi ilikuwa chini ya ofisi ya Gavana na twajua muhula wa kwanza wa Gavana 
hatuku wa…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Aran under  Standing  Order 73, use one language please 
you have started with English proceed with the same.  
Hon. Oindo : Mheshimiwa Spika nilikaa  nikasoma tena ama?  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Proceed.  
Hon. Oindo : Okay Mr. Speaker I am very fluent  in English , so let me just proceed in 
English as you have requested . Mr. Speaker the Motion that I am moving this afternoon is 
self-explanatory. We all know that the first term of the County Government under the 
Governor His Excellency Hon. Hassan J oho the office of the Ward and Sub-County 
Administrators was under the office of the Governor but right n ow we know that there is a 
new Department that has been created , that is the Devolution and Public Administration. I 
hereby request this House  that all the administrative work should be therefore handed over or 
transferred to the relevant department because as I have read Mr. Speaker all the 
Administrators , the Sub County Administrators are supposed to report to the necessary Chief 
Officer, in 2013 that of fice right now we have the Chief Officer of Devolution so I request 
the Honorable House  to please do the necessary. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Kitula?  
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono 
hoja ambayo imeweza kulet wa na Mheshimiwa Moses Aran. Kusema kweli Mheshimiwa 
Spika nimeshangazwa sana siku ya leo kusoma gazeti ya leo kuona kwamba kuna mgogoro 
katika Serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa upande wa wafanyi  kazi.  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 Mheshimiwa Spika kusema kweli Gavana hivi sasa ameweza kutenga idara hii ya 
Ugatuzi na mas uala ya umma ; Mheshimiwa Spik a unapata hawa wahudumu katika Wodi zetu 
kata ndogo maaru fu kama Ward Administrators  wam ekuwa wakiweza kuchukua ripoti zao na 
kupe leka kwa County  Administrator  ambaye  hivi sasa County  Administrator  huyu ameweza 
kufanya kazi pasipo kuwa na mwelekeo. Lakini l eo hii tukiweza kupitisha kama Wabunge 
katika Bunge hili kwamba hawa Ward Administrators  pamoja na County  Administrator  
waweze kuhakikisha kwamba wanaweza kufanya kazi k wa ushirikiano baina ya wao na 
Waziri ambaye Gavana ameweza kumteua Bwana Seth Odongo  ili kuweza kuhakikisha 
kwamba huduma haziwezi kugongana kwa ajili ya manufaa ya watu wetu. Mheshimiwa 
Spika ni jambo la kushangaza kuona kwamba ha di wafanyi  kazi wa umma hawajui wa pige 
ripoti changamoto zao mashinani kwa mkubwa wao nani, lakini leo hii tukiweza kupi tisha 
kama Wabunge tutaweza kuwapatia nguvu hawa Ward Administ rators  kuhakikisha kwamba 
wote pamoja na wahudumu katika idara hiyo waweze ku fikisha malalamishi yao katika 
Wizara ambayo Gavana a meweza kuiteua inayoongozwa na Waziri Seth Odongo. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Tobias Samba.  
Hon. Samba:  Yes thank  you Mr. Speaker, in fact this Motion has come at the right 
time; of late we as Hon . Members there have been some co nflict of interest between the 
Member of the County Assembly (M CA) and the Ward Administrators , at times you feel 
frustrated and you do not know whom you report to. When we  are dealing with other 
Departments we are very much aware that there  are specific people for specific Department s 
responsible for each and every issue , now this is going to be the platform that is going to be 
offered to us as Hon . Members , we are going to  have somebody who is responsible.  
Most of the Ward Administrators do not report to anyone, they are colliding with 
most of the politicians and at times you find that we have conflict of interest between us and 
the Ward Administrators. Mr. Speaker thi s is going to be between us and th e Ward 
Administrators are well propagated , well laid mechanism s that are going to make sure that we 
deliver to our electorates at appropriate time s and with appropriated measures. Hon . Speaker 
we have got several incident s within our Wards and whenever there  are issues at the Ward 
level the only person whom the electorates can reach easily or can access easily is only th ese 
Hon. Members  and they can only reach these Ward Administrators when there are issues like  
for in stance where there are public holidays you find that the only people who will be front 
with those iss ues of public holidays will be Ward Administrators. There are some of the 
things that are going on like currently I just contacted my Ward Administrator last t ime and 
there is an issue going that they a re setting up a structure or a Committee that is going to 
foresee the development within the Ward ; this is done without our consent , without even our 
knowledge and if you call them  the best thing they can tell you is that; give us two or one 
person. This thing has been going on Hon . Speaker and they are just using the power that is 
bestowed on them to enrich themselves. Thank you Hon. Aran for this Motion I beg this 
House  also to support it so t hat at least we will have some where to ran to , we will have 
somebody who will be responsible , we will have somebody whom if at all there is any issue 
we ca n summon. I beg to support the Motion.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athuman Mwam wiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nime simama kwa nia ya 
kuunga mkono Hoja hii ili oletwa na Mheshimiwa Moses Aran. Kwa yakini Mheshimiwa 
Spika kuwepo kwa hawa Makarani au Ward Administrators  kumekuwa donda sugu sana 
mashinani . 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 Laiti kama sio ya kwamba watambul ika Kikatiba basi ingekuwa waondolewe mbali ; 
Mheshimiwa Spika wamefanya kazi bila mipangilio kwa sababu hawakuwa na mahali 
maalum ama Waziri m husika wanapo piga r ipoti. Wametekeleza majukumu yote 
wanayowahusu na ya sio wahusu. Mheshimiwa Spika  kuna taarifa ya kwamba baadhi yao pia 
hutembelea mijengo inayojengwa na kuitisha rushwa, wanatembelea vibanda vya mama zetu 
wanaofanya biashara na kuwatatiza na kuwaitisha hong o hali ya kwamba wenyewe ni 
maskini na hali duni. Lakini uwepo wao katika idar a mahsusi watanyoroka na watakuwa na 
nidhamu kwa sababu changamoto utak azozipata hatutadili na wao...  
  
(Applause ) 
 
Tutawaendea wakubwa wao ambao b ado Bunge hili lina  uwezo la kuwaita na 
ikilazimika a ma hawajibiki pia kuwatuma nyum bani Mheshimiwa Spik a. Mheshimiwa Spika 
ndugu yangu ametangulia kusema M heshimiwa Samba ya kwamba kuna Kamati zinaundwa 
mashinani kwa nia ya kutekeleza majukumu na maendeleo mashinani. Jamii inatutambua sisi 
kama wawakilishi wao na majukumu yale wameya weka juu yetu iwapo kuna  tengenezwa 
Kamati na sisi hatuna taarifa Mheshimiwa Spika tutajibu nini kwa wananchi wetu ? 
Mheshimiwa Spika hawa makarani sio tu walikuwa wanahujumu nia nzuri ya Mheshimiwa 
Gavana bali walikuwa na nia ya kutuhujumu baadhi yetu tusiweze kurudi katika Bunge  hili 
Mheshimiw a Spika...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
...Kuwepo chini ya Mkurugenzi  na Waziri m husika itawanyorosha na naliomba 
Bunge hili pasi na kigeg ezi tuunge mkono hoja hii hawa Makarani wawe chini ya Idara 
husika wapate nidhamu inayostahiki na watekeleze majukumu  kwa nia ya kusaidia jamii na 
serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Members it seems you have fully exhausted. Yes Hon. Bomoa . 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for awarding me this oppor tunity to air my 
views too to this important matter in the House . Mr. Speaker Sir it is very understandable and 
it very well known that any institution must always have an organizational structure where all 
the matters must be addressed from down upwar ds. Mr. Speaker Sir this sector ; the 
Devolution and Public Administration is one of the very important sector in our country and 
as you  know that this child was just born recently and his Excellency Governor has taken a 
lot of effort to ensure that we hav e the be st material in this particular Department and we 
have to utilize this optimally .  
As you have heard from the Speaker or from my Member who spoke at first that this 
time there is a very clearly lineage where by the protocol must be observed. The Ward 
Administrators that we are having now ; Mr. Speaker am sorry to say that they have been , of 
late they have not been organized the way they do their services and that  is why I want to 
support this Motion , that this particular Department must be active and they  must be able to 
report to a specific person  whom we now have in our County . As another Member said 
indeed we have had problems with these  Ward Administrators and Mr. Speaker Sir I will tell 
you t his one for free that I am the Chairman of Educat ion but I was amazed when I happened 
to meet one the Ward Administrator who seemed to know more than the way I know th an the 
Chairman of education . Mr. Speaker sir I think that is very s ad because the Ward 
Administrator se emed  to know that the bursaries will be released next month  and that one is 
my department ... 
  
(Laughter ) 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  I have just prepared my report Mr Speaker sir wh ich was requested by th ese able 
Members in this House  of which I am going t o give that statement on Thursday on the status 
of bursary in our County and the Ward Administrators are already preaching outside to our 
voters that the bursaries are ready and then they are going to be given next month. I think Mr. 
Speaker sir something has to be done and this one is actually an indication t hat there is a very 
big problem ; the way th ese Departments are r un, thanks to our Governor t hat now w e have 
the person the Chief Officer who is going to organize this and ensure that everything is done 
the w ay it is supposed to be done to avoid this confusion. Thank you Mr Speaker Sir I 
support.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Amriya .  
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma :  My microphone is trying to play hide and seek on me, 
however thank you so much. Mr. Speaker Sir I wish  to oppose the Motion by Hon . Moses 
Aran Oindo that on the rooting of Sub County administration to the Department of 
Devolution. Mr. Speaker having looked at the Motion the argument s are neither here nor 
there because the County Government Act as corre ctly brought forward by Hon. Aran 
Section 50(4) stat es that Sub County Admi nistration shall report to the Chief Offices and the 
current pos ition is they do report to the Chief Officer not to Department of Devolution b ut 
rather on the office of the governme nt. Mr. Speaker unless there are other reasons to the 
rooting  of administration I think t he Department of Devolution is relatively new and you 
understand Mr. Speaker that the Fourth Schedule part two has given the mandate of the 
County Assembly and they are  quite enormous  so they are relatively new , they are 
familiarizing so I think that this Motion will bring more harm than good in my respect ed 
opinion since the Department is adjusting ; is it a month now , it is adjusting . We want to bring 
a whole structure that has been there almost fo r three and four years to that Department it will  
be a bit of confusion , so Mr. Speaker am on my feet and some Members are murmuring 
behind ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Whom do you want to inform .  
Hon. Omondi:  Yes the  Member who was just speaking Mr. Speaker sir and Mr. 
Speaker when the Hon . Member stands firm and states clearly that she’s not in support of the 
Ward administrati ve reporting to the respective Chief Officer who is now in the office I think 
that one is not in order because the reasons the Hon . Member has given that the department ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  So you are now opposing what the Hon . Member was saying 
or you are informing th e Hon . Member.  
Hon. Omondi:  Am informing the Hon . Member.  
The Deputy Speaker:  But it is as if you are opposing what she has been saying on 
the floor of the House , just inform her because you’ve already given your views for her to 
proceed with the debate.  
Hon. Omondi:  Ok Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for that correction I  would just like to 
inform the Member that the Chief Officer that wa s appointed in that particular Department  
has all it takes to be able to contain the pressure , very intelligent and educated . 
The Deputy Speaker:  Ok we’ve got your point Hon. Amriya proceed.  
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15 Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Hon. (Mrs.) Amriya  Juma : Thank you very much again Mr. Speaker . I was just 
winding up before Hon . Member interr upted my speech but I think I have made my point that 
one of the structures as they are a pursuant of the County Government Act and the 
Constitution so I don’t see the necessity of trying to delve into the new struc ture that we a re... 
the Hon . Member has ju st recommended and secondly the Department is relatively new and it 
needs some  time before we can think about restructuring on the same . Thank you so much 
Mr. Speaker sir those are my grounds of my objections.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Prischilla.  
Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza nimesimama hapa kuunga 
mkono na kumpongeza kijana mdogo Mheshimiwa ambaye yuko hapa ndani ametufanyia 
kazi nzuri kabisa ameleta Mswada huu kwa wakati unaofaa na wakati ambao tutasema ni 
mzuri kwa sabab u katika muhula huu wa pili ambao tumeanza ni mda mfupi tu ameweza 
kuwa na tun aweza kuona wameingizwa katika Wizara . Kwa masikitiko yangu kuona 
Mheshimiwa mwenzangu akipinga nina kuombea Mungu Mheshimiwa Amriya … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Member address the Speaker please!  
Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba : Ninashukuru Mun gu kwa kunipa fursa hii ili nim uambie 
Mheshimiwa mwenzangu pia alikuwapo Mheshimiwa Spika nimuombe e Mungu ndio maana 
nimesimama hivi nikimuombea Mungu wakati unao kuja aweze kuwa na Wodi aingie akiwa 
na Wodi asiki e ule ule uchungu ambao sisi tumeteuliwa tuko hapa tukiunga h uu Mswada  kwa 
sababu yeye sa a hizi yuko raha m ustarehe hata huyo mtu anayeitwa Ward Administrator  
nafikiri hajakutana naye akamjua ni nani …. 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
Lakini mimi ninafa hamu kwa sababu anafanya kazi katika Wodi yangu ambayo 
niliochaguliwa na ninajua utundu wao san a kwa sababu walikuwako hawana mamlaka yoyote 
ya kuweza kuwanyoosha lakini saa hii tunashukuru kwa Gavana wetu kwa kuweka kitengo 
cha wao kuweza kusimamiwa wak iwa na Wizara ambayo itakuwa ina wajibika wao 
wana wajibika kuleta ripoti pale kwenye Wizara ili kuhakikisha utendaji kazi wao katika ma  
Wodi uko namna gani. Kwa wakati huu tukisema utendaji kazi wao una  shaka kubwa sana 
kwa sababu hata unashindwa mtu huyu ana piga r ipoti haya mambo wapi na ikiwa hata 
anakosea tunaweza kumpata wapi maana hata mimi wakati alipokuwa akinihujumu kwenye 
ule muhula wangu wa kwanza alipokuwa anaenda kinyume nilipata wakat i mgumu sana 
kuweza kumnyoosha Ward Administrator  wangu . Hii ni  kwa sababu aliku wa anafanya 
mambo yake kiholela  holela bila kuwa na wasiwasi akijua kuwa wewe hakuna mahali 
utanipatia pa kuweza kunishika na kuweza kunihuju mu lakini sisi kama tunavyojua Mawaziri 
wakiwa wamekosea tunawaita katika Jumba letu na tunawauliza maswali na ikiwa  Waziri ana 
mfanyi  kazi ambaye yuko katika Wizara yake amekosea ni lazima Waziri ataenda kumu uliza 
maswali na kum uonyesha jinsi ya kufanya kazi inavyotatikana hawa watu ambao wako kule 
mashinani wamekosea kwa njia nyingi sana wa  kutokuelewa kuwa mtu ambaye alichaguliwa 
ni MCA ambaye anatakikana awe ndio kama kiongozi wake wa kumuelekeza yale majukumu 
amba yo yanatakikana kufanya katika Wodi. Lakini unakuta a naenda kuchukua mkondo wake 
kivyake , anaenda kukaa na kufanya kazi zengine hata na watu ambaye pia si wahusika na 
anafanya nao wengine hata ni wa kuhujumu kazi ya MCA na anafanya nao kazi kuharibu jina 
la MCA kule chini . Kwa hivyo sisi tunashukuru kwa hii hoja leo….  
 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16 (Applause ) 
 
Maana mimi k uanzia leo nina imani kuwa hii kitu ikipita leo hapa hii Hoja Ward 
Administrator  wangu kwanza atakuwa mashakani manake mimi ndio wa  kwanza nataka 
nimpeleke kwa Waziri wangu nikam uweke kikao chini ajue majukumu yake.  Hiyo bo di 
unayos ikia sa a hizi inayotekelezwa watu mashinani Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ninaheshimu 
uongozi wa chini na uongozi wangu na uongozi wa Kaunti ya Mom basa lakini huwezi kuja 
katika Wodi yangu unilete e bodi unani wekea hapo na unaniamb ia ati mimi MCA 
nimechaguliwa na katika bo di ya watu ishirini nipeleke mtu mmoja ndio awe ananiwakilisha , 
mimi huo ni upu uzi wac ha nikuambie hata nitaivunjilia mbali kwa sababu nina imani walio 
niunga mkono ndio watakuwa na  fursa  kwanza katika ishirini…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
Wakae katika ile Wizara kwa sababu yeye lazima ale matunda ya jasho ya lile 
alilolitoa leo mtu alinipinga mpaka akawa anataka niende nyumbani alafu kesho namkuta 
amekaa katika bo di ati anakaa pale akiniuliza maswali ati wewe ninakupangia ..., unanipangia 
kama nani ….  
 
(Applause ) 
 
Ndio pale tunasema t unashukuru hawa kuingia katika Wizara  kwa sababu wata itwa 
kulingana na kazi zao vile wanazifanya sisi ni wanasiasa na Mheshimiwa Spika nash ukuru 
Mungu hili ni jumba la siasa tumeletwa hapa kwa ajili ya siasa anayeniunga mkono atakula 
matunda yangu ambaye  haniungi mkono atakula upepo…  
  
(Applause and laughter ) 
 
Wacha n ikuambie Mheshimiwa Spika na hawa Ward Administrator  watakuwa 
wanatuletea walaghai katika Wodi zetu wakiwa weka mstari wa mbele mimi nakuambia 
nashukuru sana ndio maana naona na mpa kongole yu le kijana mdogo amekuja katika Bunge 
ametuletea mambo ya maana sana…  
 
(Interr uption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Honorable Sheillah your time is up.  
Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba:  Mheshimiwa Spika unajua hii ni kitu imenigusa hapa na 
unajua ukishaguswa na jambo lazima useme huo ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Sheillah your tim e is up .  
Hon.  (Mrs.)  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika lakini ungenipa kama dakika 
chache ... 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Mgwisho.  
Hon. Hamadi Mgwisho : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi ili na 
mimi niweze kuchangia kuhusu hoj a ambayo imeletwa na Mheshimiwa Moses Aran . 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17 Natoa shukrani zangu za dhati kwa hii hoja ambayo imeletwa na Mheshimiwa Aran 
hawa ma  Ward Administrator s wameleta kazi katika hizi Wodi zetu lakini  kwamba 
wanafahamu kwamba hili Jumba letu la kutunga sheria lakini hasa naf ikiri haya majukumu 
yao hawaelewi hasa ni nini kwa sab abu sisi wapinzani wetu katika Wodi ni Ward 
Administrator s. Hii ni  kwa sababu hawa ndio ambao hutatiza sana katika kazi zetu na 
hufanya kazi kinyume cha sheria wakisema kwamba wao wametumwa sijui na nani lakini 
sitaki kutaja hilo jina lakini husema kuwa hao huwa wametumwa wanahujumu sana kazi zetu 
kule chini na la muhimu pia naf ikiri hawa wanafaa wapelekwe induction  ili waelezwe 
kwamba kule mashinani kwa sababu kazi zao kwenda vizuri ni lazima washirikiane n a 
Waheshimiwa . Lakini kule mashinani kusema kweli Mheshimiwa Spika hawa watu 
wanatudharau sana hufanya mambo yao kama mtu pengine kuna kitu chafanyika MCA hana 
habari yeye ana habari ameunda Kamati sijui watu kumi na ngapi na kuambia Mheshimiwa 
MCA alete mt u mmoja . Hasa kule mashinani yaonekana hao wan afanya kazi sana kushinda 
sisi Waheshimiwa kwa hivyo kitu amba cho tunakihitaji sisi hatuwapingi kwa sababu isije 
pengine wakaona sababu tunawaharibia kazi lakini ni lazima washirikiane na sisi 
Waheshimiwa ambao t umechaguliwa na wananchi tufanye kazi nao pamoja na kama 
hawawezi kama kuna kipengele katika sheria chaweza kutumi wa basi hawa wa ondolewe 
kabisa…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa hio nafasi kwa kuchangia. Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Faith.  
Hon. (Ms.)  Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am in support of this Motion because 
most of th ese Ward Administrator s feel  so superior than the elected Members ; this  is very 
frustrating and unacceptable so because it has been deliberated more I beg to se ek leave in 
this House  thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Milka.  
Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker .  I am in support of the Motion 
introduced to this House  by Hon. Moses Aran and I want to talk as a person who was once 
beaten tw ice shy . I have had an experience with one Ward Administrator during the time 
when we were pr eparing to go and swear in the People’s President Raila Amolo  Odinga whe n 
I came face to face with one Ward Administrator and he was trying to consult on somethin g 
and he seemed to have assumed too much power and even shouted at me in the presence of 
our supporters . I remained wondering ; has this become the Governor or what is happening 
within Mombasa County so am very grateful that Hon . Moses has brought thi s Motion these 
people must be contained because they seem to be all over , they have no speed governors . I 
think they need a proper job description so that they understand and work under within their 
mandate and with that I support the Motion and am sure my colleagues Hon . Membe rs are 
also in support of this Motion . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon . Nzai.  
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa na fasi hii ya mwisho maana 
naona Waheshimiwa wenzangu wamechoka mimi ni mesimama kupinga hoja hii kwa sababu 
zifuatazo ; kitabu hichi cha sheria Mheshimiwa Spika ni kigeni mno na kila kipeng ele 
unapokisoma inakueleza kivi ngine na si  rahisi mtu useme kwamba anafanya hili nikijua kuna 
mtu ananiunga mkono hapo chini kumbe anakuchi mbia kisima . Ward Administrat ors walio 
mashinani ni kiungo muhimu sana kwa Gavana  wetu ama ni jicho la peke e la Mheshimiwa 
Gavana kama vile Rais wa nchi naye ana  wale watu wanaitwa kina Marwa , utategemea MCA 
chini kumbe MCA wengine wana ile maneno ya kumch imba Gavana chini chini . 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18 Habari hizo kumfikia Gavana ni awe na jicho lake pale kwa hivyo hao ma  Ward 
Administrator s kama kule kw angu Kadzandani mimi naona wanafanya vizuri sana kwa  
sababu sijawahi kuparuzana na Ward Administrator  wangu , cha muhimu Bwana Spika…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  There is an information , whom do you want to inform ? Hon. 
Member  are you ready to be inform ed?  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumfahamisha 
Mheshimiwa Nzai kwamba hoja hii hatupi ngi hao Ward Administrator s lakini tungependa 
sana waweze kuwa na mtu ambao atakuwa ni kiongozi wao na pia kwamba  sisi tungeweza 
kumuita katika Bunge na kuweza kuuliza maswali kuhusu mahudumu ya mashinani , kwa 
hivyo hatupingi Ward Administrator  Mheshimiwa Nz ai. 
The Deputy Speaker:  Proceed.  
Hon. Nzai:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nina utu livu mmoja wa kutulia kusikiza 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu wakijieleza mpaka watosheke huenda pia mimi hutumia  njia ya 
mbali ndio inifikishe Bungeni hapa ndio huleta huo uelevu wangu mimi k iurahisi . Kwa hivyo 
sisemi kwamba kuna yoyote ameongea hapa kwamba ma  Ward Administrator  wale 
wanafutwa hapana , mimi niko hapa kusema ma  Ward Administrator  ni wawe kiv yao vile vile 
wasiunganishwe na mtu yeyote mwingine wawe hao wanampa siri vizuri Gavana wetu ili 
azidi kujiandaa na mambo yoyote ya kule mashinani . Kwa hivyo mimi ni napinga hoja hii . 
Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Thank yo u I will give the mover of the Motion to respond on 
this Motion . Hon. Aran ? 
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker I would like to take t his opportunity to thank Hon . 
Members of this House  and I would want to urge the nominated MCAs we have to be there 
for elected MCAs because next time we will be there and come 2022 we are praying for them 
when some of them will be going for higher se ats will be vying for t he Ward so wh atever 
they are going through now you will also face that . So if you cannot fix that sitting in our 
comfort zone knowing that we’re nominated M CAs and we won’t be nominated forever so I 
want to thank you Hon . Members and I hope action will be ta ken as soon as possible. Thank 
you. God bless you.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Members I can see you have fully exhausted on the 
Motion I now stand to  put a question on rooting Sub-County administration in the 
Department of  Devolution . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Hon. Members before I sit I have a document of which I was supposed to 
communica te to you or to the respective Committee  of the Mombasa County Assembly . The 
office of the Clerk on 28th February , 2018 which is ye sterday , received the Mombasa County 
Integrated Development Plan  (CIDP)  plus the County Fiscal Strategy Paper (CFSP) of which 
the Committee on Finance and other Departmental Committees will look upon these 
documents .  
I commit  these documents to the relevant Committees.  
Yes C lerk. 
 
March 1 , 2018                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          6  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19 ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members the House  stand adjourned until Tuesday on 6th at 2:30 p.m. 
The House  rose at  4:15p.m. 
 