October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY  ASSEMBLY   
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 3rd October, 2017  
The House met at 2:39p.m. 
 (Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
Mr. Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Members  you may sit down. Yes Clerk?  
MESSAGES  
Hon.  Members  there is a letter from His Excellency, the G overnor on appointment of 
Hon.  Dr. William Kazungu Kingi. The letter reads  as follows;  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) read)  
Appointment as H ead of the Department of E ducation, Informati on Technology  ( IT) 
and Mombasa Vision 2035 in the G overnment of the County  of Mombasa.  In accordance to 
Article 179 of the C onstitution of Kenya , 2010 and Section 35(1) and S ection 32(3) of the 
County  Government A ct, 2012,  I hereby appoint you to head the Department of Education, 
Information T echnology  (IT) and Mombasa Vision 2035. C ongratulations on your 
appointment and i look forward to working with you and serve the people of Mombasa. 
Clerk?  
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF POLICY CONTAINED IN GOVERNOR’S ADDRESS  
Yes Hon.  Hamis i Mwidani, Leader of M ajority party . 
Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ):  Thank you Mr. Speaker, may I t ake this 
opportunity to move a Motion ; Adoption of policy contained in G overnor ’s address.  Mr. 
Speaker Sir i beg to move the following Motion;  
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani moved the Motion)  
THAT pursuant to G overnor ’s addres s delivered in accordance with Standing O rder 
17(1) and laid on the table on 27th September , 2017 in accordance with S tanding order (20) 6.  
I urge this Assembly  to resolve that:  
The Thanks of the County  Assembly  be recorded for the exposition of public policy 
contained in the address of the G overnor.  Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir and i wish Hon.  Kitula 
to second the Motion . 
Hon.  Kitula:  I second  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members , i propose a question that the Motion  that 
The Thanks of the County  Assembly  be recorded for the exposition of public policy 
contained in the address of the G overnor.  
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
Hon.  Members  the flo or is now open for you to debate on the Motion  on G overnor ’s 
address ; I urge you to first introduce yourself before making any contributions to the Motion  
so that the Hansard may capture your name, further as you debate please observe the rules of 
debate as contained in part 15 of t he Standing orders, i hereby remind you that the official 
language s are English, Swahili and Sign language as provided for in Standing order 73 S ub 
section 1 . So if you begin in a speech in any of the above languages you are requir ed to 
continue in the same language until the conclusion of your speech . Further note that when 
you rise to contribute recollect your thoughts and contribute conclusively as Standing order 
78 provides that no M ember shall speak not more than once to a ques tion except in the 
Committee  of the Whole House. S ince you will be contributing for the first time in this 
Honorable  House your speech will be a maiden speech and that no interruption shall be 
entertained from other Members .  
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 It is also worth noting that s ince the Motion  is brought pursua nt to S tanding order 17, 
we have a maximum of four sitting days to discuss it, the first sitting of debate on the Motion  
being today, L eader of Majority party please open the debate.  
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank  you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this 
opportunity to contribute to the policy issu es contained in the Governor’s a ddress delivered 
on Tuesday, 26th September, 2017. The same was laid and Notice of Motion  issued on 
Wednesday, 27th September, 2017.  Mr. Spe aker Sir, before I contribute on the Governor’s 
address, allow me to thank the Almighty God for giving me a second chance to serve the 
people of Mtongwe. I also thank the people of Mtongwe for the honour that they have given 
me for electing me as their MCA  for a second term. I will continue to serve the people of 
Mtongwe.  Also, allow me to thank His Excellency, the Governor and the ODM Members  for 
appointing me the Leader of Majority Party of the Second Assembly . I do not take it for 
granted and I assure yo u all that I shall always ensure that I serve you and the government 
under the leadership of His Excellency, the Governor.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, His Excellency the Governor, Hon.  Hassan Ali Joho launched the 
Mombasa Vision 2035 under which ten transformative programmes are to be achieved.  In the  
Vision 2035, youth employment and e mpowerment as contained in page 7 have been 
prioritized. When youth are positively engaged, crime rate  within the County  will 
automatically be reduced; use of drugs and other social evils will also be reduced. We as an 
Assembly  must ensure that through oversight, this is achieved.   
We are all aware that in any procurement with a government entity, 30  per c ent of 
procurement ought to be a warded to the youth, women and Persons with D isabilities.  I am 
aware that the County  Government of Mombasa has always ensured that at least 30  per cent  
of procurement is awarded to the special groups. We as a House must ensu re that this 
requirement in procurement is met at all times.   
Creation of gainful employment for the youth is also key. We as leaders must 
purposely engage the companies within the County  to ensure that our youth access 
employment.  
Youth with talent in var ious areas such as music, acting, sports, among others, must 
also be given the necessary support. We should commit to passing legislation that will ensure 
that youth are empowered.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, in terms of solid waste management, as elaborated in page 8, the 
responsibility to ensure a clean en vironment starts with you and I; l et us ensure that we keep 
our environment clean. I also urg e the department tasked with e nvironment to enforce all the 
environmental laws to ensure that the environment remains cle an at all times.  
Security within the County , as noted in page 9, is key; w hen security is compromised, 
investors will shy away from investing in the County . We must ensure that security is at its 
best, both for the residents and visitors.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, page 10 of the Governor’s address promotes provision of water to 
residents of Mombasa. This is a responsibility of the County  Government. The Water Act and 
County  laws on water will ensure that clean water is provided in adequate quantities.  Mr. 
Speaker Si r, allow me to refer to page 15 which is dedicated to the realization of 
infrastructural development. The County  Government in the last term tremendously improved 
the infrastructure within the County . It was a step towards modernizing Mombasa. I have 
faith that the roads, hospitals and other amenities will b e rehabilitated/built in every W ard 
within the County . 
Another key component of the Vision 2035 as provided in page 17 is the pro motion  of 
tourism which plays a major role in developing the economy of our County . We must 
promote local tourism and open up new tourist sites such as Shelly Beach and Mtongwe.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, last but not least, I refer to page 17 which focuses on urban plann ing, 
housing development and lands management.  
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 We are all aware that Mombasa has a small area and thus we must maximize the 
space that is available and this can only be achieved through planning.  
As legislators, let us examine the pillars of Vision 2035 a s contained in the Governor’s 
Address and do the following:  
i. Where there is legislation, let us ensure that such legislation is enforced;  
ii. Where there is no legislation and it is needed to realize any of the programmes, let us, 
as an Assembly , pass the necessary legislation.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Amur.  
Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Mr. Speaker sir first I would like to than k 
you for being elected as the  Hon.  Speaker of this House. Tw o, I want to thank my collegues 
who were elected and nominated as M ember s of this House, c ongratulaions my brothers and 
sisters. .. 
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker Sir, I want to refer to the Governor’s speech which was made in this 
House on 26th of las t month ( September,  2017). Mr. Speaker Sir, in his address Mr. Governor 
or Hon.  Governor emphasised on the issue of y outh on  page 7 i n his address ; I want to take 
this opportunity to enlighten this because youth is a big ger number of this population of 
Mombasa Coun ty. In his address , the Governor thought of youth by saying  youth 
employment,  empowerments, skills excetra , but for us a s a House if we don’t come wi th 
measures to help our youth by making laws the Governor ’s realization will not be fruitful . 
Why do I say so Mr. Speaker?  Youth s we have  unemployment of about 40  per cent  to 50  per 
cent Mr. Speak er. The Hon.  Governor to empower them but Mr. Speaker I want say to this 
House  if we don’t mak e laws to them a chance then these  young girls and boys who ha ve 
come from Universities will never be employed. Why Mr. Speaker I say so? Whenever we 
advertise  for employment there is that statement saying people with experience of 5  years, 10 
years and above , this an automatically disquali fication of our you ths so I beg this House to 
come with laws so that  we can do something so that these y ouths who are graduates who 
have M asters degrees can be employed simply so that this obstacle of 10  years or 5y ears as 
experien ce be looked into it so that we can accommodate them to make or get employment in 
our County  Assembly  but without that day in and day out youth s who are leaving  from the 
university will never  get employed due to this fact of 10  years experience,  5 years of 
experience , this is a direct disqualification yet the G overnor wants to help the y ouths . It’s 
upon us as Assembly  Mr. Speaker Sir  to come with better regulations to ov ersee what we can 
do so that these  young people can be granted an opportunity so that they can apply for this 
job. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Ramla. Members  just a reminder according to 
Standing order number 76, S ub section one; no M ember shall read a speech but a M ember 
may read a short  extract from written and print ed papers in support of an argu ment and may 
refresh memory by reference to notes. Members  just note that.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Said : Thank you Mr. Speaker. My name is Ramla  Said Omar , Nominated 
MCA representing People L iving wi th Disabilities. I want to thank  God to be ab le to be here 
with all of you and be able to make laws and B ills for People Living with D isabilities ... 
(Interruption from ringing mobile phone)  
Mr. Speaker I want to refer to the speech of the Governor  and I  want to emphas ise on 
addressing on issues of People Living with Disabilities; nu mber one, while addressing youth 
employment and em powerment , I want now  to hear addressing youths and PWD s 
employment and empower ement . Because it is our underst anding that on the same youth we 
try to assume that these PWDs  are also included but at the end of it they are not considered . 
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 So i insi st on them to  be mentioned every now and then so that people will remember 
there are pe ople living with disability who  need to be considered.  
Two; Mr. Speaker  in every sector of the speech from number one to number ten it 
would be very nice to see persons living with disability being considered.  
(Applause)  
We have environment   Mr. Speaker, we have environment whereby PWDs can also 
be engaged in making the enviro nment clean ; if given the opportunity PWD s also need to be 
engaged.   
Number 4, public toilets ; we need to have public toilets, number 5, about health 
insurance the Hon.  Governor only mentioned elder ly and women in names but not PWDs 
they also should be rec ommended.  
Number 6, Mr. Speaker Sir we talk about education, education also there is alot to be 
done to make sure P ersons Living with D isability get proper facilities required in education 
sector ; number 10 Mr. Speaker we have business entrepreneurs  in the CBD and we know 
many PWDs are also entrepreneurs and also doing businesses . We need also to come up with 
laws in future to consider them to do their businesses in their own way.  
Mr Speaker number 8, the desir able infrastructure , transpor tation, mo bility ;  
Infrastructure I thank my colleague Mr. Hudson Karume for making an effort but we still 
need more infrastructures for people with disability , like more ramps, those who can fit to 
access lifts and e.t.c. Transportation so far there is no transport  for P WDs in Mombasa that 
caters for Persons with D isabilities , that is one of the things we need to come up and try to 
have for our fellow PWDs. Mr. Speaker , number 10, as we look at the V ision 2035 that we 
maintain urban planning, housing development and  land management also this we should 
always consider People With D isability so that we can access anywhere without any help 
from other people , they should feel independent. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Lucy Chizi?  
Hon.  (Ms.)  Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika,  nilikuwa sijaonekana lakini 
ukaniona kwa mbali sana na ukanitaja , ahsante sana kwa kunitambua.  Kwa majina ni 
Mheshimiwa Lucy Chizi Chireri nawakilisha W odi ya Mtopanga eneo Bunge la Kisauni. 
Kwanza ningependa kuwashukuru wananchi wote wa Mtopanga kwa kuniregesha mara ya 
pili kuwa kiongozi wao , mimi ninasema a hsante sana na Mwenyezi Mungu aweze 
kuwabariki wananchi wote wa Mombasa Kaunti na Mtopanga kwa ujumla.   
Mheshimiwa Spika  ningependa kutoa  shukrani zangu za d hati kwa Mheshimiwa wetu 
Gavana Ali Hassan Joho kwa hotuba yake ; kwa kusema ukweli hotuba yake Gavana 
imenigusa sana mimi kama MCA wa Mtopanga , hotuba ya Mhesh imiwa Gavana imeangazia 
vipengele vyote , shida zote za mwananchi ambayo anaik umba pale mashinani na maendeleo 
ambayo yatafanyika , ndio ninasema a hsante sana Gavana wetu Hassan Joho kwa kujali 
maslahi na maisha ya wananchi wote wa Kaunti  ya Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Spika hotuba 
aliyoitoa Gavana wetu imenifurahisha sana ; akiangazia upande  wa mabarabara kama 
unavyojua Mheshimiwa Spika Wodi ya Mtopanga barabara zilikuwa ziko katika hali mbaya 
lakini tulianza 2013 na tumerudi tutahakikisha ya kuwa tunashirikiana na serikali kuu ili 
tuweze kuboresha barabara zetu mitaani.  Udongo ulioko  kule Mh eshimiwa Spika ni mbaya , 
saa hizi ukiingi a Wodi ya  Mtopanga barabara ndogo za mitaani cabro  na cabro  zitazidi 
zilizob akia ni kidogo na kulingana na h otuba ya Mheshimiwa Gavana ambayo ametupa ni 
hakikisho ya kuwa tutaweza kuboresha maisha ya watu wetu Momba sa Kaunti nzima. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Kitula?  
Hon.  Kitula : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . 
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Vilevile nachukua fursa hii kumsh ukuru Mungu kutukutanisha sote W abunge 
walioweza kuchaguliwa na kuweza kuteuliwa ili kuwakilisha sehemu zote mbalimbali 
tukakuja kama tulikotokea. Mheshimiwa Spika moja kwa moja ningependa k uchangia hotuba 
yake Gavana ali oweza kutoa siku ya tarehe ishirini  na sita mwezi uliopita tisa mwaka huu . 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza kabisa ningependa kumshukuru Gavana kwa  sababu aliwez a 
kufafanua majukumu yetu kama W abunge katika Bunge hili la Kaunti ya Mombasa ; kueleza 
kwamba tuwe na demokrasia na wananchi ambapo  tuweze kuleta utawala ambao unastahili 
moja k wa moja , pia Gavana akaweza kuelezea kuhusu r uwaza ya mwaka elfu mbili  
thela thini na tano  (2035) , ambapo Gavana akasema kwamba atawasilisha mapendekezo yake 
kwetu sisi ili tuweze kuipatia motisha ruwaza yake ya mwaka wa elfu mbili thelathini na 
tano.  Ruwa za hii Mheshimiwa Spika iliweza kutilia mkazo mambo kumi kulingana na hotuba 
yake ; jambo la kwanza  ambalo lilinivutia moyo ni ile ambayo iliweza kuangazia ajira kwa 
vijana na kuwapa uwezo wa kuweza kujitegemea.  Mheshimiwa Spika hapo ndipo palipo na 
kizungu mkuti maana imani ya vijana wa Mombasa ilivyo kwetu kuweza kuhakikisha 
tunakuja na mbinu za kisasa ambazo zitaweza kuwapatia mkate wao wa kila siku .  
Mheshimiwa Spika sehemu nyengine ambayo ningependa kuzungumzia ni katika 
masuala ya mazing ira; katika swal a la mazingira inahitaji ushirikiano mkubwa baina yetu ni 
sisi viongozi tulioweza kuchaguliwa kwa kura na viongozi walioweza kuteuliwa na vile vile 
ushirikiano mkubwa kuanza na wananchi ili wahudumu katika idara husika na hatimaye 
viongozi watakao teuliwa na Gavana katika idara hii.  
Mheshimiwa Spika jambo lengine ambalo litakuwa ni la kutia moyo zaidi kuhusu 
Community police , Gavana tukishirikiana nae tutaweza kuwapa ajira watu wetu mashinani 
kupitia miradi hii maana jambo la usalama linahitaji ushirikiano , japo ni jukumu la serikali ya 
kitaifa lakini kulingana na Katiba, Kaunti yetu imeweza ku orodheshwa kama sufuri sufuri 
moja , kwa hio tunastahili kuwa kupatia kipao mbele zaidi. Mheshimiwa Spika jambo ambalo 
ni donda sugu zaidi ni katika hali ya maji, ni dhahiri shahiri sehemu zetu K aunti nzima 
Mombasa tunapata maji kwa masiku ya kuhesabiwa ; maana imeweza kuzungumzia kuweka 
bidii na kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba tutakuja na mtindo wa kileo ambao ni kugeuza  maji ya 
bahari na kuyafanya maji kwa matumizi ya kibinadamu almaarufu kama desalination .  
Mheshimiwa Spika Gavana akazungumzia kujengwa kwa vyoo vya umma na miondo 
msingi ulio bora kwa maji taka, lakini hivi sasa maji taka yameweza kuzongwa na taka taka 
nyingi zaidi ambazo zimefanya sehemu hizi kuweza kuziba njia hizo.  
Mheshimiwa Spika katika sehemu nyeti kabisa ni katika sekta ya afya, nashukuru 
Gavana ameweza kujenga zahanati mashinani ila changamoto ni madawa ; ni jukumu l etu 
kama W abunge kuweza kuhakikisha tumeweza kuchanga pesa nyingi zaidi katika sekta hii ili 
kuweza kukubaliana na majanga ya dharura. Gavana Mheshimiwa Spika nampatia heko kwa 
sababu alitanguliza kuwapa hapa wazee wetu na kina mama mashinani bima ya afya yao.  
Mhes himiwa Spika jambo lingine zaidi ni swala la elimu;  katika elimu basari kwa kila 
eneo Bunge kwa  wanafunzi wetu pasi kuweza kuwabagua ni jambo ambalo laweza kutia 
moyo kila mmoja kat ika Bunge hili kulingana na hotu ba ya Gavana. Vile vile tupunguze 
ujumbe mw ingi kwa kujaza fomu za basari Mheshimiwa Spika maana zinatatiza wanafunzi 
wetu na wazazi wetu kulingana na kuweza kujaza zile fomu za basa ri ambao sisi kama 
serikali ya K aunti tunaohudumu katika Bunge hili tutaweza kuhakikisha kwamba fomu zile 
zina ujumbe  mfupi ili kila mmoja awe na uwezo wa kujaza fomu zile.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
katika kipenge kingine ni maswala ya biashara, Gavana ameweza kuzungumzia ya kwamba 
ataweza kupunguza ada kwa wafanyi biashara katika serikali yetu ya Mombasa. Mheshimiwa 
Spika changa moto inakuja pale askari wetu sasa wanadai kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba 
wanapatia mazingira muafaka sio kuweza kuwabumburusha wafanyi biashara, maana jambo 
hili linatupatia picha mbaya zaidi kama serikali yetu ya Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nikiweza kumalizia n i kuhusi ana na maswala ya miundo msingi.  
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Gavana amezungumzia kuweza kuhakikisha kutengeza barababara za kisasa Likoni, 
Kisauni, Changamwe, Jomvu, Nyali pamoja na Mvita ; barabara hizi ni sisi kuhakikisha 
zimetengenezwa kwa njia zenye ustadi na zenye kudumu.  Mheshimiwa Spika jambo lengine 
la zaidi ni kuweza kuha kikisha ya kwamba maswala ya ardhi kulingana na hotuba ya Gavana 
kuweza kuanzishwa County  housing development fund  na vile vile  kuhakikisha watu wetu 
wanapata haki yao kuhusu maswala ya ardhi, lakini mambo muhimu katika hotuba ya Gavana 
Mheshimiwa Spika ambapo tunastahili kuweza kuangazia sisi  kama Wabunge katika Bunge 
hili; kwanza ni kuhusu kuwahusisha wananchi katika maswala amb ayo twafanya kazi kuhusu 
kushirikiana almaarufu kama public participation . Mheshimiwa Spika heshima baina ya 
kiongozi wa serikali ya kitaifa maana kuna  ustahili kwa  kutoheshimu sheria za K aunti yetu. 
Mheshimiwa Spika kipenge 191 (4) kinasema wazi na kutung a sheria tunazozipitisha hapa 
Bungeni. Mheshimiwa Spika nikiweza kutilia mkazo katika ushirikiano wetu na Mawaziri 
katika serikali ya K aunti Mombasa ambao watahakikisha  kwamba kulingana na hotoba 
alioweza kuzungumzia Gavana yale yote yameweza kutimizwa. Mh eshimiwa Spika jambo 
lengine ambalo linastahili kuleta mkazo ni katika ushikiano kama sisi Ward Administrators .  
Mheshimiwa Spika kuna hawa wanafahamika kama Ward Administrators , ni jambo la 
kwanza kuanza waweze kuingia mashinani na kuhakikisha kwamba yale  tunaeza kupitisha  
katika Bunge hili yameweza kutimilizika mashinani kupitia idara husika. Mheshimiwa Spika 
lengine ni kwa ushirikiano wa wahudumu wote wa serikali ya Mombasa hasa sisi kama 
Wabunge walioweza kuchaguliwa na wale ambao waliohumu wataweza ku hakikisha 
kwamba wametekeleza wajibu kulingana na hotuba ya Gavana. Mheshimiwa Spika nasema 
ahsante sana kwa kunipatia fursa hii na vile vile naomba Mwenyezi Mungu amjaalie amani 
na mafanikio katika safari ya 2017 hadi 2022. Ahsanteni sana  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Robert Nyiro . 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Mheshimiwa Spika nakushukuru sana kwa kunipa fursa hii ili kuweza 
kuchangia, lakini kwanza naomba niwashukuru wakaaji wa Wodi ya Bamburi kwa kunipa 
fursa hii ya kipekee na kuniamini kwamba ninayo ma wazo ambayo ni ya kupeleka Bunge hili 
mbele. Pia namshukuru Mungu kwamba na sisi sote kwamba tuko ndani ya K aunti kama 
wajumbe, pia nikupongeze kwa ajili ya kuchaguliwa kwako kuwa Spika wetu, pia 
nimpongeze Gavana kwa kuchaguliwa kwa kura nyingi zaidi kuen delea kuchapa kazi. 
Nikirudi katika hotu ba ya Mheshimiwa Gavana, ukweli wa mambo kama wenzangu 
walivyoweza kuchangia ni kwamba kuna kochochokocho, mambo mazuri ambayo ikiwa 
Bunge hili litamsaidia Gavana na wafanyi  kazi wote wa K aunti hii ili yaweze kutimilika, basi 
kwa uwezo wa Mungu Bunge hili litaenda katika vitabu vya historia kama Bunge ambalo 
limetekeleza majukumu mateule katika miaka hii mitano kwa wananchi wa Kaunti ya 
Mombasa. Nafikiri tukiangazia macho katika ndani ya Bunge hili ni kwamba vi jana ni wengi 
wamo ndani ya Bunge hili na jambo la msingi ndio lilimpa mshawasha Gavana kuweka 
jambo la vijana kama hoja yake ya kwanza na ina nitia moyo mimi kama kijana kuona 
kwamba G avana anatambua uweko wa vijana wengi katika K aunti ya Mombasa na ya 
kwamba mji usio na watoto basi hauna mbele na kwa sababu mji wetu una vijana wengi 
wenye uwezo mbali mbali nafikiri ni vizuri zaidi sisi kuwekeza katika nguvu ambayo vijana 
wako nayo. Ukweli wa mambo ni kwamba asili mia ya vijana  ambao tuko nao katika K aunti  
ya Mombasa ni kwamba wanaendelea  kupata elimu viwango tofauti tofauti na mbali na hayo 
ni kwamba Mombasa kulikuwa pengine hakuna vijana wenye viwango vya juu vya elimu 
lakini hivi sasa viwango vya vijana vya elimu vimekuwa na mbali kwamba viwango vya juu 
vinakua shida imekuwa ni kwamba ajira imekuwa finyu, imekuwa haipatikani na ni nzuri 
zaidi ama ni vizuri zaidi kwa serikali kuwaza jinsi ya kuweza kuwekeza na kuwafanya hawa 
vijana wawe wanaweza wakawa wabunifu na wakujifaa na kufaa K aunti  yetu.  
 
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 Hivyo basi nataka nimuunge mkono Gavana kwa sababu kwamba kuwapa nguvu 
vijana miradi yoyote ambayo itawapa nguvu vijana ya kwamba waweze kujitegemea katika 
maisha yao , ingekuwa ni bora zaidi na kwa sababu sisi wajumbe tunatoka katika maeneo na 
itakuwa bora zaidi i kiwa tutakuwa tunaliangazia hili la kuwafaa vijana kwa mfumo ambao 
tunaangalia maeneo sisi tunatoka. I kiwa itakuwa namna hio basi ujue kwamba maendeleo 
yanapatikana kwa usawa kwa vijana wote Kaunti  ya Mombasa kwa sababu vile viwanda vya 
ufundi ama sehemu a mbazo zile vijana wanajifundisha ufundi na kuboresha vipawa vyao 
sana sana vinakuwa mbali nao na ndio maana wanakuwa wanapotelea mitaani kwa sababu ya 
ukosefu wa fedha .  
Kwa hio natilia mkazo kwamba ni kweli ya kwamba tunahitaji kuwatia  nguvu vijana 
kwa kuweza kuwashika mkono katika talanta ambazo wako nazo, vijana wana ubunifu 
mwingi na wanaweza kufanya makuu ikiwa tutarudi kule mashinani katika miradi yote 
tuyawekeze kule ili ubunifu wao uweze kupata mahali pa kuboreshwa.  
Kuna jambo l a kipekee ambalo limezunguziwa kuhusu mambo ya maji ya kwamba, 
ukweli wa mambo jamani Mombasa kukinyesha dakika kumi basi maji yanafurika kila 
mahali na Gavana alitaja kitu kingine ambacho ni cha ajabu sana ya kwamba tunaweza 
tukayanasa haya maji wazungu w anasema ku harvest bila shaka Kiswahili ni kuyavuna haya 
maji tunaweza tukayavuna na mimi si mtembezi sana lakini nimetembea nikaona kwa 
wenzetu walivyofanya ni kwamba wanavuna yale maji yanatoka kwenye mito kisha 
wanayasafisha maji maana kusafisha maji ni  rahisi zaidi. Kwa hio ukweli wa mambo ni 
kwamba maji Mombasa imekuwa ni janga kubwa na kama tunakuwa tunaweza kuvuna yale 
maji ambayo hufurika kwa madakika kidogo wakati kunanyesha itakua ni vizuri zaidi tuwe 
na mfumo mzuri kwamba yale maji tunaweza tukay avuna na yakawa yana mahali maalum 
ambapo kuna mitambo haya maji yasafishwe na kisha yapelekwe kwenye matangi na 
yapelekwe kwa wananchi kwa matumizi ya kinyumbani itakua ni bora zaidi, na sisi tuko hapa 
nadhani  kumpa nguvu na mawazo Gavana na wale wote amb ao wanahusika na mambo haya 
kuona kwamba mambo haya yatakuwa vipi, maana mambo haya yana andikwa kwenye 
karatasi lakini kutekelezwa kwake inategemea na mawazo ambayo sisi tutayatoa na 
kusaidiana na wale ambao wanashika majukumu mengine ndio kwamba mambo ha ya 
yamekuwa vizuri.  
Nikizungumzia mkondo wa afya nikilinganisha na hotuba ya Gavana ni kwamba kwa 
mfano kwangu mimi ninapokaa mimi jamani hakuna zahanati hata moja na zile zahanati ziko 
pale ni zile za kibinafsi, na zile zahanati za kibinaf si zinawapora s ana wananchi wet;  nipeane 
mfano ya kwamba kwa muda huu ambao wale wauuguzi wameendelea wamegoma, kuna 
janga kule kwangu ya kwamba mama kujifungua ni elfu tano, yaani hata akajifungua mlango 
wa hospitali akiingizwa kule ndani ndio akatwe mtoto kitovu aoshwe  mama anaambiwa alipe 
elfu tano, na inakuwa ni  dhiki kwa sababu hali zile ambazo ziko kule ni hali za kusikitisha 
mama amejifungua Mungu amemsaidia amejifungua salama, amejifungua tu peke yake lakini 
kwa sababu amejifungua mlango wa hospitali unaona kwamba  mama yule ataingizwa ndani 
angalau asaidiwe kukatwa mtoto kitovu na mambo mengine, mama anaitishwa elfu tano, 
inakuwa ni dhiki unakuta mlango wa duka umegongwa , unakuta majirani hawalali 
wanasumbuliwa kwamba  mama amebaki hospitali, s aa nyengine wazee wana wacha 
vitambulisho mahospitali kwa sababu watu wao ama wagonjwa wao watoke . Kwa hio ni 
vizuri zaidi kama tunazungumzia mambo ya afya tuweke macho yetu kule mashinani tuone je 
hivi vifaa ama hivi vituo vya afya vipo? Na kama vipo basi katika ruwaza hii amba yo Gavana 
ameileta tuzingatie tena kwamba vile  vituo vya afya vinawekwa kila W odi, halafu 
tuzungumzie tutaweka vifaa namna gani na kule kuviboresha manake  kinachoboreshwa huwa 
kiko. Kwa hio nadhani kupitia Jumba hili tutaweza kumsaidia Gavana kimawazo ili ya 
kwamba hivi vituo vya afya vipatikane kila Wodi mwanzo kisha ndio pale tuweze 
kuviboresha ili wananchi wasiumie.  
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 Nikimalizia Bwana Spika mimi ni mmoja tumeangalia kwa mtazamo tukiwa waalimu 
na mambo ya elimu yakitajwa tunasikia kusisimka ikumbukwe kwam ba tunahitaji kuenua 
kiwango cha elimu cha watoto wetu na mara nyingi zile changamoto ambazo ziko mashinani 
wanaambiwa wakifika darasa la nane ndio wamemaliza kusoma hata ukimuuliza mzazi 
anakwambia ashamaliza, akikwambia ashamaliza ni kuwa ashafika darasa  la nane . Kwa hio 
stori imeis ha pale lakini kwa sababu kisomo  hakina mwisho maana mtoto anatamani kusoma 
ni vizuri twende mashinani tukimsaidia Gavana kuangalia ki wango cha elimu kiko namna 
gani,  tujue kwamba katika ile mitaa wale ambao tunajaribu kuwaenua  katika elimu je 
wamefika kiwango kipi , na ni vipi tut awaongezea elimu kwa namna gani,  na hivi vituo vya 
elimu kwa mfano kuna wale ambao wanashindwa sekondari ni vizuri tupate vile vyuo vya 
ufundi wapeane maoni ili waweze kupata ujuzi zaidi ili waweze kuji kimu zaidi kimaisha na 
tunajua dunia inageuka jamani siku hizi mambo yote teknolojia , ni vizuri tunavyofikiria 
elimu tufikirie ni jinsi gani watoto wetu watakuwa na elimu na teknolojia ili waweze 
kushindana katika kimataifa hususan kwa upande wa biashara n a uchumi kwa jumla. 
Nikome e pale nikisema nashukuru zaidi kwa sababu imani yangu ni kwamba Bunge hili 
litaweza kutekeleza majukumu mengi matukufu na tutaweza kuingia katika daftari la 
kumbukumbu ya kwamba tumefanya kazi nzuri na Gavana hatajuta kuwa na Bun ge nzuri 
sana. Ahsante sana.  
(Applause)  
Hon.  Speaker  (Mr. Khatri): Thank you very much Hon.  Nyiro . Hon.  Members  I just 
want to remind you that you first introduce  yourself by your name and which W ard you come 
from before making contributions to the Motion  so that the Hansard can capture your name. 
Thank you. Yes ?  
Hon.  Aran:  Mr. Speaker Sir first of all let me congratulate you for being elected as 
the second Speaker of this County  Assembly , and my names are Moses Aran representing the 
youth and also let me congratulate the Governor for his re election and also Mr. Speaker you 
being a youth I know you will spearhead the youth agenda in Mombasa County . Also I want 
to thank my p arty ODM for giv ing me this chance , the ODM branch led by our able 
Chairman Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy for giving me this chance to represent the youth of 
Mombasa County  I promise the Party that I will work hand in hand with the Hon.  Members  
elected and n ominated to deliver to t he youth of Mombasa. Now back to the Governor ’s 
speech that was read on 26th September, last month I want to congratulate our able Governor . 
Actually i have gone through the speech , and  I have to say I must congratulate him that's why 
he is called the Gove rnor 001 and if you see this the ten programs or the agenda for the 
Mombasa County  you cannot compare to wh ere we were sometime back. Hon.  Members , I 
know this may sound as a hard task to us but it can also  be very simple and I want also to 
make a contrib ution that for the Governor , His Excellency Hassan Ali Joho to start with the 
youth agenda is not by mistake , we know that the youth drives the nation and the youth 
contribution if you work hand in hand with the youth all the remaining programs will be a 
success, I don't want to repeat what my fellow Honorable  said and what they said is what we 
need to do. My fellow Hon.  Members  I want to urge you that we know almost a third of Hon.  
Members  who are in this House are youth s... 
(Applause)  
I call upon you guys  don't let be a Moses Aran agenda let us work hand in hand to 
achieve the youth agenda and this can  be achieved if we practic e loyalty, if we practise 
patience , understanding and if we work hand in hand with each other and we respect each 
other . Let us be united and all these  agenda s will be achieved but the moment we will be 
divided across religion, across tribe, across all things  it will divide us to achieve this . The 
Governor has throw n the b all to us Hon.  Members , and  it is upon us to make a form idable 
team and I can tell you that we can score the b all. L et us not play the ball then score our b alls 
by unnecessary wrangles ; we are a team regardless of the political affiliation . 
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 We need to work as a team and achieve this, the people of Mombasa depend on us  
and the moment w e won't succeed it won't be on the G overnor ’s only but it will be on us also 
because it is us who represent the people , we need to deliver and for us to deliver we need to 
work hand in hand . I appreciate my senior Hon.  Amur for the sentime nts made , also by Hon.  
Nyiro and my Chief Whip I thik I second you guys let's work together and let's move and also 
make laws which will favour the youth. Thank you and may God bless you.  
(Applause)  
Hon.  Speaker  (Mr. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Fatuma . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii ; 
kwanza kabisa ningependa kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu, kwa majina naitwa Fatuma 
Swaleh Mote maarufu naitwa Fatuma Kushe. Namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu kwa 
kuniwezesha kuregelea katika Bunge hili k wa mara ya pili , si kwa uerevu wangu wala si kwa 
nguvu zangu ni mapenzi ya Allah. V ile vile Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumshukuru 
Mwenyezi Mungu kwa kuweza kumregesha Gavana wetu kwa awamu ya pili na vile vile 
namshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu kwa kuwezesha wewe kuchaguliwa katika hili Bunge kama 
Spika wa Bunge manake ni jambo la kushangaza kwamba Mwenyezi Mungu akitaka lake 
lazima liwe haukupata upinzani wa aina yeyote na vile vile hiyo ni ishara ya kwamba katika 
pepo kuna pepo nyingi kwa hiyo wewe utaingia pepo katika mkono wa kulia Mheshimiwa 
Spika ... 
(Applause)  
..Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia ningependa kuchangia katika hotuba ya Gavana, 
ningependa kuzungumzia mambo matatu ; Mheshimiwa Gavana amezungumzia kuhusu 
mambo ya ufisadi japo ni jambo tata haina budi kulizun gumzia. Mheshimiwa Spika Bwana 
Gavana alizungumzia kuhusu mambo ya mazingira , vile vile akazungumzia kuhusu vijana.  
Mheshimiwa Spika nitaanza kuzungumzia kuhusu vijana ; katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa 
kuna vijana ambao wanatumia mihadarati , suala kama  hilo Bwana Gavana alilitilia kipao 
mbele , kama tunavyojua mui huwa mwema na hakuna mzazi ambaye hupenda kuzaa mtoto 
ambaye hasikii. M heshimiwa Spika mimi ningeomba Waheshimiwa wenzangu tulete 
Miswada katika Bunge ili tuweze kuokoa jamii zetu katika Jimbo la Kaunt i ya Mombasa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika u fisadi ni donda sugu sana katika nchi yetu ya Kenya na kuna tetesi 
ambazo zilizungumzwa juzi katika magazeti kwamba katika  Kaunti ya Mombasa kuna 
ufisadi. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ningependa wenzangu tuje na sheria mtu yeyote 
atakayepatikana na ufisadi katika Kaunti hii yetu ya Mombasa kwanza aweze kusimamishwa 
kazi mara moja huku uchunguzi ukifanywa. Jambo lengine ni kuhusu mazingira Mheshimiwa 
Spika , hivi sasa tunajua takataka ni mali , pia tuweze kuja na sheria kuhusu takataka ama 
kuhusu mazingira ili vijana wetu waweze kupata ajira. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.   
(Applause)  
Hon.  Speaker  (Mr. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Shebe Athuman . 
Hon.  Athuman: Ahsante sana M heshimiwa  Spika ningependa kuchukua fursa hii 
kumshukuru mfalme  wa mbingu na ard hi ambaye ametuwezesha sisi pamoja na mimi kuwa 
hapa leo . Ama kwa hakika M heshi miwa S pika si kwa uja nja wetu bali ni kwa uwezo wake; 
pili napenda kuchukua nafasi hii kuwash ukuru wakaazi wangu wa Jomvu K uu kunichagua 
kunipatia fursa hii kuw eza kuwahudumia kwa miaka mitano . Majina yangu kamili naitwa 
Abdallah Shebe Athuman Said nitakuruhusu uweze kuniita mkono power . Mheshimiwa S pika 
napenda kuchukua fursa hii kumshukuru na kumpongeza G avana wangu 001 kupatiwa fursa 
ya kuongoza K aunti yetu ya  Mombasa kwa hatamu ya pili , vilevile  nakupongeza na kukupa 
kongole Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kuchaguliwa na nina imani ya kuwa uta...kwa uwezo wa 
Mungu . Napenda kuc huku a fursa hii kuwashukuru na kuwapongeza W aheshimiwa wenzangu 
kuwaeleza kuwa majukumu yaliyo mbele yetu ni makubwa sana kwa hi o hatuna budi tu kaze 
mishipi tuangalie ni vipi tutaweza kutekeleza majukumu yetu tuli okabidhiwa na wana nchi 
wetu katika Wodi takriban thelat hini. 
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 Yangu napenda ku… kwa kuunga mkono hotuba ya G avana kwa sababu ametaja kwa 
njia moja ama nyingine japo hakusema shebe moja kwa moja lakini amenitaja kwa sababu 
kuna mas uala yako katika moyo wangu ambayo G avana ameyagusia ndio nikasema 
amenitaja kwa njia moja ama nyingine . Swala la vijana,  mimi ni mkereketwa nashukuru niko 
Bunge kip indi hiki kwa nguvu za vijana pamoja na kina mama pamoja na walemavu na 
wazee  nikikwambia G avana amenitaja ametaja falsafa tano za mukono ndio hayo 
yaliyozungumwa hapa ; swala la vijana G avana amezungumzia kuhusu ajira,  vijana 
tunavipaw a  wala hatukufilisik a kimawazo , vijana wana talanta na wana vipawa mbalimbali 
changamoto tuna imani kupitia uongozi wako na uongozi wa G avana wetu hili swala 
tutalifanya chuka… ili tupate mfuko na bajeti ya sawasawa ili tuweze kuweka mas uala ya 
vijana mbele , hususan michezo . Ukiangalia mas uala ya usanii , ukiangalia mas uala ya taaluma 
mbalimabili hizi ni talanta zimemilikiwa na vijana wetu lakini changamoto imekuwa 
wamekosekana watu kuwashika hawa vijana mkono . Kwa hi o nina imani katika Kamati 
tutakazo ziunda za B unge pengine  tutaweka mas uala ya bajeti itakuwa asilimia kubwa katika 
bajeti iwekwe katika masu ala ya vijana ili tuweze ku tengeza  ajira... 
(Applause ) 
…Mheshimiwa Spika limezungumziwa swala la walemavu ; vilevile ni swal a ambalo 
liko katika moyo wangu; ninaye dada yangu ambae naamini uwezo anao  lakini changamoto 
za maumbile zinamfa nya yeye kukosa riziki au kukosa kutimiza ndoto yake . Kwa hi o 
Mheshimiwa S pika vilevil e nitatia pondo sana kuhusu masu ala ya ulemavu nihakikishe kama 
ni masu ala ya bajeti wafikiriwe hawa walemavu ndugu zetu , wengine wana vipawa wanakosa 
watu wa kuangazia mambo yao . Mheshimiwa Spika swala langu la tatu ni maswala ya 
mazingira ; sehemu ninayotoka hakuna W odi kubwa kama Jomvu Kuu, hakuna W odi 
iliyosahaulika kimaendeleo kama Jomvu K uu, nazungumza ili langu likitaka kukatika hapa 
nilipo nikisema masw ala ya mazingira J omvu tumebahatika . Mheshimiwa S pika tuko na 
mtambo Jomvu nashukuru Mheshimiwa G avana alijaribu kutupa nguvu alikosa tu goodwill 
ya M heshimiwa aliyetuwakilisha katika B unge liliopita lakini leo mimi ni M heshimiwa hayo 
maswala tutayamaliza.. . 
(Applause ) 
...Huo mtambo kuna recycling plant   ya mazingira katika J omvu  Kuuu amba yo 
ningeomba katika bajeti ama K amati mbalimbal i tutakazoziunda hii miradi kati ka ruwaza ya 
2035 ni vizu ri huo mtambo uweze kutengewa ba jeti ili uweze kufanya kazi pale tutaweza 
kuajiri vijana wetu wengi takriba n mia tano,  na ni mradi wa Kaunti  ya Mombasa nzima , nina 
imani Wabunge Waheshimiwa wenzangu wa K aunti,  vijana na wazee wanaotuongoza 
wakitu patia nguvu katika hili swala,  mambo ya ajira ya vijana na mazingira machafu 
tutalizika katika kaburi la sahau . Ya mwisho Mheshimiwa S pika nikimalizia maswala ya maji 
pale kwangu nina mtihani na huu mtihani uko Mombasa K aunti nzima ; ukipita kona ya 
Jomvu ukipit a Bonje tu hapo ni Kilifi K aunti , pale kuna birika kubwa sana maji pale 
yanamwaika sirafu ya hali ya juu sana , ukitoka chini ukiingia J omvu hakuna maji,  ikiwa 
Jomvu hakuna maji mjini ya tapatikana ? Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa S pika maji ni uhai lazima 
tuekeze katika  masuala ya maji,  maji yako lakini shida ni cartels  ambayo ni na imani katika 
hili B unge tut aweza kuchachawiza na tuchac hawizane vipi tutaweza kutatua maswala ya maji 
na tuweke bajeti ya ruwaza yetu ya 2035 tuweze kuyatimiza.  Sote tuna majukumu 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu tuungane mkono kwa mambo ya heri na mambo ambayo ya taleta 
natija katika watu wetu mashinani . Tumepewa kandarasi ya miaka mitano kwa hi o tuna imani 
kwa uongozi wako Mheshimiwa S pika utatupatia mwelekeo na  kutuunga mkono pale 
panapofaa I nshaAllah. Mimi sina budi kuunga mkono hotu ba ya Mheshimiwa  Gavana wetu 
na nitasimama na yeye kuha kikisha mambo yote ya maendeleo ya akina mama,  walemavu,  
vijana , wazee na miundo misingi itaweza kup ewa kipa o mbele . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika nashukur u sana kwa kunipatia fursa hii M ungu akubariki.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mary Naliaka?  
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 Hon.  (Ms.) Wafula : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for granting me this opportunity to 
make my maiden speech today . I also thank his Excellency the Governor A li Hassan Joho 
and I also thank him in his own capacity nominated me as a nominated MCA Mombasa 
County . Mr. Speaker Sir I thank all the Members  of County  Assembly  that are prese nt in this 
House today, on the G overnor ’s speech I will start on the youth s; as a mother I am crying 
very much because of the youth s of today . As you all know the youth s are the backbone of 
the economy of this country , and  when I think of discouraging the social vices that are 
especially in Mombasa County  we have many youth s engaging in drug abuse , others in 
vigilante groups like wakali wao  and the rest and we may  want to help these  youth s through 
mentorship skills . We can s it as a H ouse and put down strategies and mechanisms on how to 
mentor our youth s, we can hire speakers so that they are talked to and how to live positively . 
Many youth s in our country have lost hope, and that is why they are engaged in this but if 
they come out and through the integrity as Members  of this H ouse we can put down measures 
of how to teach them  on how to live life fully without shortcuts because we don’t have gifts 
in life but we have to go the normal procedure. A nother thing that we wish to talk about I will 
thank the S peaker in his speech he mention ed about socially our diversity with in the  nation 
called Kenya , and by this I thank him because if you see even in the nomination the MCA’s 
of Mombasa County  you will see that the list represent the face of Ke nya and so I want to 
urge this H ouse to put down measures and strategies on how to embrace t his. 
Last but not least I wish to talk about the issue of education as mention ed in the 
Governor ’s speech ; like where I come from the Airport Ward I would like this H ouse to put  
down some measures to help us get at least one public school b ecause I believe  it’s the only 
Ward in Mombasa that doesn’t have or doesn’t enjoy from public institution s, both in 
primary and even at the secondary level . With those few remarks, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi . 
Hon.  Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir I have been standing for a long time but I 
appreciate that this time you have actually identified me. A ctually my names are Ibrahim 
Omondi properly known as Bomoa  and I want to take this particular opportunity or special 
opportunity  to thank the almighty God to have enable d us to be here today . I want also to 
thank my ably,  His Excellenc y the Governor of Mombasa 001 for having given us enough 
support during our election , the period of election and up to date  he has provided  good 
environment for us , as you can see we are very organized and well seated to date . I want to 
thank the Speaker for having been elected Speaker of this H ouse and I want to thank all the 
MCA’s , both elected and nomi nated actually to be in this H ouse and  I cannot forget my 
brother Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu who is my neighboring Ward who also has been elected as a 
Deputy Speaker , thank you . I cannot forget the people of Airport W ard, this was something 
that actually was done and in a very organized way and the  faith that they showed towards 
me when they elected me to represent them in this County , and I want to say that people of 
Airport W ard are expecting a lot just like in other W ards. I know that very many W ards are 
expecting a lot as a matter of fact expect ations from this H ouse and therefore it ’s very 
important and critical for us to be able to meet their expectations and that one now sets our 
objectives and our goals on how we are going to satisfy the entire Wards that we are 
representing . I want to say this as of now I focus on the G overnor’s speech and it may look 
like most of the Members  are actually engaging on the issue of the youth s and Mr. Speaker 
sir as you can see almost every M ember that has spoken has talked something about the 
youths and I am not an exemption . I am also going to contribute something about the youth s 
and certain ly youths are very important,  in fact they the ones driving the economy of 
Mombasa County  and even the whole country and that ’s why you see most Mem bers are 
revolving around the youths . I have always been told that the youths will be the leaders of 
tomorrow but we want the youths to be leaders of today . 
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 That one c an be only be achieved if this H ouse is going to enlighten the goals  or the 
laws that will favo r the youths in achieving the objectives  and goals;  without giving them an 
enabling environment they will gain nothing , and as other M ember s have said that there are a 
lot of skills , a lot of knowledge and a lot of abilit ies which are need ed to be turned from the 
youth s outside but the challenge is how do we start , how do we get the skill s or the 
knowledge that is outside there so that we can utilize them and making them achieve the ir  
objective , that’s the challenge and that is why am talkin g about the laws that we shall enact in 
this House .  
Mr. Speaker sir our able G overnor in his very elaborate speech note d issues ; one is 
about the support programs for the youth s, that  we need to come up with very many support 
programs which will help us m ake these youths realize their obj ectives and the M ember of 
Jomvu Mr. Mukono has also said the issues of sports , programs  for the youth and so on so 
forth . We can make that be realized then the  most important thing that the G overnor 
embraced in his speech is the SWOT analysis ; when we look at this speech he has talked 
about the strength , the weaknesses , opportunity and the thre ats which come along with youths 
and truly speaking if this able H ouse will be able to attain this,  to look at th ese four issue s 
then definitely am sure we shall be leading somewhere else and am sure most of us will be 
here in 2022 , actually almost 90  per cent  of this House...  
(Applause ) 
That one am sure Mr. Speaker sir ; another issue I also want to emphasis e on my 
Governor ’s speech is about self governance, these are very important polic ies which give the 
people th at freeness so that they can express themselves without fear or favour. A s we bring 
the country together , especially this County  of ours, and therefore when you look at Article 
185 which is under our own constitution which actually supports this pa rticular policy it is 
now this H ouse to ensure ...I actually forgot my water bottle there , thank you Hon. .. 
(Laughter ) 
Fourthly I was emphasizing on the issues  of self governance  that the G overnor  has 
singled in the speech , and I would just support it by Article 185 which is under the new 
constitution, and that one means our Governor is very much focused on the issue of self 
governance , and therefore  we must support it fully , supp ort it so that  the policy  can be 
realized.  I also want to emphasize on the  issue of  waste management;  Mr. Speaker sir this one 
has been a nuisance in our environment especially Airport  Ward where I represent.  I would 
like to beg this Honorable  House, one day the whole of this House to visit my Airport Ward 
and you see for real what am talking, it’s a very serious issue, and you know  this one comes 
along with many diseases;  water and air borne diseases and others. S o I want to beg this 
House, le t us strengthen the laws that will help us deal with this issues of waste management 
once and for all.  
(Applause)  
Finally when we are talking about this waste management as  my able G overnor has 
actually single  out on this issue if you check  he has actually said something concerning 
mobilization for using the community as a human resource, the Community can help us to 
actually harmonize or can help us to make it easier to manage this waste and that is a very 
significant point. The people arou nd you know are very cheap, you know if you give them 
mainly a hundred per day or two hundred per day, and they can do that work for us, very 
cheap instead of holding very many common less man of collecting those and we shall also 
be creating employment  for these  youths in our community, thank you  for your Motion ... 
(Applause)  
Actually the Members  want  me to conclude with my s peech, I am finishing up on the 
distribution of water, this is  the last point Mr. Speaker sir.  Water, without water these  Hon.  
Members  could not have been smartest there, without water I could not read and talk, water is 
very important, you can see practically what water does.  
October 3 , 2017                  MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                      6 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 Now you can imagine if we don’t have water in our Wards what happens, you can just 
imagine what’s going t o happen there Mr. Speaker sir, and there is a program that was 
started , I can not explain what happened but there were some pipes that were put especially in 
my Ward underground that were running, giving people a lot of hope that you are going to 
get wate r just the next day, but Mr. Speaker sir I was disappointed, I waited today, tomorrow 
the next day no water , the next day there was no water up to date . Those pipes have  been put 
there I don’t know what’s happening . Mr. Speaker sir I just want humbly to re quest that we 
have to find out exactly what happened, it’s a very big problem, water, we need fresh water in 
my Ward, i am even planning to use my salar y, you can imagine how bad that salary has been 
slashed to go and buy ton nes of fresh water for my people of Airport  Ward. It is a very 
serious thing , a Hon.  Member to use his own salary which has been slashed to distribute 
water while there is an able House in this Mombasa County . I think I  rest my case right there.  
(Applause)  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members , I just want to remind you that we have a 
maximum of four sitting days to discu ss the Governor ’s Speech. Under Standing order 
number 78 (1) ; no Member shall speak more tha n once to a question except in Committee of 
the W hole County  Assembly . Yes Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani.  
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, I beg to move a 
Motion  on adjournment to this debate pursuant to Standing Order number 49(b) ; debate to 
resume on Wed nesday  4th October, 2017 at 9:00 a.m, and I would request Hon.  Kitula to 
second Mr. Speaker.  
Hon.  Kitula:  I second Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  I propose the question that the Assembly  
be now adjourn the debate on Governor ’s Speech and the debate to resume on Wednesday  4th 
October, 2017 at 9 :00a.m. 
(Question proposed  and agreed  to) 
Members  I now put the question that the House be now adjourned,  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
The Assembly  stands adjourned until Wed nesday , 4th October, 2017, at 9: 00a.m. 
The House rose at 4: 02p.m. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 