June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  MEMBER  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday , 13th June, 2017  
The House met at 3:10p.m. 
 (Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Member s, you may sit down. Yes Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Thank you very much. Member s I have a communication in the name of , ‘Alteration o f 
County  Member  Calendar 2017’.  Hon.  Member s as you aware that yesterday 12th June 2017 at 
2:00p.m we held a meeti ng of  the County  Member  Business Committee  and there was a bu siness 
which was to be transacted today on the above mentioned subject . I consider the Motion  and the 
provisions of Standing Orders ; I am relying on the Standing Order number 44, (3)(f), which in 
essence  provide s that the Speaker may find the Motion  to be inadmissible in which case I found 
it to be inadmissible due to some reason  that it require s a committal which is of public funds  
which no  provision of annually  is made  in the annual estimates as adopted by the County  
Member . I therefore refer the Motion  to the Committee  of Finance, Budget a nd Appropriation 
before I  approve  the Motion  on the following financial grounds: - 
1. Every County  Member  has a calendar for it s convenience and may alter the calendar 
for its convenience anytime and what inform s the alte ration is good justification , resources and 
value of the time. However, extending the Calendar ought  to be gazetted for public awareness 
and in at lea st two  newspapers of n ation al circulation.  This therefore means what; there shall be 
financial expenditure  to be involved to do so which is about Ksh. 2.4 million  to bring them out 
for two different  quarter  pages o f daily newspapers . Note  that the votes , for such publication  is 
already exhausted.  
2. The County  Member  is current ly facing financial difficulties since the Supplementary 
Budget  is not uploaded . By extending the Member  over and above the financial year ending  30th 
June, 2017, this translate s to the County  Member  utilizing the budget for  the second Member  
which is not financial ly prudent .  
3. The exte nding of the calendar , all th e Committee  meeting s have to be paid for and this 
has financial implications.  The Member  has got no  funds to run its  Committee s for now. In fact 
several Committee s have been getting assistance from the Executive.  
4. The  County  Member  has been facing financial difficulties a t the moment and this is 
attested to the fact that the Ward  Office rent s have been paid by the office of the Governor for 
this month.  
5.  The Member  has unmet  financial obligations such as gratuity which is th e priority . 
The County  Member  is therefore cutting down cost to ensure that the gratuity is remitted to the 
relevant agenc y for the benefit of the Hon.  Member s Accounts.  
I therefore rule that the matter is hereby  referred to  Committee  of Finance, Budget a nd 
appropriation for the consideration and advise as to where the funds can be attained to  sustain  the 
extended period of the Member . Thank you very much.  
(Applause ) 
Yes Clerk.  
MESSAGES  
Member s there is a message from Honorable  or H is Excellenc y Hassan Ali Joho;  Re: 
Organization of executive Committee  departments,  in line wi th the  County  Governments Act 
section 30 (e),  36 to 42 and the program Based  budget financial year 2017/201 8, the Executive 
Committee  Departments of the County  Government of Mombasa shal l be as follows: - 
1. The Department of Finance a nd Economic Planning . 
2. The Department o f Education Information Technology and MV2035  
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 3. The Department Gender, Youth and Sports  
4. The Departments of Trade, Tourism And Investments  
5. The Department of Energy, Environment and Solid Waste Management  
6. The Departments of Lands, Planning and Housing  
7.   The Department Health  
8. The Department of Water Sanitation and Natural Resources  
9. The Department of Transport and Infrastructure  
10. The Department of Fisheries, Agriculture and livestock   
11. The Department of Devolution and Public Service Administration  
12. The Executive  
This re  organization will take effect on 1st July 2017 in line with the new financial year 
2017/2018.  So I urge the Leader of Majorit y to bring this tomorrow as a Motion  so that it can be 
adopted in this House.  Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
Hon.  Stephen Wangudi, Chairperson  Committee  on Early Childhood, Education, 
Children and Vocational Training.  
Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the oppo rtunity. Mr. Speaker I have received 
a letter this afternoon and i think that we are going to table this in a meeting and we get a Report   
as per the discussion we ha d in the previous sitting . Mr. Speaker , thank you .   
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You have received a  letter from who? Hon.  
Wangudi ! 
Hon. Wangudi:  A letter from County  Public Service B oard Mr Speaker . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay s o can we get it on Thursday, is that 
okay with you?  
Hon. Wangudi:  Mr. Speaker I request the Committee  we allocate time in  the House of 
Business Committee . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay you can bring it on Thursday. Yes 
Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
Hon.  Amir Thoya.  Yes Hon.  Siminyu . 
Hon. Siminyu : On behalf of the Chair as the Committee  of transpor t, we have a 
Communication  from the department  of transport ; as we are aware that  the department of 
Inspectorate has assigned a traffic officer at that  section to deal with cases of overlapping . They 
have also place d a tow truck at the top of the Kibarani hill to be  on step as a standby in case  there 
is a truck that break s down while climbing up the hill. However kindly note that all the traffic 
jam is caused by Kenya Ports Authority operations  that have no proper system and timing of 
trucks leaving the por t and other port related facilities namely; Grain B ulk and oil terminals that 
are in Shimanzi area.  For as long as the port of Mombasa is left to operate independently, to 
decide which gates are used for what cargo then we shall never be able to solve the congestion at 
Kibarani, M agongo and Mikindani. The good news is that we are developing a software ; that is 
the department of transport and infrastructure are developing a software that will create and 
queue system of trucks coming in and out of Mombasa. Th is might help, w e shall be conducting 
a pilot in the coming months. We shall a lso present a draft law to the Member  for possible 
enactment.  Thank you Mr. Speaker , that is the communication from the department of 
Infrastructure  and Transport . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much. Hon.  Mary Akinyi is 
not here this was schedule d upon her request , since she is not here nobody ..., yes Clerk.  
(Interruption ) 
Yes Motion , yes Hon.  Hatimy what is it?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  I request the Bill to be 
read the second  time and thereafter we proceed to the Committee  of the W hole House, Bill 
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 number 16 ; the introduction of the County  Member  of Mombasa and Mombasa County  Disaster 
preparedness and Emergency Manage ment Bill. Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to move.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon. if you can move both Bills because 
there will be no time for a Motion  again, if you can move a Motion  for the two Bills, I can s ee 
you are the same person.  
Hon. Moh amed Hatimy : Mr. Speaker I take this opportunity first to apply for a leave 
under -Standing order 11 8(2) that I be given permission granted so that we can table the Bill in 
the afternoon  Mr. Speaker , if this is permitted , thank you.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Msw abah Rashid) : Permission granted, Member s it has been 
proposed this Motion  and I need , Hon.  Dan i need to  put the question for a Motion .  
Hon. Onyango : We only have on e Bill Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : But it’s a Motion .  
Hon. Onyang o: Mr. Speaker we only have one Bill… 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : They are very right ,  it wil l come because we 
are discussing  two Bills here, business number ten of the Bill and business number eleven is a  
Bill. Don‘t  you have a copy ? 
Hon. Onya ngo: I have one.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Which Bill do you have?  
Hon. Onyango : I only have one and its disaster . 
(Question proposed)  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ok then we shall dispense  that as we wait for 
the other one, yes Hon.  Hatimy. Member s I put the question as many as the opinion that the Bill 
of Mombasa County  Disaster P reparedness and Emergency Management Bill 2015 be read for 
the second time . 
(Question put and a greed  to) 
Yes can the Bill be read for the second time, Clerk?  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY  DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT BILL , 2015  
SECOND READING  
Clerk:  The Mombasa County  Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management Bill, 
2015.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much Member s after the Bill 
has been read for the second time I hereby commit the Bill to the  Committee  of the Whole 
County  Member .  
(Sergeant At Arms lowered The Mace ) 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid exited the Chair)  
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Mswabah Rashid in the Chair ) 
Chairperson:  Thank you very much Member s, we are now in the Committee  of the  
Whole House and we have a Bill; it is here with us and since we have no amendment which ha s 
been put we shall be reading parts a nd passing as they are ; so if the C hairman has any 
amendments I think he shall stand and gi ve amendments because only the C hairman is supposed 
to bring the am endment in this House, yes C lerk. 
Clerk:  Part I Preliminary  
1. Short Title  
2. Interpretation  
3. Subject of  the Act  
Part II the establishment  
(Interruption)  
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 (Question proposed)  
Chairperson: Can I have one copy please; there is only one copy here. Member s we are in 
part one, I think I should propose the question on part one, it has been proposed that part one on  
Preliminary  be part of the Bill, I now put the question that part one be part of the Bill. 
 (Question put and a greed  to) 
...Yes C lerk. 
Clerk:  Part II the Establishment and composition  of the Disaster Emergency Management 
Committee ; 
4. Establishment and Compo sition of Disaster Emergency Management Committee  
5. Function of the Committee  
6. Powers of the Committee  
7. County  Disaster and Management and Emergency Management Plan  
8. Implementation of the Plan  
(Question proposed)  
Chair person : Member s it has been proposed that p art II be part of the Bill, since there is no 
comment on that , there is no amendmen t I proceed to put the question.  
 (Question put and a greed  to) 
Clerk:  The measure s of the County  Government for Disaster Emergency Management ; 
9. Measures to be taken by the County Government  
10. Period of Disaster or Emergency  
 
11.       Declaration of period of disaster or emergency  
 
12. Declaratory powers under a disaster or emergency situation  
 
13. Termination of period of Disaster or Emergency  
14. Steps to abate danger  
(Question proposed)  
Chai rperson : Member s it has been proposed that part three be part of the Bill...; is there 
any comment or any change ? 
(Silence)  
 Since there is no comment or there is no change I therefore proceed to put the question, 
as many as  are of the opinion that part th ree be part of the Bill. 
 (Question put and a greed to) 
Yes Clerk ? 
Clerk:  Part 4 Financial Provisions  
15. The County  Disaster and Emergency Management Fund.  
16. Allocation of funds for disaster and emergency management  
17. Emergency procurement  
18. Annua l estimates  
19. Accounts and audit  
20. Financial year  
Chair person : Member s it has been proposed that Part IV that is Financial Provision be 
part of this Bill. Any amendment, any comment?  
(Silence)  
No comment, so I proceed to put the question. Member s as many as of the opinion that 
Part IV , be part of the Bill. 
(Question put and a greed  to) 
Yes, Clerk ? 
Clerk:  Part V Offences and Penalties  
21. Obstruction  
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 22. False claim  
23. Misappropriation of money or materials  
24. False alarm  
25. General penalty  
Chai rperson : Member s it has been proposed that Part IV that is Offences and Penalties 
be part of this Bill.  
(Silence)  
Member s since there is no comment,  I proceed to put the question; a s many as  of the 
opinion that Part IV be part of this Bill. 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
Yes, Clerk ? 
Clerk:  Part VI Miscellaneous  
26. Power to requisition resources for rescue operations  
27. Entry on property  
28. Direction for communication of warnings  
29. Regulations   
Chair person : Member s it has been proposed that Part VI  Miscellaneous be part of this 
Bill. I proceed to put the question; a s many as of the opinion that Part VI be part of the Bill. 
(Question put and a greed  to) 
Yes Clerk ? 
Clerk:  The Mombasa County  Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management Bill, 
2015 ; A Bill for an Act of the County  Member  of Mombasa to establish and provide for 
maintenance and operation of an effective system for the anticipation, preparedness for, 
prevention, coordination,  mitigation, management, response to and recovery from emergencies 
and disasters in Mombasa; and for connected purposes . 
Chair person : Thank you, yes Hon. Hatimy, I think the Bill..., do you have anything to 
say? Yes Chairman . 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Chairman ...  
(Interruption)  
Chair person : So I did not hear you, can you ..., yeah  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: …(Inaudible ). 
Chair person : Sorry, can you use the microphone please I cannot hear you from this end.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  …(Inaudible )  
Chair person : Ok thank you Mr. Chairman and the Member s; with that the Committee  of 
the W hole County  Member  has been dissolved so we should go back to the House so that we can 
Report  progress. Thank you.  
 PLENARY RESUMED  
 (Sergeant At Arms raised the Mace on the Table)  
(Member s rose) 
 (Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswaba h Rashid took the Chair)  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit down, yes Hon. 
Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , (Inaudible ) and Second R eading 
without amendments and be read for the T hird time. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, Hon. Amur Murfad . 
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker since there are no any other amendments we should no w 
confirm the Bills, it was on the business, full Hous e no amendments have been based … 
(Applause)  
…we would rather commi t it so that we approve it Mr. Speaker other than reading step 
by step since there are no amendments Mr. Speaker.  
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ok, you have seconded the Motion  for Hon. 
Hatimy.   
Hon. Amur : Yes. 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ok thank you very much. Member s I think I 
should put the question ; as many as of the opinion that this Bill be read for a third time . 
(Question put and a greed  to) 
…yes  Clerk , can you read the Bill for the T hird time . 
MOMBASA COUNTY  DISASTER PREPAREDNESS A ND EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT BILL, 2015  
THIRD READING  
Clerk: The Mombasa County  Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management Bill, 
2015  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much, I think now the Bill 
has been passed , because Third R eading no question i s put. Thank you very much. Yes Hon. 
Hatimy .  
Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I request that this Bill be passed with amendment. 
Thank you.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : That’s a Motion ,  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes, Mr. Spea ker, but when there is anything it can be 
amended after the Third Reading  
(Interruption)  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Seconder… ? 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I stand to second the propos al by Hon. Hatimy. Thank you.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s I shall now put a question to the 
Bill; as many as of the opinion that the Bill, the Mombasa County  Disaster Preparedness and 
Emergency Management Bill, 2015 be passed with amendments .  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
…and the Bill has been passed. Thank you. Yes Hon. Hatimy I think you have another 
Bill but first I agree for you to go back to the Motion , you put the Motion  and then you bring the 
Bill.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  This is the second Bill Mr. Speaker and I think we  do have a 
Report  of Motion , maybe Mr. Speaker ….the Committee … 
(Interruption)  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Dan Onyango . 
Hon. Onyango : Bwana Spika  sijui kama mimi ndio sioni lakini hii inayosemekana ni hii 
sio hii na wewe kama Mheshimiwa Spika unajua , sasa pengine  kama kuna nyengine lakini hii 
tulipewa sio Bill nafikiri sote tunajua vile Bill inafanana , lazima ichapishwe rasmi na published 
by the Government Printers  sasa hii tumepatiwa ni photocopy  sijui kama wewe kama 
Mheshimiwa Spika pia tunakubali ana na hii Bill. Thank you.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, I am in support of the Bill. Yes Hon. 
Hatimy .  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker this Bill is published and it was sent  by email and   
there's no where it  states that you cannot use a phot ocopy of the document , there's no law  
restraining us to not use a money  Bill.... 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Onyango : Point of order Mr. Speaker Sir . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Resume your seat I will give you time, yes 
Hon. Hatimy . 
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : This is a money Bill and we can use a copy when you go and 
you want to have an Act you can go and download it and use a photocopy of that document so 
you go to our website and download it and use a copy . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : And this is the Second R eading, yes Hon. 
Duncan . 
Hon. Onyango:  Mheshimiwa  Spika nakataa  sio mara ya kwanza kuwa na Bill katika 
Nyumba na hii ni Nyumba ya sheria tumepitisha Bills nyingi hapa na hakuna siku....  
(Interruption)  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Duncan this is the Second R eading . 
Hon. Onyango:  Mheshimiwa Spika  chenye twafanya kwa N yumba hii  isije ikatuletea 
shida hapa hata baada ya sisi kutoka hapa...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Duncan this is a Second R eading , the 
Bill has already come, it is not the First Reading the Bill has a lready appeared here being the 
Second Reading and it is not the First R eading , the Bill has come here....  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Onyango:  How can we pass a Bill here without Member s having origina l copies?  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Speaker  (Mr. Mswabah) : Just a minute can you have a seat please Hon. Duncan , 
this Bill came for the first reading it went to the public participation and now it has come back 
for a Second R eading it went to public participatio n so it means it's a Bill because it went to a 
Public participation so it is now coming back so maybe I can say it is a Bill, so this Bill is not a 
stranger. Hon. Hatimy , can you continue .  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker we were giving a Report  first he should have to 
wait and listen to the Report  and say this is right or wrong ... 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Can you finish please . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  We even have the S tanding orders here ... 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read the Report  of the Mombasa  County  budget estimates for FY 
2017/2018  
1. Introduction  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, Hon.  Member s, ladies and gentlemen. I am pleased to present to you a 
Report  on the Mombasa County  Budget Estimates for FY 2017/2018.  The Report  was made after 
public parti cipation forum, departmental hearings and scrutiny of the budget estimates 
documents as submitted by the County  treasury.  The Report  will deal with major highlights and 
whether the document can pass muster in terms of compliance with the law.  
Mr. Speaker S ir, I beg to proceed....  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Duncan Onyango what is it?  
Hon. Onyango : Mheshimiwa Spika m imi naomba tu kubaliane hii Bill ambayo 
imepitishwa sasa hivi ni original  na haiko na saini,  hii inayosemekana ni photocopy  ina maana ya 
kwamba ili tiwa saini  na hii copy  haina sahihi popote....  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Duncan can you resume your seat...  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker Sir . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashi d):  Yes Hon. Fadhili what is it?  
Hon. Mwalimu:  The original copy that Hon. Duncan is purporting that it has a signature 
Mr. Speaker is in front of everyone here and there's nowhere that  somebody or an individual is 
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 supposed to sign . Mr. Speaker this Bill is being signed by the Governor when it goes for a ssent  
and the Clerk of the Member , so at the moment we will see no signatures here.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Hatimy can you proceed...  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Onyango : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi na kataa ... 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I have given permission to Hon. Hatimy so 
Hon. Duncan can you have your seat...  
(Loud Consultations)  
Hon. Duncan you are out of order , please have your seat . 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy resumed reading the report of the Mombasa  County budget estimates 
for FY 2017/2018 ) 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Observations and Findings ; 
2.1 The budget process in Counties is anchored vide A rticle 201 of the constitution of 
Kenya. The Counties  Revenue Collection Act,  2017,  the Finance Act,  2017,  the County  
Governments Act,  2012 and the mother act, the Public Finance Management Act,  2012 and 
its regulations, the Public Finance Management Act,  2015.  
 
2.2 The constitution and the PFM Act,  2012 section 107(2) demand that County  
governments exerc ise fiscal responsibilities and adhere to the principles thereof. These fiscal 
responsibility principles are as follows:  
(a) The County  government's recurrent expenditure shall not exceed the County  
government's total revenue;  
(b) Over  the medium term a m inimum of 30 per cent of the County  government's 
budget shall be allocated to the development expenditure;  
(c) The County  government's expenditure on wages and benefits for its public 
officers shall not exceed a percentage of the County  government's total  revenue as 
prescribed by the County  Executive Member  for finance in regulations and 
approved by the County  Member ;  
(d) Over the medium term, the government's borrowings shall be used only for the 
purpose of financing development expenditure and not for r ecurrent expenditure;  
(e) The County  debt shall be maintained at a sustainable level as approved by County  
Member ;  
(f) The fiscal risks shall be managed prudently; and  
(g) A reasonable degree of predictability with respect to the level of tax rates and tax 
bases shall be maintained, taking into account any tax reforms that may be made 
in the future.  
2.3 Before budgeting, the County  government is required to plan pursuant to Part XI 
of the County  Governments Act,  2012. Section 107 of the said to Act read s as 
follows:  
“107. Types and purposes of County  plans  
 
(1) To guide, harmonize and facilitate development within each County  there 
shall be the following plans — 
 
(a) County  integrated development plan;  
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 (b) County  sectoral plans;  
(c) County  spatial plan; and  
(d) Cities and urban areas plans as provided for under the Urban Areas  
and Cities Act (No. 13 of 2011).  
 
(2) The County  plans shall be the basis for all budgeting and spending in a  
County . 
 
2.4 The budget estimates for FY 2017/2018 were or were not in compl iance with the law as 
follows:  
 
a) They were submitted very early before time i.e. April 30 as provided for in the 
PFM Act,  2012. The budget timelines were revised by virtue of 2017 being an 
election year.  
 
b) The budget was prepared in a programme -based budget format and duly 
submitted to the County  Member . 
 
c) Adherence partly to the fiscal responsibility principles outlined above as per 
section 107(2) of the PFM Act,  2012. All except section 107(2)  (c) on the thresh -
hold for wages has been complied with.  
 
d) The bud get estimates were partially in compliance with section 107(1) of the 
County  Governments Act,  2012 on basing plans on the integrated development 
plan, sectoral plans, spatial plans and cities and urban areas plans. So far no 
sectoral plans or spatial plans  are yet to be tabled at the County  Member  for 
approval.  
 
e) It should also be noted that no functional sector working groups are yet in place to 
spearhead planning and budget -making hence severely impinging on a credible 
budget -making process.  
 
2.5 While the  departments made their presentations a continuing narrative was the failure 
to implement or complete programmes due to the failure by the County  treasury to 
disburse funds in time or if at all thus hampering budget execution. Centralization of 
funding rem ains to be an impediment to proper functional budgetary planning and 
execution and it is high time the County  executive Committee  addresses this problem 
with a view to efficient and effective service delivery to the public.  
 
2.6 As mentioned earlier, there  is need for synchronization of plans and the budget 
estimates to create harmony and ensure due compliance with the law and co-ordinated 
implementation of programmes.  
 
2.7 Both the County  executive arm and the County  Member  held public participation 
forum s to engage the public and collect views on the budget estimates. Most of the views 
were general in nature and did not focus on the budget document itself. The few views 
that touched on the budget were taken up and necessary changes made while a few others 
could not be taken up since they would entail changes in departmental ceilings as 
contained in the County  CFSP,  2017. However, the concerns were noted and would be 
considered in the next budget cycle.  
 
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 3. Conclusions  
 
The Mombasa County  Budget Estimates fo r the FY 2017/2018 mark another milestone 
in the annual budget cycle and a remarkable step and improvement in the preparation 
of budget documents. Compliance to the budget law requirements and linkage to other 
budget documents such as CIDP,  CBROP,  CFSP,  ADP has improved significantly but 
much more needs to be done to increase the level of compliance thereto. The County  
needs to activate the Budget and Economic Forum, form sector working groups and 
come up with sector policies and plans that are inter -connec ted with other County  
plans and are cascaded down to the budget estimates.  
 
4. Recommendations  
 
a) The Committee  recommends that the consolidated budget estimates for the County  
Government of Mombasa for the FY 2017/2018 circulated to Member s and annexed 
herewith be approved.  
 
b) The County  Treasury and all other departments to ensure compliance with the law in 
matters of planning and budgeting and ensure corrective measures are taken as 
outlined in this Report . 
 
c) The County  Member  to approve and enact the Mombasa  County  Appropriation Bill, 
2017.  
 
d) The County  Member  to consider and adopt this Report . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much. Member s I now put 
the question that The  Mombasa County  Applic ation Bill, 2017 be read a Second time. Yes 
Chairman c an you come at this side we talk something.  
(Loud consultation)  
            Yes Clerk Can you.. aah Member s I have put the question that Mombasa County  
Appropriation Bill, 2017 be read a S econd time.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
            Yes Clerk.  
MOMBASA COUNTY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017  
SECOND READING  
            Clerk:  The Mombasa County  Appropriation  Bill, 2017.  
            Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Member s, this House is 
dissolving itself into a Committee  of the w hole House.  
(The Mace w as lowered)  
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid exited the Chair)  
THE HOUSE CONVERTED TO COMMITTEE  OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Mswab ah Rashid  in the Chair)  
            Chai rperson : Member s you may sit down.  
(Loud consultation s) 
            Clerk:  an Act of C ounty Member  to authorize the issue of certain sums of money out of 
the County  Revenue Fund and their application towards the ser vice of the year ending 30th June, 
2018, and to appropriate those sums for certain public services and purposes.  
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11 ENACTED  by the County  Member  of Mombasa, as follows - 
Short title  
1. This Act may be cited as the A ppropriation Bill, 2017. Issue of 10,819,072,17 9 out of the 
consolidated Fund for the service of the year ending 30th June, 2018 . 
2. The County  Treasury may issue the sum of Ten Billion, Eight hundred and nineteen 
Million, seventy two thousand, one hundred and seventy nine Kenyan Shillings only, out 
of th e County  revenue fund and apply it towards the supply granted for the service of the 
year ending on 30th June, 2018.  
 Appropriation of the money granted  
3. The sum granted by section 2 shall be appropriated for the  several services and purposes 
specified in the second column of the First Schedule, in the amount specified in third 
column in that schedule.  
4. In addition to sum granted by section 2, the sum specified in the fourth column of the first 
and second schedule  shall be applied for the several services an d purposes specified in 
the second column of those schedule, out of revenue directed to be applied outsi de the 
consolidated fund under A rticle 206(1) of the Constitution.  
Appropriation in aid  
5. The supply granted for the services of the year ending on the  30th June, 2015 in respect of 
votes R3011, R0912, R3013, R3014, R2015, R3016, R 3017, R3018, R3019, R3020, R3021, R 
3022, R3023, and D3011, D3012, D3013, D3014, D3015, D3016, D3017, D3018, D3019, 
D3020, D3021, D3022, D3023, in accordance with the appropri ation Act.  
Chairperson:  Yes Leader of M ajority . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker i think there is a mistake here,  there is 
an issue saying the supply guaranteed for the services the year ended 30th June 2015 it should be 
2017.  
Chairperson:  It’s 2018, that's a printing error I have noted that, 2017. Okay  thank you 
Clerk can you continue reading recurrent expenditure .   
Clerk:  recurrent expenditure,  
(Interruption)  
Chairperson:  Yes Hon. Faraj what is it?  
Hon. Faraj:  Mr. S peaker the reason as to  why i have risen is because of the fact that we 
are in these meetings and we have attended these meetings the Whole H ouse meetings severally 
and the attendance book has not been brought forth and we feel that b earing in mind the other 
meetings which we ha ve attended and the meetings have not reflected on our payslips it is 
important that we have this Whole H ouse meetings we need to have the attendance book to be 
availed here so that the Member s can sign, this is the second meeting today and the book s are n ot 
anywhere near these chambers . 
Chairperson:  Okay it is being brought forward. Okay C lerk, okay Member s i will now 
put the question ; as many as of the opinion that vote number recurrent 3011 be part of this Bill of 
303, 637, 246 .  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
Clerk:  R3012  The amount required in the year ending 30th June 2018, for salaries and 
expenses of County  Member , including expenses on general administration, legislation, and 
financial management services of the entity 672,499,670  317,981,060 . 
Chairpe rson:  Okay Member s, i will now propose the question and later on put the 
question, it has been proposed that R3012 be part of this Bill, I now put the question as many as 
of the opinion that  R3012 of 672,499,670 be part of this Bill.  
(Question put and ag reed to)  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker am suggesting the Clerk to read all the vote s since there are no 
amendments,  let her read all the votes then we put the question . 
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12 Chairperson:  The C hair is of the opinion that every vote should be read on its own.  
Clerk ? 
Clerk: R3013  The amount required in the year ending 30th June 2018, for salaries and 
expenses of Devolution and public service administration.  877,060,939 . 
Chairperson:  Okay Member s it has been proposed that R3013 of 877,060,939 be part of 
this Bill, I now p ut the question as many as of the opinion that R3013 of 877,060,939 be part of 
this Bill.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
Clerk:  R3014  the amount required in the year ending 30th June,  2018 for salaries and 
expenses of f inance and economic planning 595,092,8 52.  
Chairperson:  Okay Member s it has been proposed that R3014 of 595,092,852 be part of 
this Bill, I now put the question as many as of the opinion that R3014  of 595,092,852 be part of 
this Bill.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
Clerk:  R3015  The amount req uired in the year ending 30th June 2018, for expenses of 
energy, environment and solid waste management including expenses on salaries and general 
administration 383,332,811 .  
Chairperson:  Member s it has been proposed that R3015 of 383,332,811 be part of t his 
Bill, I now put the question as many as of the opinion that R3015  of 383,332,811 be part of this 
Bill.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
Clerk:  R3016  The amount required in the year ending 30th June 2018, for expenses of 
education, information technology and MV2035 579,398,932 . 
Chairperson:  Member s it has been proposed that R3016 of 579,398,932 be part of this 
Bill, I now put the question as many as of the opinion that R3016  of 579,398,932 be  part of this 
Bill.  
 (Question p ut and agreed t o) 
Yes Clerk ? 
Clerk: R3017 The amount required in the year ending 30th June 2018,  for salaries and 
expenses of Health Services , including expenses on general administ ration, health curative and 
promo tive services ….2,519,880,071 . 
Chairperson : Member s it has been proposed th at vo te number R3017 of 2,519,880,071  
be part of the Bill, I put the question … 
(Interruption ) 
Yes Chairman what is it?  Before  I put the question . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mr Chairman I want to propose the total amount of revenue of 
recurrent in this Bill i pro pose vote number R3011,  R3012,  R3013,  R3014,  R3015,  R3016,  
R3017,  R3018,  R3019,  R3020,  R3021,  R3022,  R3023 , total amount recurrent to be 
7,466,372,381 thank you Mr. Chairman. I would like to move.  
Chairperson: That’s a proposition from the Chairman . 
Hon. A mur:  I stand to second it Mr. Chairman , it would have been wise it will be good 
that way Mr. Chair.  
Chairperson : Okay now I put the question to that proposal. Vote number R3011,  R3012,  
R3013,  R3014,  R3015,  R3016,  R3017,  R3018,  R3019,  R3020,  R3021,  R3022,  R3023 of Ksh 
7,466,372,381 be part of that Bill. 
(Question put and a greed to) 
Yes Chairman?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. Chairman, I do hereby propose that for Development 
Expenditures as follows vote number,  D3011,  D3012,  D3013,  , D3014,  D3015,  D3016,D3017,  
June 13 , 2017                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 D3018,  D3019,  D3020,  D3021,  D3022,  D3023 to be 3,352,698,798 , thank you Mr. Chairman  I 
beg to move.  
Hon. Amur : I stand to second Mr. Chairman . 
Chairperson:  Member s that is a preposition, I proceed to put a question to that proposal 
.As many as of the opini on that vote number ,  D3011,  D3012,  D3013,D3014,  D3015,  D3016,  
D3017,  D3018,  D3019,  D3020,  D3021,  D3022,  D3023 of amount 3,352,698,798 be part of this 
Bill. 
(Question put and agreed t o) 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. Chairman I propose that total amount of this 
Appropriation Bill, 2017 to be a total of Ksh. 10, 819, 072, 179, thank you.  
Chairperson : Member s I think we have come to the end of this Committee  of the W hole, 
now we revert back to the Member  and get the Report , thank you.  
PLENARY RESUMED  
(Sergeant At Arms raised the Mace on the Table)  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid in the Chair)  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit down, Yes Chairman?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the County  Member  
agrees with the Committee  that the Bill was passed without  amendment and be read for the T hird 
time, thank you.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Seconder?  
Hon. Mwalimu : I second.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s I proceed  to put a question t hat the 
Bill be read for a Third time.  
(Question put a nd agreed to) 
Clerk , can you read the Bill for a T hird time?  
MOMBASA APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017  
THIRD READING  
Clerk : The Mombasa Appropriation Bill, 2017 . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you, Chairman do you have anything 
to say?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : I propose this House to pass this Bill with amendment Mr. 
Speaker  so that we can be able to make amendments ; as you know today we have a problem with 
the County  Member  budget we don’t have votes so  we wanted to make sure that this time we 
don’t make the same mistake for this Member . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you, yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Having no other business this House stands adjourned until tomorrow morning . 
The House rose at 4:32p.m.  
 
 
 
 