 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 1 3th July, 2016  
The House met at 9: 22a.m. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the C hair)  
PRAYERS  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk.  
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
       Hon. M walimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa Spika mwanzo natoa 
pongezi kwa wakina m ama kwa kuwa wamepata cheo cha U kurugenzi mkuu  katika Bandari  
ya Mombasa na hiyo ni pongezi kwa wakina mama kwa kupata uongozi huo.        
Mheshimiwa S pika mi mi kusim ama nimesimama, nataka Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi aje 
atuambie katika Bunge hili ni nini haswa sisi kama K aunti ya M ombasa tunapata kutoka 
katika  ile la Bandari  ya Mom basa.  Mheshimiwa S pika inasikitisha ikiwa Bandari  ile inaenda 
kutengeza ma shule Kaunti ya Kwale;  kwetu Mombasa labda ziko  siwezi nikasema hakuna 
kabisa lakini ningetaka Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi aje  mbele ya B unge hili aelezee ni nini 
haswa tunapata sisi K aunti ya Mo mbasa kutoka Bandari  ya Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nakuomba kupitia Kiti chako hu yu K iongozi wa Walio W engi usimpe mda mrefu, mpe mda 
mchache ili afanye kazi kwa bidii na haraka  atulete e habari hio hapa kupitia mawaziri karibu 
wote wajulie ni nini ambacho sisi tunapata ama ni nini tunakosa kutoka Bandari  ama tufanye 
nini ili tupate ku toka Bandari , hii amba yo tuko na yo hapa kwetu kwa kau nti yetu.  Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo.  
Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa S pika mimi ni 
kuongezea tu maneno yameongewa na  Mhesh imiwa Fadhili kupitia hoja yake.  Kwa hiyo 
napongeza kabisa kina mama na pili n ataka kujua faida ya Bandari  hii haswa kwa sisi  
Mombasa Kaunti, vile vile Mwenyekiti  wa Walio Wengi katika Bunge hi i Mheshimiwa 
Hamisi Musa  Mwidani ni lazima ata kapokwend a kwa mazungumzo yake aweke wazi bayana 
ya pia masuala yanayohusika na viongozi  wetu wa Mombasa.  Haswa tukiangalia sisi 
wakaazi wa Changamwe ambapo tunataka kupewa access  pia kupitia katika daraja lile kwa 
sababu msongamano wa magari wakati huu kama vile walivyofanyiwa wakaazi wa Likoni 
kupitia katika kivuko.  Kwa hivyo hi o ni moja pia katika changamoto  zitakazo wekwa mbele, 
nakumbuka Mheshimiwa Spika wewe mwenyewe Spika  wa J umba hili pia una matatizo 
makubwa kupitia katika Bandari  ile. Kwa hivyo pia hilo swala liwe na kipa o mbele katika 
Bunge hili.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Kondo, 
Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi naona masuala yaliyozungumzwa ni swala nyeti  na 
Jumba hili  linataka utufanyi e utafiti masu ala haya mengine ambayo yamechipuka katika 
taarifa  imesomwa na Mheshimiwa Fadhili . Ni kwanza twataka kuju a Bandari  inafaidi nini 
wakaazi wa Mombasa kwa sababu inasemekana kuna shule imejengwa na Bandari  ya 
Mombasa , kwa hivyo twataka kujua ue nde ukafanye utafiti tuone Bandari  inatusaidia sisi na 
tunakupatia wiki mbili Mheshimiwa Mwidani.  
 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I think it’s my honour  
to take  up the task we  have discussed, it’s just the time, what has been raise d today even if 
am given two weeks it’s okay.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : So two weeks is okay for you to respond. 
Yes C lerk.  The other stateme nt is from Jabess Mdhai. Chief W hip have you seen Mdhai ? 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed  Ebrahim ): He is not around.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Not around?  
Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed  Ebrahim ): Mheshimiwa S pika nimejaribu kumtafuta na 
saa hii sijamuona . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay next Order?  
MOTION  
Hon. Leader of M ajority.  
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I would  beg to  give a 
Notice of Motion  on resciss ion of defective resolutions on n omination of Members to 
Committees ... 
(Leader of Majority ( Hon. Mwidani ) moved  Notice of Motion ) 
RESCISSION OF DEFECTIVE RESOLUTIONS O N NOMINATION OF MEMBERS TO 
COMMITTEES  
       Mr. Speaker I beg to move a Notice of Motion ,  
       THAT AWARE that the County Assembly had on Thursday, 31st March , 2016 d uly 
approved with amendments a Motion  containing a list of M embers nominated to Select  and 
Sectoral C ommittees.  
       FURTHER AWARE that subsequently on two other occasions the foregoing list was 
irregularly alter ed by way  of defective Motion s which were not in compliance with Standing 
order 154 (1) and 157.  
       CONCERNED that these su bsequent alterations were done in undue disregard of the 
procedures and practices of our legislature and have set a bad and dangerous precedent.  
       I therefore urge the County Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
       1. Pursuant to S tanding Order 42 (2) (a) th is County Assembly hereby rescinds its 
decisions done irregularly to a lter the list of nomination of Members to C ommittees.  
       2. That necessary modifications and alterations be done to the list of membership to 
Committees by the Committee on Selection  in consultation with ODM. The sole 
parliamentary party to take ca re if changes such as those of Leader of M ajority and any other 
changes they may deem necessary ; 
       3. That it is hereby declared that the list of membership to Committees approved throu gh 
a Motion  by this House on Thursday,  31st March 2016 shall , with necessary modifications ( as 
noted in no. 2 above) be the bonafide list unless otherwise procedurally changed later.  
 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3        Thank you Mr. Speaker and I would like Hon . Hatimy to second the N otice of Motion . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Notice of Motion  is not supp osed to be 
seconded, this is a N otice of Motion  but I can see it has been approved  by the House, by the 
Clerk  for it to come here  so a Notice of Motion  does not need to be seconded maybe you can 
rise and seek leave to move it now . 
(Interruption)  
       Yes Hon.  Meti what is it, before Hon.  Mwidani let's see what Hon. Meti  wanted to say  
then Hon.  Mary, let's see what you have to talk.  
Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim ): Mr. Speake r, I beg th is House to make this 
become a Motion . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Mary what do you have to say?  
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
mawazo yangu na kuelewa kwangu na kisomo changu pale nimef ikia kama M bunge baadhi 
ya haya m ambo ambayo yameletwa leo kama Mswada  huu w a leo ndio baadhi ya vitu 
ambavyo viko katika yale mambo ambayo yako ko rtini. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuelewa 
kwangu...  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Hatimy what is it?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nafikiri Mh eshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa alie toka 
kuongea sasa hivi anapotosha  Nyumba hii an aposema kwamba mambo haya yako k ortini,  
sijui ana njia yoyote ya kuon yesha mambo haya yako ko rtini? 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswab ah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mary do you have any pro of? 
Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ile Notice of Motion  ya kumuondoa Sp ika, baadhi ya haya 
mambo yaliku wa katika yale.. . 
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No you s hould produce it if you have it.   
Hon. Mw alimu:  Point of order ! 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika a hsante kwa  kuniruhusu kwa hoja ya nidhamu.        
Mheshimiwa Spika ni kwanzo uruhusu kama aliv yoomba Mheshimiwa Meti  na ikiwa 
Mheshimiwa ana hoja  ama tetesi za kuzungumza ni watu wazungumze baada ya kuwa 
umeturuh usu kuzungumza hii hoja katika B unge hili . Lakini ikiwa watu wata anza kuchangia  
kabla hoja haijatolewa idhini M heshimiwa Spika itakua tunakeuka hoja za n idhamu ambazo 
tuko nazo katika B unge  letu...  
MOTION  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mwidani .  
 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I take this opportunity 
again to move that the Motion ... 
(Leader of Majority ( Hon. Mwidani ) move d the Motion)  
RESCISSION OF D EFECTIVE RESOLUTIONS ON NOMINATION OF MEMBERS TO 
COMMITTEES)  
       Mr. Speaker I beg to move a Motion ;  
       THAT AWARE that the County Assembly had on Thursday, 31st March 2016 d uly 
approved with amendments a Motion  containing a list of Members nominat ed to S elect and 
Sectoral Committees.  
       FURTHER AWARE that subsequently on two other occasions the foregoing list was 
irregularly altered by way of defective Motion s whi ch were not in compliance with Standing 
Order 154 (1) and 157.  
       CONCERNED  that these subsequent alterations were done in undue disregard of the 
procedures and practices of our legislature and have se t a bad and dangerous precedent;  
       I therefore urge the County Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
       1. Pursuant to Standing O rder 42  (2) (a) this County Assembly hereby rescinds its 
decisions done irregularly to a lter the list of nomination of M embers to Committees.  
       2. That necessary modifications and alterations be done to the list of membership to 
Committees by the Committee o n Selection in consultation with ODM , the sole 
parliamentary party to take ca re if changes such as those of Leader of M ajority and any other 
changes they may deem necessary ; 
       3. That it is hereby declared that the list of membership to Committees app roved through 
a Motion  by this House on Thursday, 31st March , 2016 shall with necessary modifications  (as 
noted in no. 2 above) be the bonafide list unless otherwise procedurally changed later.  
       Thank you Mr . Speaker i quote number 3 and M embers shou ld know the way how 
number three means ; if there is any necessary modifications this is very clear we shall see 
that those memberships and if somebody maybe if he/she was not taken care of we can easily 
take care on that.  So It  should not worry the Assemb ly that we are going to do such under the 
table, we are going to do things very openly that 's why we have mentioned if there is any 
modifications it can be done, Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think now let me take this 
opportun ity to have a seconder of this Motion, I think i'll call Hon.  Hatimy to second . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy .  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimeitikia 
huu Mswada u liosomwa na Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni; chini ya 46 ( 2 ) sheri a 
inasema unapopitisha Mswada na ule Mswada u mepita kwa wakati wowote kunaweza kuja 
Mswada  chini ya kifungu hiki kuweza ku review order  iliotoka ili ku uzungumzia tena u le 
Mswada  kuon yesha kuwa u le Mswada u liokuja u mekuja kwa njia ya sawa ama hau kuja kwa 
njia sawa . Mheshimiwa Spika nikianza kutaka kuzungumza nd ani ya Nyumba hii na sheria za 
Nyumba hii ziko wazi kabisa , kanuni za Bunge  nambari  44 iko  wazi  kusema kuwa 
utakapoleta Mswada ... 
 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 (Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hamis i Mwidani . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): I think Mr. Speaker it’s good to be in order of 
the House, Okay I trust my colleague but actually we have to follow the procedures;  he was 
seconding so let’s see that when we get the clearance for the debate then we can deal with 
that... 
(Applause ) 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafik iri niko na haki ya kutoa zile 
sababu alafu mwisho niseme tumekubali ku unga mkono ama  nimek ataa, kwa hivyo sheria 
nafikiri yanikubalia.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : (Nodding)  Okay M embers, he has 
seconded, have you seconded?  
Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker Sir Hon. Hat imy has not yet seconded the Motion ... 
(Laughter ) 
       So he has to second first;  give him time for him to lay down his personal whatever he has 
to lay in the House and second so Mr. Speaker S ir it's upon you to direct this House .  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay I  understand .  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Nafikiri  Mheshimiwa Spika ni haki yangu mimi maana 
nikisema nazungumza nikisema na unga mkono  nitaambiwa  nisiongee tena kuwa nishaongea.  
Kwa hivyo kukimbia jambo hilo Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kutoa sababu gani za kufanya 
nini kukubali ku unga mkono  ama kukataa ku unga mkono  Mheshimiwa  Spika, kwa hio kama 
Wanachama  wanataka mimi ni unge mkono...   
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker our S tanding Orders allow us to even contribute more 
than once Mr.  Speaker so it is up to  Hon. Hati my to either second or not to second.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay he has already seconded, he will be 
given another time to  contribute, so M embers i propose a question as ma ny as of the opinion 
that this Motion  should be discussed in this House .  
(Question put and a greed to ) 
(Applause ) 
Yes Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani can  you tell us why you want this Motion  to be 
passed in this H ouse. 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, nafikiri kuko 
umuhimu wa kurekebisha h izi Kamati  kwa s ababu hata ilikua ni changamoto kwa Karani  
wetu kuweza kukaa chini na kupanga ratiba za mkutano, kwa sababu zilikua zinaleta 
mgonganish o baadhi ya Wenyekiti  ambao walikua mara mbili.  Unakuta Karani  anashindwa 
amusikize Mwenyekiti  gani, kwa hivyo Bwana Spika na haya tukiyaleta sio kama tuna lipiza  
ama nini, na kama nilivyoelezea kwamba mimi kama Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  
 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 nitahakikisha  kila matakwa ya Mwanachama imeangaliwa kisheria . Kama ni  Kamati ya  
Sectoral lazima uwe tatu, laz ima zi angaliwe na uwekwe isiwe unatafut a vitu vya kuficha 
kunyanyasana.  Kwa hio Bwana Spika nimeleta h u Mswada  kwa sababu ya k uwa N yumba 
yetu iwe kwenye  ratba  nzuri kama iliv yokua kitambo.  Hivyo basi ningependelea  Wanachama  
kwamba tuipitishe na pia baadae tutaileta ile  orodha  yenyewe waione ikiwa kuna kitu 
chochote kile kama kiongozi  utaniambia alafu tunaketi chini tutarekebisha . Kwa hi o 
ningeomba B unge hili ik iwezekana tupitishe mara moja kusudi tuweze kuwapa Karani  wetu 
kazi rahisi kwenye mikutano . Ahsante Bwana Spika . 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Amur . 
Hon. Amur : Ahsante Bwana Spika kitu alicho ongea Mheshimiwa Mwidani sioni 
sababu ya kwamb a tutaleta orodha  mpya wakati orodha  haziwezi badilishwa kwa mda wa 
miezi mitano  wakati  orodha  haziwezi kubadilishwa kwa muda wa miezi mitatu  ni kuja 
kuthibitisha orodha hizo  ambazo zilipitishwa mbeleni kwamba those are t he same lists with 
the same M embers to be brought so that we can take the way forward  ya kuendelea na 
Kamati  zetu. Lakini tukisema tutakubali mambo mengine itatakaniwa tulete Mswada  
mwengine wa kubadilisha  sisi tunachokisema ; ni zile zilizopitishwa before six months , those 
are the lists that should be in order , the same should be brought and be compiled by the 
Assembly so that the Chairmen ca n take their positions and the C ommittee can work 
peacefully . Mr. Speaker other than  that if it will be the other we change we should only bring 
the list  that was brought before six months for any Committee to change Members the 
Committee....  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Mwalimu : Point of O rder!  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Makarani . 
Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker I think the Leader of the Majority is in order to s ay that 
necessary modifications ...; it is the p arty that has go t the mandate to either dewhip Members 
on its Committees or to retain Members on its C ommittees . Mr. Speaker that's what  the 
Leader of the Majority is saying but am sure Mr. Speak er as to what clearly intended , we are 
intending to retain the decision which was made in this Hon.  House that are contrary to our 
Standing Order that if they will be any communication from the party which in our case is the 
ODM party we have got no mandat e to object . Thank you.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Amur I think C lause Number 3 is 
open it says that , "That is hereby declared that the list o f membership to Committees 
approved through a Motion  by this House on Thursday 31st March, 2016 sh all with necessary 
modifications ...". So i understand there's grievances that there are some M embers who are not 
in the three C ommittees , so these are the modifications which the Leader of the Majority is 
insisting on , so Hon. Amur Murfad you can continue .  
Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I was not saying no to  modifications or additions of 
Members ; it is allowed by the Standing Order s otherwise the C ommittee list was there , was 
not in order we should be using the same list that was passed on 31st March, 2016 a nd th en 
those additions of the M embers that a re supposed to be added in the C ommittees . We are not 
object ing that the retainment of the C ommittees should remain as per the list that was passed 
on 31st March, 2016 . Mr. Speaker Sir the additions of Members we are  not objecting but 
again if we had other issues of a M ember  not attending meetings of the Committee then the 
 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Chair and the Members of that Committee have powers to remove that M ember from that 
Committee . Mr. Speaker Sir as the Standing Orders states....  
(Interruption ) 
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : That is internal communication, at 
Committee level. Yes Hon.  Ndanda . 
Hon. Mohamed Ndanda: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I have  risen up to 
support this Motion . Mr. Speaker the Motion  that was brought the first time when we had a 
lot of chaos it was  contrary to Standing Order 174. Mr. Speaker we are Hon.  Members and 
we are not disputing anything which was brought unless it goes against the constitution and 
the parliamentary Acts . Hon.  Speaker when you l ook at Standing Order 174 it talks on the 
procedure on how we can remove a Chairperson or a Vice Chairperson ; on this note that's 
why am saying Hon.  Amur who is my desk  mate here he should understand that the list 
brought as a number of the changes of the Chairmen where the procedure was not followed 
and here , "The Committee may , a resolution  supported by a majority of its M embers ", so it 
means in this manner when the new Leader of Majority they will b e no names of the 
Chairmen . According to the Standi ng Or der it is very clear that Members of the C ommittee 
shall choose their Chairperson , so what am insisting here and which gives us mandate when 
you go to Standing Order Number 44 it also state s that though the Motion  brought to the 
House has to l ast for six m onths but if it was un constitutional  and parliamentary Acts was not 
followed then we have a r ight to review the Motion ...  
(Applause ) 
       ...So Hon.  Members am here to review the Motion ; when we go to the Motion  number 3 
part 3 is very clear , now to any body with a doubt if the Selection Committee was provided so 
for you to be there , there's those modifications and i believe si nce we are one party under one 
Chairman then consultations are going to be there, the Chief W hip is  there , is an ODM, the 
Leader o f Majority is an ODM ...I think let us support this Motion  Hon.  Members with the 
two Standing Orders that have been mention ed in this House so t hat i get confidence that this 
Motion  is part and if possible Majority Lead er gives us a new list of C ommittees a nd on top 
of that have seen some Members arguing without Standing Orders . It is also proper for us to 
go to the South Coast Hon.  Speaker so that we can master these Standing Orders ; when 
arguing here in the parliament we argue with the .....Standing Orders  where we can support  
our statements fully so that we do not become afraid of the six months of the whatever if they 
infringe  on the right of the Hon.  Member. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nikiregelelea tena kuzungumza yale maneno niliyoongea ya k usema kuwa  Nyumba hii 
iliweza kupitisha  Mswada  na Mswada  ule u lipita kwa njia ambayo si ya sawa sawa. 
Nikiangalia Mheshimiwa Spika  kanuni za Bu nge nambari  44 imeivunja, 46 imeivunja, 50 
imeivunja, 54 ambayo hiyo ni ya kusema ni  mpigo wa moyo  au ndio kiini cha Mswada , 
kwamba Mswada bila  ya kuungwa mkono sio Mswada  tume ivunja 154 , tumevunja 157 , 
tumevunja 191 tumevunja maana hii Nyumba imekuwa ni k ama baraza kufanywa mambo 
ambayo yalikuwa si ya sawa sawa . Hivyo basi sisi kuregelelea Mheshimiwa Spika ni kuweza 
kuhakikisha kwamba yale tulioyafanya kimakosa tuyarekebisheni na tuendeleeni mbele ; 
hakuna haja ya watu kuleta maneno ambayo hayatasaidia Nyum ba. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
hivyo nasimama mbele ya Wanachama  wenzangu  kusema kuwa hakuna haja ikiwa mimi na 
 July 13, 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 wewe tunateta unakuja kuingililia Nyumba unakuja kuvunja Kamati ambayo ilikuwa ni 
kinyume na sheria . Ukiangalia 46 Mheshimiwa Spika ni kuwa Mswada u mepita 31st March, 
2016  ndani ya miezi miwili Mswada  mtu anakuja anavunja u le Mswada  bila ya kufanya  
maombi  kama vile sasa Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  ameweza ku batili uamuzi wa u le 
Mswada wenye ulikuwa u mepitisha . Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika nikisimama na kusema 
kuwa ilipitishwa tarehe 10 ilikuwa ni Mswada  amba o hau kuwa na  mwenye kuunga mkono , 
Mswada  ambao ha ukuwa na maswali yote,   hii ni kiny ume na sheria.  Tukiangalia 154 hakuna 
mtu anayeweza kufanya pekee yake kutengeneza Kamati  Mheshimiwa Spika isipokuw a ni 
mashauriano ; 154 iko wazi mashauriano na chama  hakuna jambo hili halikufanyika . 
Mheshimiwa Spika 157 chama  ina haki ku  whip  wanachama wake hakuna mwengine yeyote 
aliyepatiwa uwezo huo ; ukiangalia  kanuni za Bunge nambari  154 inazungumza maneno hayo 
hayo. Tukienda katika  kanuni ya Bunge nambari  191 Mheshimiwa Spika bado inataja chama  
vile vile ; hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni kwenda kwa njia ambayo ni ya sawa sawa na 
mimi naomba tukubaliane kwa kauli moja kuwa sisi tuh akikishe kuwa kama mtu yuko wa 
Kamati tatu awe kwa Kamati  tatu na ikiwa tutakubaliana tukubaliane iwe  tumeenda kwa njia 
ya sawa sawah . Asante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I can see the matter has been 
debated and there's no thing  else so I have to g o back to the Majority Leader to reply to the 
Motion .  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me thi s 
opportunity to thank all the Members who contributed to this Motion  and now it  is just the 
party to make a decision.  Thank yo u Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kui arifu  Nyumba hii kuwa  
kanuni ya Bunge nambari  156 iko wazi, chama  itakapoleta majina hakuna mtu yeyote 
atakayeweza kusema huyu awemo huyu hasiwemo ; ni aidh a mkubali listi yote ama mukata e 
listi yote, kanuni ya Bunge nambari  156 iko wazi .   
Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Members i have no other option but 
to put a question to the Motion . Members as many as  are of the opinion that this Motion  
should be passed as it is .  
(Question p ut and agreed t o) 
(Applause ) 
       Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Yes Hon.  Members this House st ands adjourned until today at 2: 30p.m. 
The House rose at 10: 20a.m. 