July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 31st July, 2019  
The House met at 3:22p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You may be seated Hon . Members.  
(Silence)  
Yes Clerk?  
PETITIONS  
COMPLAINTS AGAINST MOMBASA COUNTY ASKARIS FOR  DEMOLITION OF TEMPORARY 
SHADES  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii japo 
nasimama kwa huzuni nyingi . Nataka kwanza Bwana Spika kwa heshima na taadhima nataka 
niwatambue wafanyi  biashara wa Mama Ngina ambao leo wametutembelea katika gallery  yetu 
ambao wanat oka katika eneo la Mji wa Kale/ Kizingo na wamekuja hapa kwa sababu wameleta 
petition   ambayo tuliwasilisha kwa ofisi ya Karamu  na nafikiri pia ilikufikia wewe ndio maana 
tuko hapa leo.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ni masikitiko makubwa katika karne hii ya kuwapa vipawa watu wetu 
kujiendeleza kimaisha , sisi tunawaregesha watu wetu nyuma ambap o ni tofauti na ajira zetu na 
sera zetu  ambaz o tunazitangaza wakati tukitaka kura.  Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kusikitisha 
sana kwa mambo yanavyofanyika katika Kaunti ya Mombasa, yanavyoendeshwa na kitengo cha 
Wizara ya Inspectorate . Nakumbuka katika Bunge hili tulikubaliana kwamba kukiwa kuna 
jambo  lolote linalotaka kufanyika katika eneo ama uakilishi basi Mheshimiwa wa eneo lile 
anayehusika aweze kujulishwa kabla ya jambo lile halijafanyika.  

July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kusikitisha na la kuvunja moyo kwamba tunatumia watu 
wetu vibaya, wakati tukiwa taka wakati wa kura hawa wanakuwa wafalme wapigaji kura lakini 
pia tukishamaliza, punde tukishachaguliwa kuwa viongozi tunakuwa wale watu hatuwajali, 
hatuwat hamini wala hatujali maisha yao. K wa nini nasema hivi Mheshimiwa Spika , watu hawa 
hawa tuliowaita w akati tukitaka kura ili watupigie kura tukiwaahidi paradise  lakini wakati 
tukipata kura tunawapatia moto, tunafanya maisha yao yanakuwa magumu.   
Mheshimiwa Spika jambo la kusikitisha kabisa ni kwamba ndugu zetu hawa 
walikubaliana na ombi la serikali kuu wa kati Mama Ngina ilikuwa inafanyiwa ukarabati na 
marekebisho ya kutengenezwa hali ya kisasa walikubaliana na  serikali Gatuzi pamoja na W izara 
ya biashara tukafanya mikutano ili watu hawa wasihangaishwe hata Rais mwenyewe alitoa 
uhakikisho kwamba watu hawa h awatasumbuliwa, hawatadhuriwa na maisha yao yataendelea 
kuwa ya kawaida , ni masikitiko makubwa leo watu hawa wamekuwa walala hoi baada ya 
kutolewa ndani pale wanapofanya ajira zao, kupata kipato chao cha kila siku.  Ni masik itiko 
makubwa juzi kitengo cha W izara ya Inspectorate  walienda wakawavunjia watu usiku, maswali 
ambayo Mheshimiwa Spika nataka yajitokeze hapa, je amri hii kwanza ilitoka kwa nani ya 
kuvunjiwa hawa bila sisi Bunge hili kujulishwa kama kuna jambo kama hilo?  
(Applause)  
 
Je wale waliokwenda kuvunja walitumia njia gani ya kwenda kuvunja usiku saa nne  
wakati sisi tunajua masaa ya kufanya kazi ni kuanzia saa mbili mpaka saa kumi na moja masaa 
ya kazi yameisha, imekuwa ni tabia mbovu watu kuvunjiwa vitu vyao wakati ambao si wakati 
wa kazi ambao s i wa kisheria Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika lengine ninalotaka kujua 
hawa watu ha wakupata notisi walivunjiwa vipi? Kwa sababu sheria inasema kwanza watu 
wapewe notisi na wakikaidi notisi sasa wavunjiwe lakini watu hawa walivunjiwa bila kupewa 
notisi.   
Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kusikitisha ya kwamba leo tuko karne ya 21 lakini sisi 
bado tuko karne labda ya 10 kwa vile tunavyoendesha maisha yetu. Mheshimiwa Spika sheria 
inasema kama hakuna notisi huwezi vunja , hauwezo kufanya demolition  ilikuwa nimepe ana the 
petition … 
(Consultations)  
Kwa hio  Bwana Spika kitu cha kushangaza kwanza nataka Bunge hili lipate idhini ya 
kwamba tujue ni nani ametoa kauli ile ya kuvunjiwa. Pili ilikuwa kwa maandishi ama kwa 
mdomo fefe ili tujue nani alituma watu na ilikuwa kwa  maandishi ama kwa mdomo fefe ili 
tuweze kujua ni nani haswa amesababisha watu wetu kupata hasara zile ambazo wamezipata.  
Lengine Mheshimiwa Spika wachuuzi hawa ama wafanyi  biashara hawa walikubaliana na 
serikali kuu wakaingia Memorandum  of Understanding  (MOU)…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Murfad Amur I think it will be wise if you first read 
for us the petition then you can give your comments; then I can allow you to put down the 
comments so maybe just read for us the petition then…  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 (Inte rruption)  
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker that  petition  I received came 
from Mama Ngina Stakeholders dated 30th July, 2019 it was brought to my offic e and I received 
it and also presented  the same petition to the County Assembly Clerk  for it to be given a place 
today so that it can be heard.   
Mr. Speaker the petition reads ; complaints against Mombasa County Askaris for 
demolition of temporary s hades.  
 
(Hon. Murfad Amur read the Petition)  
 
We, stakeholders of Mama Ngina driv e cooperate d with the National government p roject 
going on and had an MOU with the contractor that we pave way in case the ground need s 
to be used or to be constructed. That is what we have been doing since January until 15th 
July, 2019 when the contractor wanted to do the finishing, so we moved outside Mama 
Ngina drive.  
Mr. Speaker Sir we plac ed ourselves alongside Mombasa Golf C lub so that we could 
carry out our daily activities as we wait for the completion of the project.  
Mr. Speaker Sir when it was launched the President told us that we stakeholders of Mama 
Ngina will be given the first priority when the project is over.  
Mr. Speaker Sir it’s so unfortunate that on 29th July at 10:30p.m. h eartless, inhuman and 
unkind Askaris  from the County government of Mombasa l ed by Gilbert and Bi Khad ija 
demolished our temporary sheds  stealing our goods worth shs 3Million (plastic chairs, 
tables, soda, water, crisps, printer machines etc) , an estimation.  
Mr. Speaker I received this petition from the stakeholders, they came to m y office they 
brough t it and I forwarded it to the C lerks’ office…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Amur I think it is not right to mention peoples’ names 
when you don’t have the evidence; it is wise that you talk about the office. I think yo u should 
withdraw those names…  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Murfad  Amur : …But Mr. Speaker you asked me to read and those names are in 
this letter . If I don’t read it the owners of this petition will think that am compromising their 
interest s Mr. Speaker…  
(Interrupt ion) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Raphael, are you on a Point of Information?  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think the Hon. Member is just right but I think 
procedurally he was just to read the headline I mean to capture the headline so that i s captured by 
Hansard and bring the entire petition to your attention then you will have to go through. So I 
think you just order him to just read the headline so that it capture s what is  being  discuss ed, I 
don’t see whether it is wise to read the entire p etition. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : With all due respect Mr. Speaker I withdraw the names but the y 
are there in the letter . Mr. Speaker, I wish to withdraw the names.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Because  I think Hon. Amur to morrow your name will be 
mention ed here or someone else and we don’t have the evidence so let us just talk about the 
office , we know these people are from the D epartment of Inspectorate so let’s talk about the 
department .  
 
Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker I wish to withdraw the names bu t the letter contains 
the names,  I withdraw that. Mr. Speaker there was an MOU in fact when we were launching this 
project the President himself,  the Governor and the entire C ounty government was there and the 
MOU was entered b etween the County government, the National government and even the 
contractor and these traders complied to each and every requirement that the Nation al 
government, the county government has asked to the tune that they move from the side that they 
have bee n getting their daily bread.   
Mr. Speaker I just want to bring to your attention  that if these traders were compensated 
either by National g overnment, the County g overnment or the contractor they should have been 
at their houses waiting for the completion of the project but since they were not compensated a 
single penny of their livelihood, daily bread of their families where will they get it?  
Mr. Speaker this was unfair demolition and I beg in view of the said petition I wish to ask 
the House to help and k now who authorized the demolition, was there a notice that was served? 
And if not Mr. Speaker I beg the House to summon the County Secretary and the Director of the 
Inspectorate with immediate effect since the matter is of urgency and expedite on this issu e 
because these people cannot say without their daily bread, obstructing them from their work of 
erning their daily bread for their families it is not acceptable . Mr. Speaker, they want to live, they 
have kids to feed and families to take care of and this is unacceptable behavior and whoever took 
whatever action against this law they should be held responsible for this. Thank you.  
(Applause)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Murfad Amur. Hon. Members Pursuant to 
Standing Order 202 Committal of Petit ions, the petition on complaints of the Mombasa County 
Askaris for demolition of temporary sh eds stands committed to the Committee on Labour and 
Social Welfare and the Committee of Trade and Investments for them to report back as soon as 
possible and not m ore than 60 days . So the Committees will report back as soon as possible, if 
possible by next week we can have  a response. If you want to confirm that you can check in your 
Standing Orders Hon. Amur, am not the one giving that ruling from my head.  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 Hon. Mur fad Amur:  No Mr. Speaker am not saying you are giving the ruling from your 
head, this is a situation of urgency ; 60days! T he members of the community that are doing their 
business Mr. Speaker that is two months , how will they survive? I kindly request for humanity, 
60 days  is too long Mr. Speaker, it is … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Amur wacha nizungumze kwa Kiswahili manake 
naona kizungu kinakuwa shida sasa, nimesema  kulingana na Kanuni za Bunge  202, ha yo 
malalamiko tumeyapeleka kwa K amati mbili ambayo ni Kamati moja ni ya Labour  and Social 
Welfare na Kamati nyengine ni ya Trade and I nvestment ambao pia wao wanashughulikia yale 
maswala ya pale Mama Ngina na tumesema ki sheria wanakubaliwa wasizidishe siku 60 kuleta 
hiyo ripoti kwa hii Ny umba lakini mimi nimesema ikiwa itawezekana kufikia wiki ijayo  hiyo 
ripoti iwe imeletwa kwa hii Nyumba…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa sababu sheria inawakubali na wajua sheria ni msumeno sasa wewe hauwezi sema 
sheria, mimi nimewaomba na nimesema iletwe kufikia wiki ij ayo tujue lakini bado sheria 
inawakubali kwa hio nafikiri hapo tumekubaliana Mhes himiwa.  Naam, ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Kitula,  are you on a point of information or?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Yes, point of information Hon. Speaker . Na ningependa 
kufahamisha  Bunge hili kwa sababu hili ni Bunge la Sheria ni vizuri kutumia maneno 
yanayostahili Mheshimiwa Spika ili baadaye mane no haya yasijeenda mbele za K orti 
yakachukuliwa vibaya .Tunapoangalia wafanyi  kazi wa Mama Ngina sio Mama Ngina  ambaye ni 
mamake Rais bali  ni Mama Ngina grounds, iwekwe Mama Ngina g rounds. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sijakuelewa labda uregelee tena.  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Nimesema petition  imeongea kuhusu wafanyi  kazi wa 
Mama Ngina, hakuna 'ground ' kwa hivyo ionge zwe ground , Mama Ngina grounds isionekane 
tunamzungumzia mamake rais, ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you for that. Y es I think Hon. Amur you have take n 
note and the Hansard has captured that we are not talking about Mama Ngina, w e are talking 
about Mama Ngina D rive. Yes Clerk next order please?  
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS HON . MOHAMED HATIMY ON PRO JECT AND PROGRAMS FO R FY 2018/2019  
 
Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
nachukua fursa hii kujibu swala la kupeana project na program za 2018/2019 . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni stakabadhi  ambayo ni kubwa napenda kupeana kwa ofisi yako na 
wewe mwenyewe utatoa muelekeo kwa yu le mtu anayetaka kuiona hii stakabadhi  aweza kuja 
kwako au kwenda kwa Karani mkuu  kupata hii stakabadhi  na kujua muna nini ndani yake. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Relax H on. Mwamwiri! I have not even ..., just relax so I 
have the d ocument with me and copies will be made since it  is a public document so anyone who 
want s the document will get it from the Clerks. Yes Hon. Mwamw iri you wanted to say 
something?  
 
Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Japo sina hakika ya kwamba 
wengine walikuwa nalo kwa sababu swala hili lilikuwa la mtu binafsi na ingekuwa muafaka yule 
aliye omba angekabid hiwa wa kwanza halafu mwenye haja ajitokeze lakini naheshimu maamuzi 
yako Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Mtu binafsi ni wewe haya yalikuwa yanahusika na mambo 
ya nyumbani kwako sio?  
 
Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Si nyumbani kwangu bali…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Wajua ukisema binafsi inamaanisha kama ni mambo ya 
nyumbani Mheshimiwa…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Ath mani  Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika swali linapoletwa ama  Taarifa … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yaani binafsi kwa nafsi yako mwanyewe.  
 
Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Taarifa  inapoletwa huwa ni M wanachama mwenyewe  na 
majibu h uja kwa mina jil ya yule aliyeul iza kama inahusu watu wote…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Sawa Mheshimiwa nimekubali njoo nikukabidhi hapa . 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker, a  concern please before you hand over the document.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : And then we will have the o ther copies. Haya ahsante. Yes?  
 
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 (The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) handed over the document to Hon. Athman Mwamwiri)  
 
Hon. Bwire:  The Hon. Member that you have just handed over the document  has been 
misleading this House. Mr. Speaker, he r aised the concern yes bu t thereafter all M embers 
agreed ... order M embers ! Am the one on the floor and we agreed that the copies should be made 
so that each and everyone should know what projects has made in his or her Wards as far as the 
previous status of the project are concern ed so it was not a personal as the Hon. Members has put 
it. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Fine so Members I think we will make the copies.  Hon. 
Mwamwiri just give it to Clerk let him do the copies and the Members will have it . So Clerk ,  
next order please.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ROADS , INFRASTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC 
WORKS HON . MUMBA ON LACK OF RAMP S ON PAVEMENT WALKWA YS ALONG THE STREETS  OF 
MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon. Prischillah, please give the response?  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speake r. I stand to respond on the issue raised by the 
Member about  lack of ramps on pavement walk ways along the streets of Mombasa Co unty. I 
think the M embers have the response but I will just read for those M embers who don’t have the 
copies.  
  The County in th e financial year 2017/2018 embarked on a program of improving walk 
ways by expanding the existing and paving using colo ured concrete cabro blocks to enhance the 
safety and comfort on pedestrian. We started with four major roads in terms of pedestrian 
volum e that is Digo road, Moi Avenue, Haille Selass ie Avenue, Makadara road and Nk rumah 
road to enable universal access to the premi ses by the improved walkways, the D epartment has 
finalized the designs  for the table rum closing to all junctions  and rums to all  zebra crossing. T he 
work will commence  on the first quarter of this financial year. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Prischillah. Yes Clerk next Order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON LAN DS, PLANNING AND  HOUSING HON . 
AHMED SALAME ON GRAB BED LAND AT JOMVU KU U WARD  
 
Yes Hon. Ahmed Salame?  
 
Hon. Ahmed Salame:  Ahsante Bwana Mwenyekiti. K amati ya Ardhi  iliketi 
ikazungumzia swala la Mheshimiwa Shebe (Mukono) wa Jomvu na ikapitisha kwamba 
Mheshi miwa Shebe lazim a aje kwa K amati yetu ya Ardhi , aje atupatie zile stakabadhi za ile ploti 
iliyonyakuliwa ili tupate kujua hawa ECD nao waliipata kivipi na yule mwenye kunyakua 
alikuwa ni nani? Na nambari ya plot  ni gani i li Kamati ipate kufuatilia kwa urefu Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Shebe Ath mani?  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Hon. Athmani Shebe:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti nilikuwa nimekaa lakini Mheshimiwa Mwenza aliposimama ilikuwa maini yalikuwa 
yananikatika. Mhes himiwa Mwenyekiti nastaajabu kuwa leo Mheshimiwa mwenza anasema 
kuwa nimletee stakabadhi, nafikiri hili swala nimeweza kuliibua hapa Bunge hili tangu mwezi 
wa tatu na leo imefahamika bayana kuwa ilikuwa awe anatakikana ashakuja Jomvu akaangalia 
ile ardhi ambayo m imi kiongozi nimeweza kuiangalia mwenyewe nikaona ardhi imenyakul iwa 
na ile ardhi ni ya serikali. S asa Mheshimwa namshanga a akiniamb ia niende tena kwenye Kamati 
na wakati hii H oja nime ileta kwa Bunge, nimeileta kwa K amati takriban mwezi wa nne kwa 
hivyo Mh eshimiwa Mwenyekiti niko chini ya hima ya yako naomba uweze kuamrisha 
Mwenyekiti wa maswala ya ardhi ili aweze kunitatulia donda hili limekuwa sugu.  
Leo wananchi wangu wamengoja milele watu wanakufa bila kelele ardhi zinaenda 
Mheshimiwa mimi naambiwa nilet e stakabadhi, sijafahamu . Mheshimiwa nataka utoe uamuzi 
kwa sababu mimi naona ni mchezo wa paka na panya, mchezo wa  kufungana na kamba za 
migomba, mimi sitokubali maswala haya, wananchi wangu wa Jomvu wanataka huduma, ardhi 
ya serikali ibakie ya serikali i faidishe wananchi wa nchi si ya mtu binafsi. Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti niko chini ya himaya yako, tupe muongozo.  
 
(The Speaker( Hon. Khatri ) exited the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili) : Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think it will be so wise for the Hon. Members and 
more and so the Chairpersons from  the Committees to be taking the directives from the Chair 
seriously.  Whoever was the Chair last week directed that the Committe e have a site visit on the 
alleged site to see what was the problem so I think they were to have a site visit and bring back 
the feedback but as per what I have heard from the Chair it  is like they have not, they never took 
that directive seriously and als o they never communicated to the Chairman on what the required 
is when they are speaking it here when they were supposed to bringing back the responses . 
Mr. Speaker so I will just wish to call up the seriousness of the Chairmen of different 
Committ ees to b e taking the directives;  if you issue directive today as a Speaker of the day it 
should be taken to consideration than doing the vice versa and again you will have to issue 
another directive maybe giving one week which may not fit the C ommittee so it is ju st my 
humble request that whenever the resolutions are made in the House we take them seriously. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika nadhani 
shule a mbayo Mheshimiwa wa Jomvu aliomba iingiliwe kati ya kwamba ardhi inayonyakuliwa 
ni shule ya umma na shule za ch ekechea ziko chini ya serikali G atuzi. Mheshimiwa Spika 
yafahamika ya kwamba Mombasa ama P wani kwa jumla swala zima la hati  miliki ni swala  la 
changamoto na ni donda sugu;  kuna  uwezekano mkubwa ya kwamba shule ile haina hati miliki, 
lakini kama taasisi ya umma inajua mipaka yake , kwa hivyo ingekuwa mwafak a kwa 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa K amati husika, kuzuru pale kukaa na Kamati na I dara ya elimu na  
idara yake ya Ardhi  kujua mipaka ya shule ile imeishilia wapi . 
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 Na kama ziko hati miliki ama hakuna hati miliki, halafu atake kujua mnyakuzi yule au 
bwenyenye yule ame imiliki vipi ardhi ile ya shule. Lakini Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kumuamuru 
Mheshimiwa atafut e stakabadhi ni kama alivyodai ni kufungana kamba za migomba, taasisi zetu 
nyingi Mheshimiwa kongwe na kongwe mimi nina shule yangu iliasisiwa takriban Mwaka 1963 
na hadi leo haina hati miliki, itakuwa chekechea?  
Mheshimiwa maelekezo ya Kiti yaheshimike n a Wenye viti wawe waadilifu na waaminifu 
kwa sababu ni  dhamana wamebeba kwa niaba ya K amati, maswala mengine Mheshimiwa 
huletwa hapa na watu hutoka wawili watatu wakaenda mashinani japo amri ni tofauti , iweje leo 
swala sugu la maswala ya ardhi ya shule. Ahs ante Mheshimiwa.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya , then I will let the Chair to 
respond.  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Spe aker.  Mr. Speaker I wish to raise my comments 
by virt ue of Article 195 that if each Committee has a power of the  High C ourt and they also have 
powers to compel the production of the document, if a C ommittee is an extension of the 
Assembly and it ha s the same power as H igh Court  then it uses the principal laws that one who is  
alleged  must prove . So am in support tha t whenever t here is an issue Mr. Speaker it is important 
that the M ember who is raising the issue to follow up and bring documentary evidence with 
regard to their issue so that it befits  the C ommittee that is si tting as a High C ourt with the  
standard of a High C ourt to exercise diligence on the balance of probability, as it  is required by 
the High Court. Y ou see Mr. Speaker you can  not go to Court through word of mouth .  
Mr. Speaker if the standard is that of the C ourt then we should up our standard to that , 
that is requ ired in line with the Evidence A ct, in S ection 107 ; Section 107 is clear that the one 
who alleges must prove . So if you are saying that in line something you alleged is something 
going wrong , then  you must prove for the C ommittee to take  necessary action in line with 
Article 195. So it i s very importa nt we appreciate that once the C ommittee is sitting  it is at the 
status of a High Court and not just a C ommittee Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moh amed Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . 
Mheshimiwa Spika kabla sijatia langu nataka kusema pia mimi ni M wanachama wa K amati ya 
Ardhi  na sisi kama Wanachama  tumekaa na tukayazungumza haya maneno.  Mheshimiwa Spika  
ownership  ya gari ni log-book , ownership ya  ardhi  ni hati miliki;  kwa hivyo kwenda site kwa 
hivi Mheshimiwa Spika haitatusaidia, mwanzo tupate  stakabadhi  kuwa kweli ile  ardhi  
mwenyewe ni nani? Kama imechukuliwa ndio sasa itizamwe, imechukuliwa namna gani,  kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi na mpongeza  Mwenyekiti  wangu kwa kuyazungumza yale 
aliyoyazungumza tupate  ushahidi  ili tuweze kulitizama jambo hili. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr . Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker S ir thank you for the 
opportunity awarded. Mr. Speaker I don’t know how to describe when you try to inform the 
Member of this House to go out there and look for the documents especiall y the document 
touching on land.  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 Mr. Speaker Sir, I think to me it’s l ike we are trying to give a lee way to those people who 
are holding or who are on that land illegally to continue having it ; its actually not very easy at the 
person in Kenya that we are having  to actually tell the Member of County Assembly to go there 
and look for those documents especially the title deed.  
Mr. Speaker S ir, to me I think when it’s at the C ommittee level it will strengthen the 
issue, when the C ommittee goes there or when the Committee summons the people on that land 
so that they can have a discussion from that point then it’s easier for us to get the document but a 
single person look ing for those documents that’s a tall order to a Member of County Assembly. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Athman Shebe . I thin k 
you have dwelt  on this issue, so let me just give a ruling that I have seen it is an ECD, I will now 
call upon the Committee on Education to work closely with the Lands C ommittee, first to call 
upon the stakeholde rs of that ECD Centre for you to have a starting point, in that meeting you 
can get the documents that you require from the stakeh olders of the Narcol ECD Centre. S o have 
a joint meeting with Education C ommittee and proceed from there, even if it will reac h a point 
for you to call upon the Hon. Member to shed more light, I thin k it will be prudent for those 
Committees to have a reasonable report that w ill be brought back to this Honourable  House for 
debate. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON C OMMITTEE ON HEALTH H ON. KIBWANA SWALEH  
 
(Silence)  
(Low consultations)  
 
Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh or any Member from Health C ommittee? Yes this will be 
discussed in the next House business. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON AGRICUL TURE , FISHERIES , LIVESTOCK 
AND COOPERATIVES HON . JUNIOR WAMBUA ON CON FISCATION OF FISHING  GEAR FROM NYALI MBU 
BY KENYA WILDLIFE SE RVICE  
 
Yes Hon. Junior Wambua?  
 
(Silence)  
 
Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the m atter is on 
confiscation of fishing gears from Nyali BMU by Kenya Wild Life Service. The background of 
the matter Mr. Speaker  is that  the Nyali BMU unit is among the 15 registered BMU of Mombasa 
County under the sub -department of fisheries. The BMU is mand ated to ensure sustainable 
exploitations of fisher y resou rces in collaboration with the D epartment. The BMU areas of 
jurisdiction includes Nyali landing site, Reef landing site and Mkomani landing site.  The BMU 
consists of the Executive C ommittee and the A ssembly that is made up of Boat owners, 
Fishermen, Fish traders and other fisheries stakeholder.  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11 The County through His Excellency the Governor and the Co unty Executive Committee 
Member  Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Cooperatives have in the past held consultations 
with the BMU M embers , KWS to try and reach an amicable solution. The issue was resolved and 
both parties agreed to observe the agreement reached at.  The f ishing area s for the fishermen in 
Nyal i are under the Mombasa Marine R eserve that i s under the Kenya Wildlife Service 
jurisdiction. Fishing in the area is allowed when using proper legal fishing gears.  
Visit by Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries, Livestock and Cooperative on Thursday 
25th July, 2019.  The Committee visited Nyali landing  site and met with some member s of the 
BMU who had complained on the confiscation of their fishing gears by KWS. It was noted that 
the KWS did not prevent fishermen from fishing but they must use proper fishing gear that is 
legally allowed. Upon probing , the fishermen admitted to the Committee that they indeed were 
using illegal fishing gears (Beach Seine) . However, in recognizing that the main livelihood 
activity for the community was fishing, KWS allowed them to use beach but outside the reef to 
minimize destruction to the ecosystem.  
The County Assembly C ommittee promised to follow up the matter with KWS by 
inviting them to give their position on the matter  at hand and the meeting is scheduled to be on 
Monday 5th August, 2019.  The D epartment has also procu red two boats and fishing gears for the 
BMU that will be handed over to them soon.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ROADS , INFRUSTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC 
WORKS H ON. MUMBA ON STATUS OF S TORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM AT BOMU CATHO LIC 
CHURCH  
 
Hon. Prischillah Mumba?  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Am standing on status of Storm Water Drainage 
System at Bomu Catholic Church. Bomu area in Changamwe sub C ounty is adequ ately served 
by storm water trunk drain and this served the area well until the construction of Bomu stadium 
whose boundary wall obstructed the surface runoff flow...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ibrahim just let her finish her Statement 
first then you will raise your concern.  
 
Hon. Mumba:  The S tadium design overlooks the aspect of storm water flow both within 
and the surrounding areas.  The Department on realizing this challenge and as part of the large 
plan of migrating flooding  within Mombasa communities we have planned to construct a 
conventional storm water drain to connect to the Magongo storm water main trunk drain. The 
works will commence in the second quarter of this financial year. The project is at design stage 
as at now . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir what the Chair  has been reading 
I seem not to understand because I am the one who did bring that Statement to this Hon ourabl e 
House, and my prayers ; one based on a Bomu stadium as you can agree with me tha t you are a 
Member, Bomu  Stadium is under your jurisdictions . Mr. Speaker Sir my prayers are based on 
drainage that has been already built which is along Bomu Catholic road an d my issue was; we 
have lost around two children in that particular drainage or on that drainage system. We have lost 
about two children and my prayer  was that the D epartment on Transport and Infrastructure to tell 
me on or to inform me on how are they goi ng to curb s uch issues in future. That was my issue 
but today I am get ting a story from Bomu Ground! S o I don’t know, you can rule. Thank you . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nilipokuwa na pitia hii Taarifa  
hata Mheshimiwa Mwenzangu hapa ameweza kunigusia kwamba inazungumzia kuhusu Bomu, 
lakini kulingana na ufahamu wangu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na utafiti wa Engineers  swala la 
drainage  inaanza sehemu moja hadi sehemu nyengine, haiangazii sehem u nyengine , haiangaziwi 
sehemu maalum kama ni Bomu Catholic haiangalii hapo Catholic peke yake.  Hii ni kwa s ababu 
madhara hutokea hata kilo mita mbili ama kilomita tatu. Kwa hivyo Mwenyekiti ameelezea 
vizuri kwamba sehemu ya Bomu in Changamwe Sub County; y aani C hangamwe nzima. Kwa 
sababu mambo ya drainage  inaangalia maji yanakwenda wapi na yanatakikana yashuke mahali 
gani, akasema vizuri it is adequately served by stormwater trunk and this served the area well 
until the construction of Bomu stadium whose bo undary wall obstructed the surface runoff flow.  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ningependa kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa Mwenzangu Bomoa 
kwamba tayari washasema hapo katika paragraph 3; the D epartment on realizing this challenge 
and as part of the large plan of mitigatin g flooding within Mombasa communities we have 
planned to  put conventional storm water drain to connect to the Magongo storm water main 
trunk drain.  Kwa hivyo haya maji yote lazima yatafutiwe main trunk drain  ya Changamwe  
nzima, l azima kuwe na main trunk dr ain. Kwa hivyo hali sehemu yoyote Changamwe kama 
haitaenda kwenye hiyo main trunk drain  basi tutakuwa hatuna kitu tunafanya; h asa hiyo ujenzi 
wa Changamwe Stadium pale inatatiza maji kuelekea katika hiyo main trunk drain  ndio saa hii 
wataeka njia yakuweza kuonyesha kwamba yale maji yote yataenda katika hiyo main trunk 
drain . Kila Sub County inawekewa hiyo trunk drain  yake. Kila Sub -county Mheshimiwa Spika 
hili lisieleweke vibaya kuwa inazungumzia Bomu ground la! bali main trunk  drain  katika kila 
Sub County huwa ndio moja inasambaza maji moja kwa moja hadi kuelekea baharini. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu): Thank you Chief Whip, yes ? 
 
Hon. Omondi:   Mr. Speaker Sir I don’t see the reason why we are talking about this 
issue but my Statement was very clear,  I was talking about already built drainage which is open 
and it is built along the Bomu Stadium and I am talking about the children  that lost their lives or 
who died.  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 So I wanted them to respond to me and tell this House what they are going to do. Maybe 
if they can put some sl abs on that particular drainage, t hat is what I was looking for but again 
Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): The Chief W hip is up, yes?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Wajua ni vizuri kumpatia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa 
Uchukuzi taarifa  ya kueleweka. Hii hapa inazungumzia kuhusu drainage  kumbe yeye anataka 
kwamba shimo liko wazi liw eze kupata slabu kulifinika , sasa ungemueleza hivyo akapeana jibu 
linavyopaswa. Hilo ni slabu inayohitajika sio drainage , ungemueleza baadae baada ya kuandika 
ukamueleza zaidi. Kwa hivyo ni jambo la  kumaliza kama siku moja hivi.  Ahsante.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir that is not my mistake. Hon . Member that is not my 
mistake, when I gave my Statement it was very clear so that one it was the people who wrote it. 
It was  not me who wrote what is supposed to be done.  Okay I gave my S tatement very clear ly so 
it is the Clerks or whoever who wrote the S tatement is the one who made it wrong  but it is not 
me.  
Mr. Speaker S ir I want us to leave it the way it is and through your wisdom I would again 
if you could rule in favour I would again request to make this Statem ent again in the second time 
so that it can be well understood b ecause I have already prepared it . Again, I have already 
listen ed to  it and I knew that there was a problem, so you can give your ruling Mr. Speaker Sir, 
thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Ibrahim for you to write a new S tatement 
you will have to forward the Statement to the House Business Committee for them to accord you 
a day to state your S tatement.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I have already done that I saw the Spe aker for 
the same and he passed it to the House.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you. Y es Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
Hon. Ibrahim the status on storm water drainage you we are referring back to the House 
Business Committee to accord it a day for you to bring back the Statement in the order number 
14, it is the same S tatement and I am sure the response that you will get it is the same that the 
Hon. Chair from Transport will respond.  
So as I have ruled you will bring back that S tatemen t on the next House Business 
Committees for them to give you a day.  
 
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker S ir it is okay, I did a follow up of this thing and I found that 
there was already a mis take and that is why I met the C lerk that I bring it today, that is why I 
went to the Speaker and the Speaker a llowed it to pass to the House B usiness…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay p roceed . 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand pursuant to Standing O rder 41 2 (c), 
seeking to know from the Cha irperson Committee on Transport , Infrastructure and Public Works 
if he is aware that that the storm water drainage system built along Bomu Catholic Church 
Airport Ward. The drainage has l ed to the death of two children,  I theref ore need to know if the 
Coun ty government has any plans to construct slabs on the drainage to avoid future loss of lives, 
thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Chair do you have any response? Chair 
Transport?  
 
Hon. Mumba :  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think acco rding to the new S tatement I would 
like to be given a time so that I can get the response from th e Department because as I knew…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): How long?  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Maybe by next week on Tuesday, so far because we do  not have any 
other sitting apart from next week Tuesday.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay . 
 
Hon. Mumba:  Tuesday afternoon.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk . 
 
ILLEGAL STRUCTURES E NCROACHING PARKING A ND ROAD RESERVES IN KIPEVU WARD  
 
Yes Hon. Faith?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I seek to know from the 
Chairperson Committee on Lands Housing and P lanning if he is aware of illegal str uctures that 
have encroached par king and road reserves in Kipevu W ard and what plans the C ounty 
government has  to pave way for construction of f eeder roads to facilitate proper development. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Chairman lands?  
 
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante Bwana Mwenyekiti . Nakubaliana vizuri sana na 
Mheshimiwa al ivyosema lakini Kipevu ni kubwa;  Kipevu mpaka aelezee ni sehemu gani ambayo 
inashida hiyo na pia nilikuwa namuomba ninapokaa na Kamati  kesho nataka tumuite 
Mheshimiwa aje atuelezee ile sehemu ya Kipevu anayolalamika ; kwamba kuna mijengo ambayo 
sihali ili  Kamati  ifanye juu chini ipate kuzuru pale ipate kusaidia na lile janga lililoko pale. 
Ahasnte Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Naomba kumtaarifu Mwenyekiti wa 
Ardhi na Miundo mbinu katika Idara  kuna map na pale kwetu ile ardhi ni ya absentee land lord  
majumba ni ya watu lakini mashamba ni ya mtu mwengine . Kwa hivyo kupitia ile plan ni 
Kipevu nzima , nikiangalia Kipevu nzima unapata wakati unataka kuleta maendeleo hakuo nekani 
ni wapi pa  kujengwa.  Kwa hivyo nimuangalie hiyo map kupitia Idara yako ujue sehemu ya 
kuegesha magari ya umma iko wapi barabara walio encroach  iko upande gani. Ukinifanyia hivyo 
Mwenyekiti utakuwa umenisaidia sana. Ahsante . 
  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Ahmed . 
  
Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Bwana Mwenyekiti ahsante sana lakini swala la Mheshimiwa 
kama tulivyolisikia lasema ni Kipevu nzima watu wamevamia na mijengo ambayo si  halali. Kwa 
hivyo Bwana M wenyekiti hapo itakuwa ni sarakasi kabisa Kama ti itakuja keti ije ikae t upange 
kama wiki mbili tukazunguke K ipevu. Kip evu ni kubwa na kipevu hata uki tembea leo huwezi 
kuima liza kwa hivyo nilikuwa naomba B wana M wenyekiti sisi tutembee kule kama wiki nzima 
kwanza tuangalie tuje tupate kujibu maanake Kip evu ni kubwa sana. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon.  Faith?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Mheshim iwa Spika naomba Bwana Mwenyekiti  vile tu nimeweza 
kumtaarifu niwaangalie Idara  yao kuwapatia map itawaelekeza barabara ziko wapi sehemu za 
umma za kuegesha magari  kwa sababu tukija tulipata watu tayari washajenga na nimepata maafa 
mengi ya moto na inakuwa gari za wazima moto haziwezi kuf ika pale kwa msongomano wa 
manyumba. Kwa hivyo na idara yake ataweza kusaidika. Ahsante sana . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Faith . Yes Hon. Laila?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. 
  
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Are you a Member of Lands Committee?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Yes. 
  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): But the  Chair is here to respond so I do  not 
know why ...  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 Hon. Nyache:  Naomba kuchangia . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay . 
 
Hon. Nyache:  Sawa, ahsante sana Mheshimwa Spika. Mimi pia ni Mwanakamati wa 
Ardhi na kama vile Mwenyekiti v wangu alivyosema hapa y a kwamba apewe muda wa wiki 
mbili ni sawa. Mimi ningeomba tu utupatie hiyo wiki mbili kwa sababu mimi pia natoka sehemu 
ya Kipevu na najua Kipe vu ninai jua ukubwa wake . Ningeomba tu tembee hiyo wiki moja halafu 
wiki ya pili tutengeze ripoti. Tafadhali Mheshim iwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay it is noted . So the Chair on lands 
Committee work on the Statement from Hon. Faith and as you know we might be going to recess 
so we will be waiting for a credible rep ort after surveying the Kipevu Ward. You will have your 
ample  time for you  to check on the maps from the Department and having the site visit to the 
said road. Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
Yes Hon. Ramla?  
 
Hon. Said:  Ahsante Mheshimi wa, kama utaniruhusu ningeomba nimpe ruhusa 
Mheshimiwa Moses Aran anisomee M swada  wangu. Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed.  
 
STANDARDIZATION OF EXAMINATION FEES FOR PERSONS LIVING WITH DISABILITY  
Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker Sir. Actually it is an honour to move the Motion on 
behalf of my colleague Hon. Ramla.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion;  
THAT AWARE  that f or purpose for registration of Persons living with disability, it is 
mandatory requirement fo r one to undergo med ical examination by registered Medical 
Officer in a registered and certified health facility to ascertain the disability;  
FURTHER AWARE  that Mr. Speaker the medical services are now a devolved function 
pursuant to the Fourth Schedule of  the Constitution , 2010;  
NOTING THAT  Mr. Speaker People living with disability are considered marginalised in 
the society and in most cases do not have a source of livelihood because they have not 
been fully empowered;  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17 CONCERNED  THAT  Medical Officers in the health facilities within the County are 
charging different fees for assessment of people living with disability. Some charging a 
fee of as high as  shs 1,500; 
I therefore urge this County Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
The a ssessment/examination fees for Persons livi ng with disability to be s tandardized to 
Kshs.500 in all public health facilities within the County of Mombasa  to make it more 
accessible to Persons living with disability. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
Hon. Said : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Moses Aran . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nataka 
kueleza…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
Hon. Aran:  Hon. Speaker I request Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho to second the Motion.  
Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  I second.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a question that the 
Motion on Standardi zation of examination fees for Persons living with disability  be discussed in 
this Hon ourable  House . 
(Question proposed  and agreed to ) 
 Yes Hon. Ramla?  
 
Hon. Said: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nataka kueleza Bunge hili kua kuna 
vitambulisho huwa vyatolewa kwa walemavu kama uthibitish o kuwa yeye ana ulemavu fulani , 
na kupata kitambulisho hivi huwa lazima afanye assessment  kutoka hospitali na ulemavu 
tunavyoju a kuna ulemavu mwingi. Sasa assessment  hii inachajiwa shs 1500  hapo Coast General, 
Port Reitz ni elfu moja, Tudor Clinic ni mia tano.  
Walemavu walikua wanataka tuwafanyie bure lakini tumekaa chini na Chief Officer  wa 
Afya  Dr. Khadija na tukaja na maelewano kuwa badili kila mtu alipe bei yake tufanye bei moja 
ambayo itakua mia tano. Sasa hii Motion ikipita, tutasaidia walemavu wengi wasiojiweza 
kuweza kuenda Coast General apate assessement  na aweze ku omba  kitambulisho cha walemavu. 
 Pia Mheshimi wa Spika tunaomba hii kupunguzwa kwa sababu kama wasiosikia huwa 
mwanzo mpaka aende apimwe masikio na apate instruction kutoka (???)  ili kuhakikisha huyu 
mtu hasiki i, ndio sasa hiyo ripoti pia ina  pesa zake mtu analipia ndio aje huku assessment apeane 
kuonyes ha kuwa huyo mlemavu hasiki i ama yuwasikia kwa mbali.  
Pia wasio ona hivyo hivyo wana enda kwenye Kliniki za wasio ona kupata ripoti ya ana ona 
kwa kiasi gani , haoni kabisa ama haoni jicho moja ndio alete ripoti aandikiwe assessment ya kua 
yeye ni mlemavu wa aina gani .   
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 Sasa huku analipishwa, huku pia wanalipishwa walemavu wengi wana ishia  hawawezi 
kufanya hio assessment  na hawapati kitambulisho cha ulemavu. Kwa hivyo inatenga kupata 
manufaa ya Kaunti ya Mombasa . Ahsante.  
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwali mu): Yes Hon. Faith . 
 
Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kumuunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa Ramla. Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni vyema kama hayo mahospitali yote ambayo 
ametangulia kuyataja yote ni ya Serikali yetu ni vizuri yawe na bei ambayo ni moja  na hawa 
ndugu zetu pia tuwaangalie na jicho lingine na huruma ndipo sasa Mheshimiwa akapendekeza 
tuweze kuwatoza ada ya mia tano.  
Mheshimiwa Spika naona hilo litakua jambo zuri sana kama Tudor ni 500 na Makadara 
kulingana na kauli yake amesema  ni shs 1500.  Kwa hivyo ni vizuri hospitali zetu zote za umma 
waweze kulipisha hiyo shillingi 500 kwa ndugu zetu walemavu. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya Bo y. 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Also I have stood to support the Motion 
that the charges for the identification of persons with disability to be standardized. It is important 
and I congratulate the Hon. Member for that and I also maybe when she is deliberating also the 
time frame that they take before they give the persons with disability the cards they normally 
take a lot of time. And you know in our Country there is a lot of waiver and good things that are 
given to the persons with disabilit ies but the catch is unless they show  the identification card that 
they have been registered that they are per sons with disability. So that  always inhibits our 
residen ts who are physically disable d from getting th ese services or getting th ese goodies. So it is 
important that the cost be low ered and even the process of getting those identification cards be 
made a bit straightforward and time efficient so that all the residen ts can achieve an d get all the 
goodies that the government has in store for them. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mw alimu) : Yes Hon. Leyla?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii pia mimi 
niweze kumuunga mkono. Nimesimama hapa kumuunga mkono Mheshimiwa Ramla kwa Hoja 
yake hii aliyoleta kulingana na malipo ya hospitali kupitia hawa w alemavu. Mimi pia ningeomba 
hizo hospitali zote ziweze kuwa na kima kimoja cha chini kwa sababu hawa wenzetu ni watu 
wasiojiweza na wengi huwa wanasaidiwa na mwenye kumsaidia pia labda ana mzigo.  
Kwa hivyo mimi ningeomba hiki kima kiwe hiki hiki cha 500 Mheshimiwa Ramla alicho 
omba hapa na waweze kujisaidia wote maana yake wengi wao hata vibarua hawafanyi, wengine 
ni hata wale wa  kusimama barabarani  masikini ya Mungu, na wengine pia amekaa na njugu zake 
pale ama anauza vidude dude basi hata hawawe zi wakiwekea kima kikubwa kama hiki cha 1500 . 
Mimi ningeomba hi i hii ya ambayo Ho n. Ramla ames ema hapa iweze kuzingatiwa na hospitali 
zote waweze kuwapunguzia wawafanyie hiki kima alichosema hapa Mheshimiwa Ramla cha 
500. Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa Spika.  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Prischilla.  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nimesimama hapa sio kupinga Hoja 
iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa Ramla lakini hata hio 500 kwangu naipinga. Kwa sababu ninaikata a 
kabisa na ikiwa ndio itakua ipitishwe kwa Hoja hii hiyo pia 500 iweko  kwangu bado naiona ni 
mzigo. Kwa sababu ninaelewa jinsi walemavu huwa wana matatizo na kusema ule ukweli saa 
zingine twawaona hata wakiwa katika hali ya kutafuta riziki wengi tunawaku ta hata barabarani 
kule na mtu apate ile 500 kwa siku aangalie atalisha familia, aangalie ataangal ia watoto, 
ataangalia ulezi ali o nao na arudi achangie pesa ya kufanyiwa hayo matibabu ya kuwa aweze 
kuhudumiwa na Mheshimiwa Ramla hapa ametueleza vizu ri kuwa kuna matibabu mengine 
kumbe ya kuwa mpaka ukaangaliwe kama una ulemavu wa masikio kuna pesa fulani pia mpaka 
watoe kule ile athibitishwe kama ana ulemavu wa masikio ama kama ni mlemavu wa kuwa 
haoni, athibitishwe pia akalipe ada ili aangaliwe ama p engine macho hayaoni vizuri 
kuthibitishwe na hapo bado kuna kima kitatolewa.  
Ikiwa sisi ni viongozi na tunaelewa hali ya wenzetu walivyo, ni kweli Mheshimiwa 
Ramla alikwenda akazungumza , akaelezwa kuwa ni lazima kuna takikana ada kidogo ya kuweza 
kusimamia  hayo mambo. Lakini kama ninavyojua ikiwa sisi tunasema tunataka mambo y a 
kuangalia jinsi mlemavu tutam beba vipi, mama tutam beba vipi, kijana ana matatizo gani tuweze 
kumuinua na ikiwa leo tuna angalia mlemavu na bado tunamuwekea kima cha kuweza kulipa n a 
hali tunajua kuna watu wengi wanakua na hiki kiwango wanaita waive r, mara nyingi sana ziko 
katika hospitali ya Coast General tunaona na tunaona ni watu wenye nafasi zao wengine hata hua 
si ati wako hohe hahe kabisa lakini unaweza kuona mtu amesaidiwa anapatiwa waiver  na anapata 
ule msaada.  
Kwa hivyo mimi kwangu ningependa kwanza tuangalie jicho la mbele kuangalia huyu 
mlemavu, tutampa huduma gani kama Kaunti ; ikiwa tumeweka hicho kima cha 500, kwa nini 
sisi kama Waheshimiwa Wabunge tusiwe na kitengo fulani tuseme  tutakua tukiwekea kwa ajili 
ya mlemavu kuenda kujiandikisha katika Coast General na hali sisi tuna hayo mamlaka na uwezo 
kulifanya. Mheshimiwa Spika ninazidi kurudi nyuma na kujaribu kutetea katika hali hii na 
Kaunti  yetu tunajua ina uwezo ikiwa tumereges ha Ms wada huo tena ndani ya hili Bunge 
tuhakikishe kujua kuwa walemavu tuwaangalie kwa jicho l ingine kuwa tuweze kupitisha 
Mswada hapa wa kuwa wawe watakua wanaweza kupewa huduma bure katika Kaunti  yetu ya 
Mombasa mpaka wapate vile vibali. Bora mtu tu aend e akajitambulishe katika hali ya ulemavu 
wake, kule ataenda kuchajiwa kitu lakini huku atakapokua sasa ashathibitishwa tuweze kujua 
tutamsaidia vipi? Lakini hapa mimi nimeona kuna malipo mara ngapi ; mara mbili, mlemavu 
anaenda kule kuthibitisha kwanza ule mavu wake halafu tena anakuja huku ndio aweze kufanya 
process  ya kupata vile vibali.  
Kwa hivyo bado kuna mzigo mimi naona Mheshimiwa Ramla nina kushukuru sana kwa 
kuleta jambo hili ndani y a Nyumba hii, lakini bado kama Wajumbe, kama Wabunge wa Jumba 
hili l etu tukufu ninawaomba tufikirie mara mbili  tuone bado tuna kazi ya kufanya tusonge tena 
katika drawing table  tuone tutazidi kusukuma vipi? Waheshimiwa wenzangu hili jambo la leo 
tunaweza kulipitisha kuwekea hii 500 lakini inatakikana turudi tena tu rudi katika drawing table  
tuone tunaweza kusaidia vipi hata hii 500 tuiondoe ili kuwe na urahisishaji wa kupata hivi vibali. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
July 31, 2019                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           70 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Let me call the Mover of the Motion to respond.  
Hon. Said : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nashukuru Bunge hili kwa kuni unga 
mkono huu Ms wada na k wa hakika ningetaka sana huu Ms wada badili ya kushukisha bei kuwa 
500 ningetaka iwe bure kabisa, lakini maelewano yetu ni kuwa tushukishe mpaka 500 wakienda 
Coast General wachajiwe 500, wakienda Port Reitz iwe ni 500, wakienda Tudor Clinic ndio ya 
rahisi sana, sasa walemavu wengi wanakimbilia Tudor kwa sababu ni rahisi na ambapo 
wanatengwa. Kuna wengine ambao hawana uwezo mpaka tutoe kw a mifuko yetu kumsaidia. Pia 
nataka tufanye medical camp  tuwaite watu wa National Council ndio tuwaambie walemavu waje 
kufanya assessement bure ambapo sisi tuko kufanya mambo yarahisishwe. Kwa hivyo nashukuru 
Bunge hili kwa kuniuunga mkono. Ahsante.  
The D eputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Ramla. I now stand to put a 
question on the Motion on Standardi zation of examination fees for persons living with disability  
be approved in this Hon ourable  House . 
(Questio n put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members the House stands adjourned until 6th August , 2019 at 10:00 a.m. 
The House rose at 4:41p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
 
 