June 1 4, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         71 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  MEMBER  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday , 14th June, 2017  
The House met at 9:45a.m. 
 (Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
            Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit, y es Leader of 
Majority?  
            Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr.  Speaker, I stand under S tanding 
Order number 28 ; I would  request  you give an  adjournment of two hours . Mr. Speaker you 
know we are heading  to the sine die session and we have some two very important docu ments 
which are not ready so  I request that this House be adjour ned for two hours and then we come 
and complete the matters for today . Mr. Speaker I request for that adjournment.  
            Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you Hon.  Leader of M ajority. 
Member s it has been proposed that this House should leave for two hours and then come 
back , as many as are of that opinion . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
            So this House shall take leave for two hours then come back.   
(Sergeant At Arm s lowered the Mace  from the Table ) 
The House rose for a temporary adjournment at 9:48a.m . 
 (Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) exited the chambers)  
 
RESUMPTION OF PLENARY  
The House met at 11.45a.m.  
(Sergeant At Arms raised the Mace on the Table)  
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mswabah Rashid)  in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit down. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
Hon.  Hatimy . 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I reques t the Bills to 
be read for the S econd time and thereafter we proceed to the Committee of the W hole House 
Mr. Speaker.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Hatimy we have got three Bills, you 
have to move three Motions so that we don't go back to business number 8 .  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker, we do have the first Bill, Tax 
waiver  Bill, and then  we have Education amendment and Liquor licensing Mr. Speaker . 
Thank you, I propose  we go over three of them.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj.  
Hon.  Faraj:  Mr. Sp eaker I raise to second all the three Bills. 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s I put the question as many as of 
the opinion that the Mombasa County  Tax Waiver and variatio ns Bill, 2015, be read for the 
Second time and the Mombasa County  Liquor licensing Amendment Act, and Mombasa 
County  Education Amendment Bill be read  for the S econd time.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Yes Clerk.  
 
 
June 1 4, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         71 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 MOMBASA COUNTY  TAX WAIVER AND VARIATION BILL , 2015  
SECOND READING  
Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir, This is the S econd reading  of The Mombasa County  Tax 
Waiver and Variation Bill, 2015. A Bill for AN ACT of the County  Assembly of Mombasa to 
regulate the waiver and variation of taxes pursuant to A rticle 210 of the c onstitution of 
Kenya, 2010 and S ection 159 of the Public Finance M anagement Act, 2012; and for 
connected purposes;  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much,  Hon.  Member s, 
the Bill after being read for the Second time the House should dissolve itself and convert into 
the Committee  of the W hole House, Tha nk you.  
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
(Sergeant At Arms lowered the Mace from the Table)  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) exited the Chair)  
 
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITT EE 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
 
Chairperson : You may sit down, ye s Clerk.  
Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir this is for the Mombasa County  Tax Waiver and Variation 
Bill, 2015 ;  
PART I - PRELIMINARY  
 
1. This Act may be cited as the Mombasa County  Tax Waiver and Variation Act, 2015  
 
2. This Act shall come into operation upon publication  in the gazette.  
 
3. In this Act, unless the context so otherwise requires  
 
“Assembly” means the County  Assembly of Mombasa;  
"Executive Committee  Member " means the executive Committee  Member  
responsible for finance;  
             "Tax" includes any revenue or licensing fee payable by any person to the County  
Government whether it has become due or not.  
             "Tax waiver" includes the forbearance of tax collection, partial or full remission, 
spreading out a payment in respect of tax already accrued and an y variation of the amount 
due or interest or penalty due on any amount owing to the County  Government  
4. The object of this Act  is to–– 
(a) Give further effect to A rticle 210 of the constitution as regards tax waivers and 
administration thereof;  
(b) To ensure transpa rency in the administration of taxes and other revenue in particular 
in the waivers thereof;  
(c) To provide for the procedure applicable to and requirements for tax waivers.  
(Question proposed)  
Chairperson : Member s I propose that part one Preliminary section 1 , 2, 3 and 4 be part 
of the Bill. Member s I now put the question as many as of the opinion that part one ; that is 
preliminary, section 1,  2, 3 and 4 be part of the Bill. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
Yes Hon.  Hatimy.  
June 1 4, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         71 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:   Mr. Speaker I prop ose to d elete 2015 of the Act number 1 
short title to read 2017 instead of 2015, even the title to read 2017 instead of 2015.  
Chairperson : Okay Member s it has been proposed that Part 1 Section 1 to be 
amended and to read; This Act may be cited as the Momba sa County  Tax Waiver and 
Variation Act, 2017.   
(Question put)  
I now put the question as many as are of the opinion that Part 1 Se ction 1 should read 
as follow s; This Act may be cited as the Mombasa County  Tax Waiver and Variation Act, 
2017.  
(Question put a nd agreed to ) 
Yes Clerk . 
Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir .  
 
PART II –ADMINISTRATION OF TAX WAIVERS AND VARIATION  
4. No tax maybe waived or varied except in the manner provided for in this Act, any 
applicable national legislation or any other Act of the Assembly.  
5.(1) The executive Committee  Member  may, where he or she deems it appropriate, and 
with concurrence in writing, of the Governor, waive or vary the payment of any tax, fees 
or other payment due to the County  government.  
(2) The power of the executive Committ ee Member  to waive or vary tax shall be exercisable, 
in respect of every transaction, with the written approval of the Governor, but in any case, in 
the following circumstances ––  
(a) where the waiver or variation is for purpose of encouraging defaulting t ax payers to pay 
such amount as may enable the County  government recover part of the amount owing from 
the defaulting payer;  
(b) Where, in the opinion of the County  executive Committee  Member , there exist such 
compelling circumstances that make it equitabl e, expedient and in the interest of the financial 
advantage to the County  that the waiver or variation be made;  
(c) For any other public interest reason, in consultation with the Governor.  
6. (1) Where the executive Committee  Member  intends to waive or va ry any tax, he or she 
shall publish such intention in the gazette not less than fourteen days before the intended date 
of the waiver or variation.  
 (2) The notice referred to in sub -section (1) shall indicate the reason for the intended waiver 
or variation  and shall invite comments from the public on the intended waiver or variation.  
7. Every waiver and variation shall be reported to the Assembly and published in the Gazette 
not more than fourteen days after it is granted.  
8. Pursuant to article 210 of the constitution, the executive Committee  Member  shall in 
respect of every waiver or variation of tax –– 
 (a) Maintain a public record of each waiver or variation together with the reason for it;  
 (b) Report  
  
9. The executive Committee  Member  shall not waive o r vary tax or fees or authorise the 
exclusion of a State Officer or public officer from payment of tax or fees by reason of the 
office held by the State Officer or public officer or the nature of the work of the State Officer 
or Public Officer.  
(Question p roposed)  
Chairperson : Member s I propose a question ; it has been proposed part two ; that is 
the administration of tax waivers and variation section 4, 5, 6,  7, 8 and 9 be part of the Bill, 
Member s I continue to put the question as many as that of the opinio n that part two of that is 
administration of tax waiver and variation section 4,  5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 be part of the Bill. 
June 1 4, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         71 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 (Question put and agreed to)  
Clerk:  PART III –– MISCELLANEOUS  
10. (1) The executive Committee  Member  may, with the approval of the Gover nor, make 
regulations for the better carrying out of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to provide for the procedure in accordance with Sub section (1), the 
regulations may provide for –– 
a) The procedure of application for tax waivers and va riations;  
b) Where  any payment of tax is due, the time within which waivers may be applied for;  
c) The requirement with respect to documentation that may be required with the application 
for tax waivers or variations.  
Chairperson : Member s I propose a quest ion; it has been proposed part three that is 
Miscellaneous section 10 (1) and (2) be part of this Bill, I proceed to put a question as many 
as that of the opinion that part three ; that is Miscellaneous section 10 (1) and (2 ) be part of 
this Bill, as many a s of that opinion . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
Member s I think we have come to the end of the Committee  of the Whole House, 
Hon.  Hatimy, do you, Member s I think we shall convert back to the plenary . 
(Silence)  
PLENARY RESUMED  
(Sergeant At Arms raised the M ace on the Table)  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit down, yes Hon.  
Hatimy can you report the progress . 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker on behalf of the County  Assembly 
I do agree that the Bill was passed with amendments and the Bill be read the T hird time . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Do you wish the Bill to be read for the 
Third time today?  
(Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy bowed ) 
..Okay, Member s it has been proposed that t his Bill, the Mombasa County  Tax waiver 
and variation Bill, 2017 , to be read a Third time . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
...Yes Clerk.  
MOMBASA COUNTY TAX WAIVER AND VARIATION BILL, 2017  
THIRD READING  
Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir this is the T hird reading of the M ombasa County  Tax waiver 
and variation Bill, 2017 . A Bill for an Act of the County  Assembly of Mombasa to regulate 
the waiver and variation of taxes pursuant to article 210 of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 
and section 159 of the Public Finance M anagement  Act, 2012 and for connected purposes;  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much, yes Clerk can we 
go to business number 10 . 
        THE MOMBASA COUN TY LIQUOR LICENCING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017  
SECOND READING  
Clerk : Mr. Speaker Sir this is th e Second reading of the Mombasa County  Liquor 
licensing (Amendment) Bill, 2017 . A Bill for An Act of the County  Assembly of Mombasa to 
amend the Mombasa County  liquor licensing Act, 2014 and for connected purposes.  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much Clerk, the Bill 
having been read for a Second  time is now committed to the Committee  of the W hole County  
Assembly . 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
June 1 4, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         71 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 Sergeant at Arms lowered the Mace from the Table  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) exited t he Chair)  
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
Chairperson (Mr. Mswabah) : Member s you may sit down, yes Clerk . 
Clerk:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, allow me to go through the amendments of Mombasa 
County  liquor licensing Bill 2017, Short title and commencement  
1. This Act may be cited as the Mombasa County  Liquor licensing (Amendments) Act 
2017 and shall come into operation upon publication in the Gazette ; 
2 Section 2 of the Mombasa County  Liquor Licensing Act, 2014 in this A ct referred 
to as the , ''Principle Act'' is amended by inserting the following new definition in its proper 
alphabetical sequences - 
''Chief Officer'' means the County  Chief Officer for the time being responsible for matters 
relating to alcohol control;  
3. Section 4 (2) of the principle Act is amended by inserting the following new 
paragraph immediately after paragraph (a) ; 
(aa) ''A  Chief Officer'' ; 
4. Section 19 (2) of the principle Act is amended by - 
(a) Inserting  the following new paragraph after paragrap h (a);  
(aa) A representative of national authority for the campaign against alcohol and drug abuse  
(b) Deleting the phrase 'culture and tourism' in paragraph (b) and substituting therefo re the 
phrase 'Alcohol Control';  
5. Section 21 of the principle Act is  amended by inserting the following new 
paragraph after paragraph (c) ; 
(ca) Conducting public education and awareness on alcohol  
6. Section 24 of the principle Act is amended by deleting the words 'medical officer of 
health' in section 24(3) (d) (iii) and substituting therefore the words ' Public Health Officer'.  
7. The principle Act is amended by inserting the following new section immediately 
after section 38 - 
'38A. Any person who sells alcohol to a minor or entices a person below the age of 
eighteen year s to take alcohol is guilty of an offence.  
(Question proposed)  
Chairperson (Mr. Mswabah) : Thank you very much, Member s I shall now propose a 
question it has been proposed that the short title and commencement shall read that this Act 
may be cited as The M ombasa County  Liquor Licensing (Amendment) Act, 2017 and shall 
come into operation upon publication in the Gazette and I now put a question that the short 
title should read this Act may be cited as The Mombasa County  Liquor Licensing 
(Amendment) Act, 2017 and shall come into operation upon publication in the Gazette . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Member s I shall now propose again a mendment in section 2, amendment in section 4, 
amendment in section 19, a mendment in section 21, amendment in section 31 a, a mend ment 
in section 24 , that in section 1,  2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 should read as amended ; as many as of the 
opinion that, I now put the question Member s as many as of the opinion that section 2, 3,  4, 5, 
6 and 7 should read as amended . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
            Thank you very much. Member s, the Committee  of W hole House dissolves to 
plenary.  
PLENARY RESUMED  
(Sergeant At Arms raised the Mace on the Table)  
June 1 4, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         71 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6 (Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
            Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rash id): Member s you may sit down. Yes Hon.  
Hatimy . 
            Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I report back to the House that the 
amendment Bill has been passed and there was no objection thank you and I beg to move . 
            Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : So do yo u need them to be read for the 
Third time now or in the afternoon . 
            Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Now . 
            Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s as many as are of the opinion 
that the amendment Bill should be r ead for a T hird time . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
            Yes Clerk . 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY LIQUOR LICENCING  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017  
THIRD READING  
            Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir this is the T hird reading for The Mombasa County  Liquor 
Licensing (Amendme nt) Bill, 2017  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you, yes Clerk can you go to 
business number 11 .  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2017  
SECOND READING  
Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir this is the S econd reading for The Momba sa County  
Education Development (Amendment) Bill, 2017 . A Bill for a n Act of the County  Assembly 
of Mombasa to amend the Mombasa County  Education Development Act, 2014 to provide 
for a Corporation and a Fund; and for connected purpose;  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Member s a Bill having been read for a 
Second time it ’s committed to the Committee  of the Whole House Committee . 
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
(Sergeant At Arms lowered the Mace from the Table)  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) exited the Chair)  
 
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
Chairperson : Member s you may have a seat . 
(Consultations)  
Yes Clerk can you continue . 
Clerk:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir let me read the amendment first , is 
the short title and commencement 1. This Act may be cited as the Mombasa County  
Education Development (Amendment) Act, 2017 and shall come into operation upon 
publication....  
(Interruption)  
Chairperson : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker thi s is an amended Bill, I propose that this Bill 
that first the short title be amended, and section number 2 the long title to be amended, the 
amendment for section 3 to be amended, number 4 to insert a new section (2a), number 5 to 
be amended, number 6 to b e amended, 7, 8, 9,  10, 11, 12 to be amended and to insert a new 
section to read 11 (a), 14, 11 (b) to read 11(c), 16, 11 (d), 17 to read 11 (e), 18 to read 11(f), 
19, 20, 21, 22 to be amended, 23, 24 be amended, 23 to be amended, section 16 to be inserted  
June 1 4, 2017                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         71 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 7 16 (a), 24 be amended, 25 be amended, 26, 27 and 28 be amended, 29 insert a new section to 
read 20 (a), 30, 31, 32, 33 be amended 34 to read section 55 (a) . Mr. Speaker since Member s 
have been scrutinising  this Bill I believe that we can reach a consensus  to pass as it is. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker since it is an amendment Bill. 
Chairperson : Thank you very much .  
Hon.  Faraj:  I think Mr. Speaker the proposal that has been made by Hon.  Member , 
Hon.  Hatimy I stand to second that proposal which has been made by th e Hon.  Member  and I 
think it's the best way forward . 
Chairperson:  Thank you, Member s as many as of that opinion . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
Okay Member s I will proceed to propose a question, it has been proposed that section 
part 1, section  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 , 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 21, 22, 23, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, and 34 to be read as amended. Member s I proceed to put 
the question as many of the opinion that the short title which is section 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 
to read as amended . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
Member s I think the Committee  of the W hole is dissolve d and we go back to the 
Plenary.  
PLENARY RESU MED  
(Sergeant At Arms raised the Mace to the Table)  
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit down. Yes  
Chairman , Hon.  Hatimy.  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I re quest that being 
that Bill be read a T hird time , thereafter I think the Bill be read for a Third time . 
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes as many of the opinion that the Bill 
be read now for a Third time . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
…yes Clerk can you read the Bill for a T hird time . 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT  (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2017  
THIRD READING  
Clerk:  Mr. Speaker Sir, this is the Third reading of the Mombasa County  Education 
Development (Amendment) Bill, 2017. A Bill for an Act of County Assembly of Mombasa to 
amend the Mombasa County  Education Develop ment Act 2014 to provide for a C orporation 
and a Fund and for connected purposes;  
Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much Member s the Bill 
has passed now. Yes Clerk can we go to business number 12 . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
Member s this House is adjourned until in the afternoon . 
The House rose at 12:31p .m. 
 