August 2 3, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     71 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic versi on of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
    
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 23rd August , 2018  
The House met at 2:42p.m. 
 
(The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Have your seats.  
 
(Loud Consultation s) 
 
Order Hon. Members ! Yes Clerk.  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
Yes Hon. Moses Aran . 
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker Sir thank you for giving me this opportunity . I have a 
statement in regard to the CASA games  that is  scheduled on 26th August , 2018 to 1st 
September , 2018 and the team is supp osed to leave tomorrow.   
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, the County Assembly Sports Association (CASA) is a body which 
was formed during the Legislative Summit which took place in Mombasa from 22nd 
to 25th May, 2018.  
 
It is a sporting body which brings together all the 47 County Assemblies in sporting 
and other extra curricula activities.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, the inaugural games are scheduled to take place from 26th August – 
1st September in Nairobi.  
 
The County Assembly of Mombasa being a participant, has adequately prepar ed its 
various disciplines  namely ; football  men, netball, tug of war  men,  choir  and cultural 
dance  which are scheduled to leave for Nairobi on the 24th August , 2018 to take part 
in the annual sporting event.  

August 2 3, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     71 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic versi on of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 I have faith  in our various disciplines  to brin g victory back home.  Mr Speaker Sir, I  
must commend His Excellency the Governor, Hon. Hassan Ali Joho for promoting 
sports through building state of the art stadia including the new football stadium  we 
have, basketball courts and the renovations which ar e about to commence at 
Mombasa Municipal Stadium.  
 
I hope that come the next CASA sports, Mombasa will be ready to host the games.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, on behalf of the en tire County Assembly fraternity, and my 
Committee I express my sincere gratitude to our able Speaker, Hon. Aharub Khatri 
for spearheading and facilitating our teams to attend this important event in the 
Legislative Calendar . 
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, I also take this opportunity to wish our team  success and let us 
always have in mind that , “Umoja in nguvu, utengamano ni udhaifu” . 
 
(Applause)  
 
Team 001 , I believe you will do us proud!  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
Hon. Moses Oindo Aran  
Chairperson, Committee on Youth, Sports and Gender . 
 
(Applause)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Hon. Bwire . 
Hon.  Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I seek to know from the 
Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works if he is aware of the 
poor state of Safar i Junda Ngombeni Road via Junda Mis sion and what plans the County 
government ha s to remedy the situation. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Chairperson Transport Hon. Prischilla, 
do you have the response now?  
Hon.  (Mrs.) Prischilla  Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker , this has come to my 
knowledge and I think  we will also hav e a site visit.  I would not promise in this coming week 
because we have the CASA Games so maybe I will promise after the games we make a day 
so that we can have that site visit and I bring the report. So maybe I can be given more than a 
week because of the  CASA Games which will be in between the week. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Chairperson, but Chairperson you 
have to be aware that you have got very many pending issues so plan your Committee 
proper ly so that all the pending resp onses to come to this Honorable  House in time . As you 
have said you are not in position this week then plan your Committee to respond with 
whatever that was raised before this Honorable  House , you can visit the office of the Clerk ’s 
and find out what is pe nding from your Committee. Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
Yes the Leader of Majority . 
 
 
August 2 3, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     71 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic versi on of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE CO UNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker let me 
take this opportunity to move a Procedural M otion on adjournment of the County Assembly. 
Mr. Speaker S ir I beg to move the following M otion.  
 
Pursuant to Standing Order (3) of Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders this 
House resolves to adjourn on Thursday, 23rd 2018 to attend the County Assembly 
Spor ts Association Games (CASA) from Friday, 24th August , 2018 to  Saturday, 1st 
September , 2018 and thereafter proceed for long recess as per the County Assembly 
Calendar  which is scheduled to commence on Friday 31st August , 2018 and end on 
Monday, 24th Septem ber 2018  and resume sittings on Tuesday  25th September , 2018.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker and I will request Hon. Bwire to second.  
Hon. Bwire : I beg to second Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): I propose that the M otion by the Leader of 
Majority on adjournment be debated in this Honorable  House.  Yes Hon. Hamisi Mwidani , 
Leader of Majority . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Just as I have stated 
about the g ames which we have been given a statem ent from the Chair we have to give time 
for the Members  so that they can participate in these games and it is a very appropriate time 
for them to prepare so that we can easily win the games, as a winning team. So Mr. Speaker I 
am very glad to see that we m ove with what I have mentioned ; the days of the games and the 
days of proceeding the recess and this recess does not mean that the Committees will not 
meet, it is also a chance for the Committees to proceed with if need arise s. So Mr. Speaker 
mine will be very short , what I want is the Members  to accept and to give support to this 
Motion so that we have a proper time to attend the games and to our recess in time. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Samba . 
Hon.  Samba:  Thank you  Mr. S peaker, my contribution to the M otion that has been 
moved by the Leader of Majority is as we are all aware the past one month we hav e been 
having thorough practice  and it has also been our wish to participate and not only 
participation but also to br ing trophies back home. I think this is the first edition of CASA 
games , the last time we were in Machakos but we never did well maybe due to preparations 
but this time round we hope we are going to be the best amongst the best. Hon. Speaker our 
prayers is  that we make sure that players stay as much as comfortable as they can. We do not 
want any scenarios whereby we are go ing to spend some finances there  but we c ome without 
trophies ; we hope for maximum cooperation between the staff and the Hon.  Members  and the 
entire leadership of the House.  
Secondly , Hon. Speaker  we also need to have that recess as per the Standing Orders 
for us at least to have engagement with our electorates so that at least we  may also go and do 
some resear ch and come with also tangibl e Motions that can make Mombasa County . And 
with those few remarks , I wish our team all the best and let us win. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
August 2 3, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     71 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic versi on of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Hon.  Members  I can see you have exhausted 
on the debate and as per the S tanding Order raised by the Leader of Majority in this M otion 
we are not going to put a ques tion but it will go as per the M otion that has been brought but 
the Leader of Majority said that the Committees can come and sit but it is unless they are 
permitted  by the office of the Speaker. So if there is no permission from the Speaker then the 
Committees sittings will be null and void ; so if you have or you think you are going to have a 
Committee sitting notify the Speaker in time. Hon.  Members  there being no o ther business 
the House stands adjourned  until the 24th September, 2018 . 
     
The House rose at 2:58 p.m. 
 
 
 