July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 14th July, 2016  
The House met at 3: 20p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Members  you may sit down, Clerk .  
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Paul Onje . 
       Hon.  Onje:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I was given a direction  from the 
Chair last week that the C ommittee  of Delegated and Legislation to bring a  report o n Public 
participation petition .  
(Hon.  Onje read the Report ) 
PUBLIC  PARTICIPATION PETITION  
       Mr. Speaker Sir, the Committee on Delegated L egislation is  in charge pursuant to Standing 
Order 190 of the Mombasa County Assembly  Standing Order , it is mandated to consider all 
matters related to  statutory instruments such a s legislations . Mr.  Speaker Sir Membership of this 
Committee is as follows:  
 
Hon.  Paul Onje     Chair  
Hon.  Zainab Kithinzi     Vice Chair  
Hon.  Abdalla h Kasa ngamba    Member  
Hon.  Karisa Nzai      Member  
Hon.  Maimuna Mwamassa    Member  
Hon.  Beatrice S. Ka i     Member  
Hon.  Hudson Karume    Member  
Hon.  Kizito Opeya     Member  
Hon.  Zainab Mumba     Member  
Hon.  Caroline Owino     Member  
 
       Acknowledgement Mr. Speaker Sir , this report was  necessitated  by the decisions of the 
County Assembly o f Mombas a on the matter of public participation of t he County Budget 
Estimates 2016/ 2017 ….’ 
(Interruption ) 
  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Paul Onje  I think it has to come as a 
Motion , and it was to come as a Notice of Motion  and then Motion . So I think you should lay it 
on the T able and then next time you make a Notice of Motion , then a Motion  for M embers to 
debate .     
       Hon.  Onje: Than k you Mr. Speaker Sir , it was a report we were given direction through the 
Chair that today we have to b ring the  Report on Public Participation P etition which was brought 
here by the Civil S ociety Hon.  Speaker . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes I understand about that but it has to come as 
a Motion  for M embers to discuss , it stated he re very c learly just give that P aper to the Clerk . 
       Hon.  Onje: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I have got the directions , so now I beg to table  this 
report Mr. Speaker.  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 (Hon.  Onje table d Report ) 
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Point of order  Mr. Speaker Sir !  
       Deputy S peaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili ?  
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker we understand and also we respect 
other institutions in this Republic . Mr. Speaker I think It  will not be in order for this H ouse to 
receive this P aper as it has been said the matter is in court . So Mr. Speaker I think in my opinion 
it is the C ommittee to first wait, they must rem ain with the R eport and wait  to hear the judgment  
for us to proceed with the said Report . I understand the matter is in court  and it is in this R eport 
that they have indicated that the matter is in court  and Mr . Speaker .... 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : So the evidence is in the P aper itself .  
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Yah.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : So the Paper itself says the  matter is in court . 
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Yeah they have said the matter is in court and I think it w ill not be  in order 
for us to receive it and procee d to give a Notice of Motion  and yet it is in the High Court Mr. 
Speaker . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : I understand it has nothing for us to receive it but 
it cannot be discussed but it has to be received ; he actually has to show us what has been done 
but we are not going to discuss we  are just going  to receive the P aper.   
       Hon.  Onje:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I also (??) that was the R eport th at I wanted to bring 
it is the R eport that the matter is still pending in C ourt and that is why I started reading the 
content so that we can know whatever  is going here I know the case is in Court so....  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Just lay the Paper to the T able of the Clerk 
please …  
(Paper L aid) 
       Thank you. Clerk  
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon.  Mary Akinyi ? 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank  you Mr. Spe aker Sir , last week I brought a s tatement here and I 
was directed to bring it in written  form so I just want to give a statement and the s tatement itself 
is on control of noxious fume s in Kibarani a rea. Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay Hon.  Khamis Mwabashiri, Hon.  
Mwabashiri.  
(Silence ) 
       Yes Hon.  Fatuma ? 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Mwabashiri 
alikuwa hapa lakini amepatikana na dharura kidogo ; kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika am eniambia 
niwaelezee kwamba amepatikana na dharura kidogo na mimi ni  muwakilishi.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Okay , next is Hon.  Caroline Auma, Hon.  
Caroline Auma … 
(Silence ) 
       Okay, Clerk Order Number Nine . 
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Jabes s Oduor, next Statement , next yes Hon.  Saad Faraj . 
       Hon.  Faraj : Mr. Speaker thank you so much ; I rise on a point of concern because I looked 
at the Order paper today bei ng a Thursday is a day whereby M embers are suppose d to come here 
to give their St atements .  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3        In the House Business Committee the procedure is very simple and straight forward , it is the 
individual who is bringing the statement in this House who request for time and look at his diary 
if it is available or not.  But Mr. Speaker this  trend that we are having of running  in the Assembly 
I believe it is not done in good faith and therefore am requesting the direction over this m atter 
because we cannot have these statements , no single statement is read by the person who was to 
bring that particular statement. Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda . 
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , I also con cur with Hon.  Saad that it is 
not proper Hon.  Speaker for somebody to allocate a business an d then he find somewhere to go.         
Hon.  Speaker I think this is a House of procedures and as Hon.  Saad was saying  it is as if there's 
something like somebody somewhere because you cannot allocate statement you are not there 
and there's no proper reason  why you are not there . Hon.  Speaker your Chair has a lot of powers 
in this House and we are here because of this business ; nothing else so I urge if s omebody has a 
statement or any Motion  or business in this House and it is not available at least your Cha ir 
should communicate to us before anything is done and according to me this is not proper Hon.  
Speaker. Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Ndanda ; if someone brought a 
business in the House and there's no reason for hi m/her not be around I think that business 
normally has died a natural death . So for this business those M embers are not here and they don't 
have any reasons for them not to be here those business cannot come back in this House. Yes 
Clerk . 
MOTION  
       Yes Leader of the Majority Hon.  Mwidani .  
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir , I arise on a Privilege 
Motion  pursuant to provision of the Standing Order , I hereby submit the R eport of the 
amend ments of the Committees approved b y Selection C ommittee and County Assembly Party , 
hereby I wish to table it .  
(Paper Laid)      
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa.. . 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I would like to read the…  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker S ir… 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Fadhili.  
       Hon.  Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker S ir I stand to second Hon.  Khamisi Musa Mwidani , the 
Leader of Majority’s Motion .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah  Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker am very happy that my 
colleague second ed, am very happy that they have already seconded the Motion , I think it’s now 
for the S peaker to put a question.  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4        Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Now i think I should propose a question first ; 
Members the  Motion  by the Leader of M ajority has come for the approval. This is the Motion  for 
the approval of the list of C ommittees, a s many as of opinion that this Motion  is brought to this 
House. 
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
       Hon.  Mwidani.    
       Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I’ll start with the :  
               SPEAKER’S PANEL  
        
       Hon.  Mswabah Rashid -   Chairman  
       Hon.  Asha H Mohamed  
       Hon.  Fadhili M Makarani  
       Hon.  Serah Nyamvula  
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order number 152, this A ssembly 
approves the appointments  of the following Members, N ominated by the County Assembly party 
and Selection Committee to be the M embers of the County Assembly Business Committee.         
Mr. Speaker I think some of the C ommittees, there are some amendments that’s why I am doing 
the amendments. Now we are coming to the House Busine ss;  
       Hon.  Thadius A Rajwayi – Chairman  
(Interruption)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker I stand on a point of information, when Hon.  Leader of 
Majority proposed his Motion , it was a Motio n that he was seeking  leave for the approval of the 
Motion  to be discussed in this H ouse. I hear by again s tand Mr. Speaker to second the Motion  of 
Committee s to be discussed in this H ouse Mr. Speaker. Thank you and I hope the H ouse has 
understood what I h ave meant Mr. Speaker;  first I will second  the leave Motion  to be disc ussed 
and now am seconding the Committees’ Motion  to be discussed in this House Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Fadhili for reminding this 
House. Yes Hon.  Mwidani can you continue.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
HOUSE BUS INESS COMMMITTEE  
1. Hon.  Thadius A . Rajwayi – Chairman  
2. Hon.  Mswabah R . Mswabah  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 3. Hon.  Hamisi M . Mwidani  
4. Hon.  Abdallah M . Kasangamba  
5. Hon.  Ahmed O . Ibrahim  
6. Hon.  Amir M . Thoya  
7. Hon.  Salim D . Kalume  
8. Hon.  Asha H . Mohamed  
9. Hon.  Duncan O . Onyango  
10. Hon.  Enock M . Mwadziwe  
11. Hon.  Fadhili M . Makarani  
12.  Hon.  Fatma S . Mote  
13. Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  
14. Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo  
15. Hon.  Jimmy K . Odari  
16. Hon.  Zainab O . Mumba  
17. Hon.  Zainab S . Ali 
18. Hon.  Kizito O . Opeya  
19. Hon.  Beatrice S . Kai 
20. Hon.  Maimuna C . M. Mwamassa  
21. Hon.  Maimuna S . Mwawasi  
22. Hon.  Mohamed  M. Hatimy  
23. Hon.  Mohamed  Madundo  
24. Hon.  Murfad A . Amur  
25. Hon.  Saad Faraj Ahmed  
26. Hon.  Priscillah Mumba  
27. Hon.  Serah Nyamvula  
28. Hon.  Abubakar R . Kibwa na 
29. Hon.  Zainab S . Kithinzi  
30. Hon.  Mohamed  N. Chiro  
       Mr. Speaker the Motion  that….. 
                                                                   (Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili, M embers under, Standing 
Order number156. 2 it reads;  
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) read)  
      156(2) W henever a Motion  for approval of a list under paragraph (1) is moved in the County 
Assembly, no objection agains t the proposed membership of a M ember in a Select Committ ee 
shall be permitted and objections, if any shall be formulated against the proposed membership as 
a whole.  Members, as many as of opinion that the House Business C ommittee be constituted 
as…  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
       Yes Hon.  Mwidan i. 
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6        Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr . Speaker, on the Committee on 
Selection;  
1. Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani – Chairman  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Can you move a Motion  again because that’s … 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwida ni): Pursuant to the provision of Standing Order number 
153, this Assembly  approves the  appointments of the following M embers, nominated by the 
County Assembly party and Selection Committee to be the M embers of the County Assembly 
Committee on S election.  
COMMITTEE ON SELECTION  
1. Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani -     Chairman  
2. Hon.  Maimuna S Mwawasi – Vice C hair 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Saad Faraj.  
       Hon.  Faraj : Mr. Speaker I rise to second the Motion , thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Mwidani it seems you are in a hurry, it has  
been settled so it is for the S peaker to propose the question . 
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
       Yes Hon.  Ndanda.  
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Mheshimiwa S pika nili kuwa na maono kidogo, kwa sababu 
naona Kiongozi wa W alio Wengi B ungeni, orodha  yeye ana hamu kuisoma yote alafu sisi kisha 
tuwekee swali lakini tutakuwa tuki  nukuu.  Mheshimiwa Spika  ni wazo tu ili yeye ni mwanzo 
maanake yeye nafikiria alikuwa Mwalimu wa M adrassa yeye wakati akianza kusoma na 
amezoea . Kwa hivyo ni ombi  kupitia kiti chako, asome kila Kamati  alafu kisha uulize swali, 
ninaomba tu . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj.  
       Hon.  Faraj: Mr. Speaker, Hon.  Mohamed Chi ro Mohamed is a very wise man and he 
always has a word of advice for everyone here but today I think he is moving out and he is 
coming up with his own rules and regulation of this House where we already have our own .        
So my advice Mr. Speaker  is to r equest this House to follow the rules and procedures that govern 
this House and the procedure is very clear that everythi ng in the Motion  must have a proposer 
and a seconde r and then the question is proposed.  Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, these M embe rs are very 
right. This is the H ouse of law and we should follow the law correctly. So Mr. Speaker in the 
Committee of S electio n and we have already read the  Motion  that I have already se conded so I 
will just give the Members of the Committee of S election. Which I must start with:  
       Hon.  Hamisi M . Mwidani          Chairman  
       Hon.  Maimuna S . Mwawasi       Vice -Chairman  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7        Hon.  Ahmed O . Ibrahim  
       Hon.  Lucy C . Chireri  
       Hon.  Aisha Hussein  
       Hon.  Salim D . Kalume  
       Hon.  Karisa N . Munyika  
       Hon.  Mohamed N . Hatimy  
       Hon.  Kizito O . Opeya  
       Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani  
       Hon.  Kibwana S . Baya  
       Hon.  Maimuna C . M. Mwamassa  
       Hon.  Prischilla h Mumba  
       Thank you.  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
              Thank you Mr. Speaker, now I move to the C ommittee of Implementation.  
 
       Hon.  Kizito Okoth Opeya      Chairman  
       Hon.  Enock M . Mwadziwe     Vice -Chairman   
       Hon.  Salim D . Kalume  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Kithinzi  
       Hon.  Lucy C . Chireri  
       Hon.  Maimuna C . M. Mwawassa  
       Hon.  Mswabah  R. Mswabah  
       Hon.  Murfad A . Amur  
       Hon.  Tom Oluoch Ogalo  
 
       Deputy Spea ker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Continue .  
       Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Now am moving to the C ommittees because the 
question has been put. So I will just go to the Fi nance and Budget Appropriation C ommittee : 
  
       Finance, Budget and Appropriati ons Committee  
       Hon.  Mohamed M .  Hatimy     Chairman  
       Hon.  Karisa N . Munyika          Vice -Chai rman 
       Hon.  Hamisi M . Mwidani  
       Hon.  Asha H . Mohamed  
       Hon.  Maimuna S . Mwawasi  
       Hon.  Fadhili M . Makarani  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj A hmed  
       Hon.  Mswabah R . Mswabah  
       Hon.  Zainab O . Mumba  
 
Powers, P rivileges and Welfare Committee  
       Hon.  Thadius A . Rajwayi               Chairman  
       Hon.  Ahmed Omar Ebrahim            Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Mswabah Rashid  
       Hon.  Abdallah M . Kasangamba  
       Hon.  Asha  Hussein  
       Hon.  Beatrice S . Kai 
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8        Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu  
       Hon.  Fatma S . Mote  
       Hon.  Mohamed M . Hatimy  
       Hon.  Suleiman O . Boma  
       Mr. Speaker , now I come to another Motion  that pursuant to t he provision of S tanding Order 
number 188, this A ssembly approves the  appointments of the following Members, nominated by 
the C ounty Assembly party and Selection C ommittee to be the M embers of the County 
Assembly Rules and Procedure C ommittee.  I think  Hon.  Fatuma Kushe will second.  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Hon.  Speaker Sir, I second the Motion . 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
       Rules and Procedures Committee  
       Hon. Thadius Rajwayi            Chairperson  
       Hon.  Mswabah R . Mswabah    Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Hamisi M . Mwidani  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Kithinzi  
       Hon.  Mohamed M . Hatimy  
       Hon.  Asha H . Mohamed  
       Hon.  Zainab O . Mumba  
 
       Liaison Co mmittee  
       Hon.  Mswabah R . Mswabah    Chairman  
       All Chairpersons of all C ommittees  
        
       Mr. Chai rman I will take a nother opportunity to have the Motion  that pursuant of Standing 
Order number 185, this Assembly approves the  appointments of the following M embers, 
nominated by the County A ssemb ly party and Selection Committee to be the M embers of the 
County Assembly Committee on Appointments.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : I think Hon.  Amir Thoya will second this.  
       Hon.  Thoya:   Mr S peaker sir , I second.  
(Question proposed and agreed  to) 
(Applause ) 
 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
       Committee on Appointment s  
       Hon.  Thadius Rajwayi          Chairman  
       Hon.  Hamisi M . Mwidani       Vice Chairman  
       Hon.  Murfad  Abdalla h Amur  Member  
       Hon.  Maimuna S . Mwawasi  Member  
       Hon.  Mohamed M . Hatimy  Member  
       Hon.  Mswabah R . Mswabah  Member  
       Hon.  Priscilla M . Mumba             Member  
        
       Mr. Speaker Sir that pursuant to the provision of Standing Order number 153 this Assembly 
approves th e appointment of the following M embers nominated by the County Assembly party 
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 and Selection Committee to be the M embers of the respective Select C ommittee as indicated  
below and I wish Hon.  Ndanda to second this Motion . 
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Thank yo u Mr. Speaker I do second that Motion .  
(Applause ) 
 (Question put and agreed  to) 
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
 
       Ward Develop ment Fund  
       Hon.  Salim Kalume                          Chairman           
       Hon.  Maimuna C . M. Mwamassa  Vice Chairman  
       Hon.  Caroline A . Owino  Member  
       Hon.  Lucy C . Chireri  Member  
       Hon.  Duncan O . Onyango  Member  
       Hon.  Fatma S . Mote  Member  
       Hon.  Riziki F . Kitsao  Member  
       Hon.  Stephen Wangudi  Member  
       Hon.  Hamisi M . Mwidani  Member  
        
       Committee on County Delegated Legislation  
       Hon.  Moh amed Madundo                  Chairman  
       Hon.  Salim D . Kalume  Vice Chairman  
        
       But I have seen there is a correction Mr. Speaker ; if you can a llow me Kalume cannot be the 
Chairman then he becomes the Vice C hairman , with that amendment we are going to move it 
with the amendments , thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  
       Hon.  Mohamed M . Hatimy   Member  
       Hon.  Abubakar R . Kibwana   Member  
       Hon.  Karisa N . Munyika               Member  
       Hon.  Maimuna C . M. Mwamassa           Member  
       Hon.  Kizito Okoth Opeya   Member  
       Hon.  Prisc hillah  Mumba   Member  
        
       Public Accounts Committee  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy: Point of O rder!  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker am requesting this House to  delete my name from 
that C ommittee … 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Can you use the microp hone? 
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I request the Chair to delete my name from that 
Committee. Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker Sir thank you as the Hon.  Member  has deleted himself from 
that C ommittee I propose that Hon.  Ndanda to be included in that C ommittee .  
(Applause ) 
       And I ask Hon.  Amir Thoya to second my proposal , thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Chief Whip (Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar ): I beg to second .  
(Applause ) 
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10        Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Ndanda do you want that C ommittee?  
       Hon.  Mohamed Ndanda:  Yes.  
(Laughter ) 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
       Leader of Maj ority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir. 
        
       Public Accounts Committee  
       Hon.  Fadhili M . Makarani  Chairman  
       Hon.  Aisha H . Mohamed            Vice Chairman  
       Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh              Member  
       Hon.  Mohamed M. Hatimy  Member  
       Hon.  Suleiman Boma   Member  
 
       Public Investment Committee  
       Hon.  Maimuna S . Mwawasi  Chairlady  
       Hon.  Fatuma S . Mote   Vice Chairlady  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj Ahmed   Member  
       Hon.  Amir Thoya   Member  
       Hon. Zainab O . Mumba   Member  
 
       Justice and Legal affairs committee  
       Hon.  Jimmy K . Odari    Chairman  
       Hon.  Beatrice S . Kai    Vice Chairlady  
       Hon.  Paul O . Onje    Member  
       Hon.  Khamis A . Mwabashiri   Member  
       Hon.  Hudson K arume               Member  
       Hon.  Mary A . Ooko    Member  
       Hon.  Mohamed Madundo   Member  
       Hon.  Mohamed N . Chiro              Member  
       Hon.  Patrick Siminyu     Member  
       Hon.  Asha H . Mohamed               Member  
       Hon.  Nasser R . Suleiman               Member  
       
       Mr. Speaker may I take this opportunity  again to move this particular Motion ; that  pursuant 
to provision of Standing Order number 156 this Assembly approves appointments for the 
following M embers nominated by the  County Assembly party and Selection Committee to be the 
Members of the respective Sectoral C ommittees as indicated below.  
       May I have Hon.  Amir Thoya to second .  
       Hon.  Thoya:  Mr. Speaker si r I hereby stand to second the Motion .  
(Applause ) 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon.  Mwalimu : Point of order Mr. Speaker ! Mr. Speaker you are yet to p ut to question on 
the previous Motion  before we proceed to this new introduced Motion  Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  I accept your secondment.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
       Yes Hon.  Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker Sir,  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11  
       Committee on Agriculture and Livestock Production   
       Hon.  Dan Onyango     Chairman  
       Hon.  Priscilla h Mumba                Vice Chairlady  
       Hon.  Amir M . Thoya     Member  
       Hon.  Enock M . Mwadziwe    Member  
       Hon.  Suleiman O . Boma                Member  
       Hon.  Ibrahim A . Kondo                Member  
       Hon.  Lucy C . Chireri     Member  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Kithinzi                Member  
       Hon.  Nasser R . Suleiman                Member  
 
       Committee o n Fisheries and Development  
       Hon.  Nasser R . Suleiman                                       Chairman  
       Hon.  Asha Mohamed                                       Vice Chairman  
       Hon.  Patrick Siminyu                           Member  
       Hon.  Mswabah Rashid                                        Member  
       Hon.  Murfad Amur                             Member  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy                             Member  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj                                         Member  
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo                             Member  
       Hon.  Serah Nyamvula                             Member  
        
       Early Childhood, Education, Children and Vocational Training Committee:  
       Hon.  Stephen E . Wangudi                            Chairman  
       Hon.  Suleiman O . Boma                                      Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Abdallah M . Kasangamba  
       Hon.  Beatrice S . Kai 
       Hon.  Caroline A . Owino  
       Hon.  Enock M . Mwadziwe  
       Hon.  Kibwana S . Baya  
       Hon.  Serah Nyamvula Member  
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo  
 
      Committee on Tourism , Cooperatives, Culture and Community Services  
       Hon.  Murfad Amur   Chairman  
       Hon.  Abubakar R . Kibwana  Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Ahmed O. Ibrahim  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj  
       Hon.  Salim Kalume  
       Hon.  Priscilla Mumba  
       Hon.  Suleiman O . Boma  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Ali 
       Hon.  Zainab S. Kithinzi  
 
       Committee on Public Works and Transport  
       Hon.  Amir Thoya    Chairman  
       Hon.  Zainab Kithinzi    Vice -Chairman  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12        Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu  
       Hon.  Kibwana Baya  
       Hon.  Prisc hillah Mumba  
       Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Ali 
       Hon.  Fatma Mote  
       Hon.  Asha Hussein  
       Hon.  Beatrice Kai  
 
       Committee on Physical Planning, Lands and Housing:  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj               Chairman  
       Hon.  Suleiman Boma  Vice -Chair man 
       Hon.  Amir Thoya  
       Hon.  Asha H . Mohamed  
       Hon.  Jimmy K . Odari  
       Hon.  Karisa N . Munyika  
       Hon.  Mohamed M . Hatimy  
       Hon.  Zainab Mumba  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Ali 
       Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Chiro Ndanda  
 
       Committee on Sports,  Youth,  Gender and Social Services  
       Hon.  Serah Nyamvula       Chairman  
       Hon.  Lucy Chizi        Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  
       Hon.  Zainab Kithinzi  
       Hon.  Amir M . Thoya  
       Hon.  Stephen Wangudi  
       Hon.  Khamis Mwabashiri  
       Hon.  Paul O . Onje  
       Hon.  Zainab O . Mumba  
       Hon.  Ibrahim …. 
 
       Committee on Energy, Trade, Industry and Co -operative Development:  
       Hon.  Ibrahim A . Kondo               Chairman  
       Hon.  Fatuma S . Mote   Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Abubakar R . Kibwana  
       Hon.  Ahmed O . Ibrahim  
       Hon.  Amir M . Thoya  
       Hon.  Kibwana S . Baya  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Ali 
       Hon.  Suleiman O . Boma  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj  
 
      Committee on Administration and Coun ty Security  
       Hon.  Mohamed Chiro Ndanda  Chairman  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13        Hon.  Abubakar Kibwana   Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Amir M . Thoya  
       Hon.  Karisa Nzai  
       Hon.  Stephen Wangudi  
       Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj  
       Hon.  Murfad A . Amur  
       Hon.  Prischillah Mumba  
       Hon.  Riziki Fundi  
       Hon.  Zainab Mumba  
 
       Committee on Disaster Management  
       Hon.  Patrick Siminyu    Chairman  
       Hon.  Mswabah Rashid               Vice  Chairman  
       Hon.  Saad Faraj  
       Hon.  Maimu na Mwamassa  
       Hon.  Zeinab Mumba  
       Hon.  Murfad Amur  
       Hon.  Nasser Rashid  
       Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim  
       Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani  
 
       Committee on Health S ervices:  
       Hon.  Kibwana S Baya  Chairman  
       Hon.  Lucy Chizi  Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  
       Hon.  Fatma S Mote  
       Hon.  Hamisi M Mwidani  
       Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Madundo  
       Hon.  Patrick Siminyu  
       Hon.  Zainab S Ali  
 
       Committee on Equal Opportunities  
       Hon.  Hudson Karume  Chairman  
       Hon.  Zainab S . Ali Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Abubakar R . Kibwana  
       Hon.  Amir Thoya  
       Hon.  Khamis Mwabashiri  
       Hon.  Ibrahim A . Kondo  
       Hon.  Maimuna C . M. Mwamassa  
       Hon.  Salim Kalume  
       Hon.  Fadhili Makarani  
       Hon.  Tom Ogalo  
 
       Committee on Environment  
       Hon.   Zainab O Mumba   Chairman  
       Hon.   Khamis Mwabashiri  Vice -Chairman  
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14        Hon.  Abdallah M . Kasangamba  
       Hon.  Beatrice S . Kai 
       Hon.  Riziki Kitsao  
       Hon.  Prischillah Mumba  
       Hon.  Karisa N . Munyika  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Chiro Ndanda  
 
       Committee on Water and Natural Resources  
 
       Hon.  Abdallah Kasangamba   Chairman  
       Hon.  Zainab Said Ali    Vice  
       Hon.  Lucy Chizi  
       Hon.  Prischillah Mumba  
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo  
       Hon.  Amir Thoya  
       Hon.  Kibwana S . Baya  
       Hon.  Mswabah Rashid  
       Hon.  Enock Mwinga  
 
       Committee on Labour and Social Welfare  
       Hon.  Tom O Ogalo    Chairman  
       Hon.  Maimuna Mwamassa   Vice -Chairman  
       Hon.  Abub akar R . Kibwana  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Madundo  
       Hon.  Kizito Opeya  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Ndanda  
       Hon.  Lucy Chizi  
       Hon.  Mary Ooko  
       Hon.  Jabess Oduor  
       Hon.  Murfad Amur  
       Hon.  Nasser Rashid  
        
       Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir   
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy: Mr. Speaker I think Standing Order 188  (4); I think the 
Committee of Rules and P rocedures can come up with amendments , there are some name s we 
need to include them in Committees.  So I request this House to pass this list with amendments 
again, the n you Mr. S peaker ... 
(Applause ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much.  Yes Hon.  Makarani . 
       Hon.  Mwalimu : I second Mr. Speaker …  
(Applause ) 
 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : Members I think we should put to question, as 
many as of the opi nion the list of membership of C ommittees formed therein be passed with 
amendments..  
(Question put and a greed  to) 
(Applause ) 
July 7, 2016                                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          72 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15        Yes Clerk . 
ADJO URNMENT  
       Thank you very much M embers of this County Assembly , there being no other business this 
House stands adjourned until next week Tuesday at 2 :30p.m. 
The House rose at  4:12p.m. 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 