July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 19th July, 2016  
The House met at 2: 34p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
PAPER  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi... 
       Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity to give a Report on the v etting of Mr . Salim Juma for  the po sition of County 
Assembly Clerk.  
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ) tabled the Report)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): Karani ...  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
VETTING REPORT OF MR .  SALIM JUMA FOR POSITION OF COUNTY 
ASSEMBLY CLERK  
       Naam  Kiongozi ... 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker t hank you for this opportunity to give 
a Notice of Motion  adopting  the Report on the vetting of Mr . Salim Juma for  the position of 
County Assembly Clerk. Mr. Speaker i beg to give notice of the following Motion : 
       That this House a dopts the Report on the vetting of Mr . Salim Juma for  the position of 
County Assembly Clerk ; vetting of Mr . Salim Juma for the position of County Assembly 
Clerk laid on the Table on Tuesday,  19th July 2016 . 
(Vetting Report laid)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
CREATION OF MOMBASA COUNTY EMPLOYMENT BUREAU  
         
       Hon. Ahmed Omar . 
       Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Omar  Ebrahim ): Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for givi ng me 
this opportunity to give Notice of the following Motion  concerning creation of Mombasa 
County Employment Bureau .  
(Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Omar Ebrahim ) moved the Notice of Motion ) 
       Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give notice of the following Motion ; 
       THAT AWARE that the County g overnment of Mombasa is committed to ensuring that 
it’s residents , including the you th get employment opportu nities;  
       FURTHER AWARE  that there are numerous job opportunities that are available within 
and outside the County;  
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        CONCERNED that most of our y ouths are not able to access these job opportunities 
because of lack of information on these job opp ortunities ; 
       I urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that;  
       The County g overnment of  Mombasa to establish a County E mployme nt Bureau to make 
information available on job opportunities and facilitate job placements , for the residents and 
youth for this County . Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon Meti . 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF VETTING REPORT OF MR. SALIM JUMA FOR THE POSITION 
OF COUNTY ASSEMBLY CLERK  
       Hon. Hamis i Mwidani . 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity to move the following Motion  on adoption of  Report on v etting of Mr . Salim 
Juma for the position of County Assembly Clerk . There might be some typing error here ...! 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ) moved the Motion ) 
       That this House a dopts the Report on the Vetting of Mr . Salim Juma for  the position of 
County Assembly Clerk , vetting of Mr. Salim Juma for the position of County Assembly 
Clerk laid on the Table on Tuesday,  19th July 2016 . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Seconder ? 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker i would like to  ask Hon. Kibwana to 
second my Motion . 
(Laughter ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Fadhili what is it?  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker i had stood to second  the Motion  
but Hon. ..but the Leader of M ajority has chosen Hon . Kibwana  but i’ m also on the same track 
seconding the same Motion . 
(Question proposed)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mswabah Rashid) : Okay It has now been seconded;  
Honorables,  I now propose a question.   
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
       Yes Leader of M ajority ... 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mw idani) read vetting Report)  
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 REPORT OF VETTING OF MR. SALIM JUMA FOR THE POSITION OF COUNTY 
ASSEMBLY CLERK  
COMMITTEE MEMBERS  
Chairperson  -    Hon Hamisi M Mwidani – Majority Leader  
Member  -    Hon Mswabah Rashid – Deputy Speaker  
          -    Hon Maimuna  S. Mwawasi – Minority Leader  
        -    Hon Mohamed Hatimy – Member   
         -    Hon Murfad Amur – Member  
In attendance  
1. Mr. Bangush H . Mohamed – PAC II  
2. Ms. Emily Sialo        – Hansard Reporter  
Any correspondence should be addressed to :- 
County Asse mbly Clerk  
P O Box 90440 – 80100 MOMBASA  
Tel: 041-2311025  
Email:  Countyassemblymombasa@gmail.com  
       Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon . Members of the County Assembly, it is with great p leasure to 
table the rep ort on v etting of Mr. Salim Juma in our County Assembly.  The proposed 
appointee was found suitable for the position of County Assembly Clerk by the County 
Assembly Service Board (CASB) vide their meeting held on 12th July, 2016, resolved under 
Min.No.1/CAS B/12th July 2016.  Pursuant to S ection 8(1)  (a) and 13(1) of the County 
Government Act, 2012, the CASB proposal stood committed to the Committee on 
Appointments of this Honourable County Assembly.  Through a press advertisement 
appearing in The Star  Newspape r on Thursday 14th July,  2016, the proposed appointee and 
the public were informed of the vetting exercise which was scheduled to take place on 
Saturday 16th July 2016 at the County Assembly Committee Room.  The public were hence 
given an opportunity to par ticipate in the vetting exercise on the suitability or otherwise of 
the proposed appointee.  This report provides the findings and recommendations on the 
suitability for appointment to the position of the proposed appointee for consideration by this 
Hon.  House and approval of the same.  Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon.  Members of the County 
Assembly  let me now present the Committee on Appointment’s report for consideration by 
the H ouse.  
       2.0 Observations and Findings  
       2.1 The Committee did not receive any  adverse reports, presentations or c omplaints for 
or against the proposed appointee of Mr. Salim Juma for the position of County Assembly 
Clerk of County Assembly of Mombasa . 
 
       2.2 The Committee was impressed by the educational achievements and exper ience of 
Mr. Salim Juma  and found him suitable for appointment to the position of County Assembly 
Clerk in the County Assembly of Mombasa.  
 
2.3 The proposed appointee being vetted answered all questions that were asked by the 
Committee satisfactorily and i n sufficient detail.  
 
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 2.4 Mr. Salim Juma, the proposed appointee on the position of County Assembly Clerk 
presented the following Certificates/testimonials to the Committee:  
Educational Background  
Qualification      Institution    Year  
1. Masters of Business Ad ministration  Kenya Methodist University  2014  
2. Bachelor of Arts (Sociology)   Eger ton University   1993  
3. KACE      Shimo la Tewa school   1989  
4. KCE      Kilindini Secondary School  1987  
Other Courses:  
Institution      Training    Dates  
1. Kenya School of Government (KSG)  Senior Management Course  2012  
2. Kenya Institute of Management(KIM)  Diploma in HRI   2001  
3.   KIA      Preparing Project proposal  
      Writing   
4. Kenya School of L aw   Experiential Team Building  2007  
5. Institute of Personnel Training   Certificate in Bankin g of  
Finance    1996  
 
Public Offices h eld 
1. 1996 – 1998  Housing Manager, Mombasa ; 
2. 1998 – 2008  Chief Public Relation Officer and PA to the M ayor, Mombasa ,  
By that time I was the Mayor.  
(Applause ) 
3. 2008 – 2013  Deputy Clerk, Kwale County ; 
4. 2013 – 2014  Sub Count y Administrator, Msambweni Sub County, Kwale ; 
5. March 2014 – October 2014  - Director of Tourism Promotion ; 
6. 2014 – 2015  Deputy County Assembly Clerk, Mombasa ; 
7. Nov 2015 – To date  - Acting County Assembly Clerk, Mombasa proposed candidate  
(Applause ) 
1.5 The Propo sed appointee was asked a number of questions related to the functions and 
roles of the County Assembly which he replied to some briefly as follows:  
 
a) On the question that who Salim Juma  is, he replied that Mr. Salim Juma is a 
residen t of Mombasa and a Keny an by n ationality.  He is a professional with vast 
working experience in Civil Service and also a Senior Local government 
practi tioner with County g overnment understanding. He believes in cultural 
diversity and possesses  good emotional  intelligence and dem onstrate s excellent 
team leadership and passio n for growth within the County g overnment.  His key 
strength s are excellent i nterpersonal skills and is self motivated.  
 
b) On the dut ies of County Assembly Clerk, he replied that County Assembly Clerk 
is the acco unting officer in County Assembly, Secretary to County Assembly 
Service Board, and Chief  advisor to the Hon. Speaker who advises on legal and 
convectional issues relating to Assembly, in charge of implementing le gislative 
issues passed in the A ssembly.  
  
c) On how he will ensure that Hon. Members receive their gratuity when their term 
comes to an end, he replied that he agreed that there is a big problem but from the 
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 moment he was made A cting  County Assembly Clerk he came up with a payment 
plan and the issue o f gratuity was a bit tackled to a good extent.  
   
d) He further said that he managed to pay  a further eight months gratu ity during the 
spell of acting a ppointment.  He further said that in consultation with Chairman of 
Finance he managed to pay Kshs.10 millio n remaining Kshs.4 million for 10 
months gratuity period which was paid  by the Executive  arm of government .  He 
said that as a County Assembly w e have budgeted for the year 2016/2017 but the 
main concern is for 2014 and 2015 where the executive is suppose d to pay.  In this 
case we need mutual understanding and consultations between the Assembly and 
executive so that they can pay for the two years remaining.  
e) On new  ideas that he has to make the A ssembl y a better place for staff and 
Members of A ssembly, he r eplied that the activities are more or less rotational.  
He came up with following:  
(i)        Issue of welfare of M embers is to be handled very well ; 
(ii)       There is need for the A ssembly to be autonomous/independent from the 
Executive ; 
(iii)       To improve communication so that inf ormation reaches the right person at 
the right time and Members of Count y Assembly are not left in dark;  
(iv)       No discretion or discrimination as far as committees are concerned ; 
(v)       The A ssembly needs to launch its strategic plan which is ready for the 
same ; 
(vi)       To fos ter and enhance relationships between other Assemblies and 
National A ssembly and the civil societies ; 
(vii) Making a conducive working environment ; 
(viii) Enhance procurement of relevant tools, equipments and uniforms for staff.  
(Applause ) 
(ix)        Finally to make  the A ssembly is progressing well and striving towards 
goals.  
 
2.6 On the function and powers of Clerk of a County Assembly, he replied that the functions 
and powers of the Clerk of Parliament shall with necessary modifications be the functions 
and Powers of the County Assembly Clerk as stipulated in S ection 13(3) of County 
Government Act 2012.  He further said that all policies, decisions, directions must pass 
through the County Assembly Clerk and the Clerk to disseminate the same.  
 
3 Conclusions : 
3.1 The Committee cond ucted the vetting exercise and was satisfied with the knowledge, 
experience and capacity of Mr. Salim Juma, to handle the position of County Assembly Clerk 
in the County Assembly of Mombasa and therefore suitable for appointment to the position.  
3.2 The Commit tee held a meeting on 19th July, 2016 at 10.00am and adopted this Report.  
 
       4. Recommendations:  
       4.1  That having considered the suitability capacity and integrity of Mr. Salim Juma and 
pursuant to section 8(1)(a) and 13(1) of the County Govern ment Act 2012, this House 
approves the appointment of Mr. Salim Juma as County Assembly Clerk by the County 
Assembly Service Board.  
(Applause ) 
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6        4.2 That this Report containing the Committees observations, findings, conclusion and 
recommendations of the vetting of Mr. Salim Juma for the position of County Assembly 
Clerk in the County Assembly of Mombasa be adopted and approved by this Hon.  House.  
       Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move that the Hon.  Members  of this Assembly do adopt this 
Report.  
 (Appla use) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon.  Mwidani  and the 
Motion  is in the House to be debated. Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh . 
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker for giving me this chance just to 
support the report that  was read by our able Leader of Majority. Mr. Speaker am happy now 
at the moment that the position of the Clerk who has been  on Acting capacity and the 
Members have adopt ed the report in this House I want to say that the Members of this County 
Assembly we are going through a lot of difficulties especially our welfare and the big issue is 
that we are aware that the election is knocking on the door and the issue of the gratuity was 
one of the issue s and it was not handle d clearly or properly during the other time and the 
experience of Mr. Salim who is our Clerk today give s us a lot of hope because having worked 
with the g overnment before he has a lot of experience with the issue in the Assembly as well 
as the issue tackling the Members. Mr. Speaker I think it is high we give him support as a 
Clerk because when it was in an Acting capacity I think you have more powers but since you 
have confirm ed this position you have given the Clerk full mandate to conduct the duty.       
Mr. Speaker mine is just to sincerely thank the Committee that transacted this good job of 
appointing the new County Assembly Clerk to this Hon.  House. Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  from Tudor . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir fir st I would like to congratulate the Clerk 
because first things are moving ...  
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker Sir the change is always good ...  
(Applause ) 
       Some things  are changing because as I can see you are on the board that's an 
achievement. Mr. Sp eaker the Clerk has been absent since November and even there are staff 
here who are working without being seconded ; it is high time for the service to make sure 
each and everyone who is acting to be officially confirmed so that they can be sure of the 
position because they have been acting for a long time. Mr . Speaker I fully support this 
Motion  because my brothers and sisters must be really confirmed, looking at the 
qualifications and the experience that he has in this House as articulated by the Constitu tion 
of Kenya.  I fully pray to this House to fully support this Motion  so that we can have our 
Clerk , I repeat again Hon.  Majority Leader even our security staff let them be confirmed and 
they know their positions Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. of  Port Ritz Fadhili Makarani . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza ningependa 
kusema Nyu mba hii ningependa iwe wazi... Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi kwa majina naitwa 
Mheshimiwa  Fadhili Mwal imu Makarani na tunaemzungumzia leo anaitwa Salim J uma 
Mwalimu.  Mheshimiwa Spika  ningependa kuambia Jumba  hili hatuna uhusiano wowote na 
Karani huyu wa Bunge  isije ikaonekana kwamba nachangia kwa sababu naegemea upande 
wake ; naeleza tena Mheshimiwa  Spika  sina uhusiano wowote na Mheshimiwa  Spika  mwaka 
wa elfu moja mia tisa themanini na tisa hata mimi nilijiunga na shule ya Upili ya Shimo  la 
Tewa  na ninaona Mheshimiwa  Salim J uma nae alimaliza  mwaka wa elfu moja  mia tisa 
themanini na tisa pia … sasa il…bali n i kazi yake ndio iliyofanya pale alipo na vile  vile 
Mheshimiwa  Spika pongezi kwa K amati iliyokaa chini kumdadi si Karani  huyu Mheshimiwa  
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 na kutuletea ripoti ndani ya Bunge  hili. Tuna imani ya kuwa K amati hii iliridhika na hata 
mimi binafsi Mheshimiwa  Spika  nimeridhika naomba wenzangu tuweze kukubaliana na 
Kamati ili oleta ripoti . Kwa hio Mheshimiwa  Spika  tukiangazia mas uala muhimu ambayo 
Kamati iliangazia ni mas uala tata na Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na ripoti na N yumba hii ni 
kama kuweka kiapo kuwa sisi hatu takuwa lakini ikiwa haya aliyoulizwa yatatekelezwa 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  na ni kama kula kiapo ya kwamba mambo yataenda vi livyo, mambo 
yataenda vizuri sana . Mheshimiwa Spika  tukiangalia vile alivyokuja ndugu yetu mpaka 
kufika pale alipo si kuwa ni mtu alipotole wa tu kwa nyumba akaj a akawekwa katika kiti , 
imeonyesha ameenda katika nyadhifa tofauti tofa uti, ameenda Kaunti  tofauti,  ameenda hata 
katika kusoma kwake ameenda kuonyesha si kuwa  ni mtu alikuwa hapa  hapa Mombasa na 
imefurahisha kuwa maana Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi ameeleza ati yeye akiwa ndiyo M eya 
wa jiji hili la Mombasa alionyesha kuwa alikuwa mdogo wake ...alikuwa ni.. .na nina imani 
pia si a ti kwa sababu ni msaidizi wa ndugu yetu Hamisi Musa M widani katika nyadhi fa hii 
aliyopewa , ni kuwa ameridhisha K amati  ambayo ni watu zaidi ya watano ambao sisi kama 
Bunge  tumewaamini na tukawapa wakati ule ama tumewapa nyadhifa zile wawe 
wataendeleza kikao . 
       Kando ya kufanya shughuli zile Mheshimiwa  Spika mimi naomba W aheshimiwa 
wenzangu tushirikiane  pamoja na Mhes himiwa  atakapokuwa amechukua hatamu ya uongozi 
kama ilivyo ndani ya ripoti achukue nguvu kama vile vile seri kali kuu awe atakuwa kama 
vile vile alivyo Karani wa Bunge K uu na Mheshimiwa  Spika  nina imani maana Bunge  kuu 
Karani mkuu wao ikifika  wakati wa kwen da safari ya seri kali kuu huwafanyia mambo yao ni 
rahisi sisemi kwa kuwa nampe ndelea lakini nasema hivi kuwa natoa mfano wa Bunge kuu 
kwa maana wanapata kwa kimombo privilege s samahani kwa kutumia lugha hii .       
Mheshimiwa Spika  sisemi tu ni safari , nasema akichukua mamlaka kama ilivyo  Karani wa 
Bunge  kuu Mheshimiwa  Spika  ataweza kuendesha Nyumba hii kisawasawa . Nataka tuelewe 
tumekuwa na changamoto katika Bunge letu B wana Spika  tumekuwa na changamoto nyingi 
lakini nina imani akichukua wadh fa huu ataweza kurahisisha mambo ataweza kutuletea  
mambo mengi na tutaweza kufanya kazi zetu Mheshimiwa  Spika  …. 
(Applause ) 
 ….Na Mheshimiwa  Spika  kusema kweli chanda chema huvishwa pete,  ahsante 
Mheshimiwa  Spika na natumai pia W abunge wenzangu kuwa sote tutaridhika kuwa sasa hivi 
maana siamini kuna mtu anapinga kazi nzuri aliyoifanya Mheshimiwa  ndugu yetu Salim 
Juma,  ina maana ndio maana tunaona mambo ya gratuity  imeanza kwenda tangu aingie 
katika miezi mitatu Mheshimiwa  Spika.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Lucy Chizi Chireri.  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Chireri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa kunitambua , hii nguo yangu 
nyeupe Mheshimiwa  Fadhili  ameyamaliza yote lakini nitaongezea ...  
(Laughter ) 
       …kwanza ningeunga mkono mia  fil mia hoja moja kwa moja kuchaguliwa kwa  Karani 
wa Bunge letu Salim Juma . Pia Mheshimiwa  Spika  ningependa kushukuru Kamati ambayo 
ilikaa na huyu B wana na ikaweza kum dadisi.  Mheshimiwa Spika, Sal im Juma tumekaa naye 
kwa m uda huo Mungu  ametujalia kuwa nay e kwa kusema ukweli mimi mwenyewe nina 
…(Inaudible)  na mcheza mbao , tabia ya huyu B wana ni msomi , anapenda  kusikiza ambayo 
ni mambo ya kuleta maendeleo katika hii Kaunti,  yetu si mtu wa kub waga Kaunti,  ni mtu 
ambaye anaangalia mbele kuna nini .  
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8  Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa  Spika  moja kwa moja Bwana huyu tuipiti she kazi aifanye 
lakini tutampa morali sana aweze kufanya kazi kwa bidii kazi yake tumpee nguvu aweze 
kufanya kazi yake tutaenda mbele . Ahsante . 
(Applause ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mhes himiwa  Fatma M ote. 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa kunipa fursa hii .       
Mheshimiwa S pika kwanza kabla  ningependa kumshukuru  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi 
Bungeni  wetu ambaye si mwingine ni Hamisi M usa Mwidani,  kweli sasa naam ini kumbe utu 
uzima ni dawa kwa kweli Mheshimiwa  Hamisi  Mwidani  ni mtu mzima hii nafasi  ilikuwa 
inamfaa Mheshimiwa.  Mheshimiwa Spika  tumua ngalie Salim J uma ni mtu wa aina gani?  
Salim J uma ni mtu ambaye  anatoka Mombasa Kaunti  na vile  vile ni mkaazi wa Buxto n 
anatoka katika Wodi ya Tononoka kama sijakosea na vile vile ni mpigaji kura wa Kaunti ya 
Mombasa. Kwa hio hii nafasi inamfaa mia fil mia; kwanza alipiga kura kwetu na vile vile 
kazi pia amepata kwetu na vile vile mimi sijaona Karani wa Bunge katika Mji w etu huu na 
yeye ni Karani wa Bunge wa kwanza aliweza kukaa na wafanyi kazi wa chini ambao ni 
wanyonge nikiwemo mimi mmoja wao na matatizo yao yakaweza kutatuliwa, aliweza kukaa 
na wafanyi kazi wanyonge.  Mheshimiwa Spika ambao hawajanifahamu wanifahamu kwa 
makini aliweza kukaa na watu wa chini wafanyi kazi wanyonge na mimi nikiwa mmoja wao 
kusikilizwa katika huo mkutano...  
(Applause)  
       Na mambo yao yaliweza kutatulika. Hivyo basi Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama 
hapa kuunga mkono mia fil mia na Mwenyezi  Mungu ampe nguvu na moyo kwa kuzidi 
kuangalia wafanyi kazi walio wanyonge na kuweza kuendeleza Mombasa Kaunti. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  from Tononoka.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Naam ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii.         
Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri ikikumbukwa tarehe 8 mwezi wa Aprili mwaka huu nilileta 
mswada wa kuweza kushinikiza Mheshimiwa Spika wa kuweza kumpatia nafasi ndugu yetu 
Salim Juma kuchukua wadhifa kamili wa uongozi wa ku wa Karani mkuu wa Bunge la Kaunti 
ya Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Spika ni muda mrefu sana na amefanya katika wadhifa ule bila 
shaka anafaa kupewa kwa sababu ya majukumu aliyofanya na ripoti inaonyesha wazi juhudi 
zake ziko ilionyesha kuwa Mheshimiwa Spika hii kazi  ambayo kwamba leo tutaweza 
kumalizia kwa kuhakikisha anapata wadhifa ule ni kazi ambayo amebobea na ni kazi ambayo 
anaifahamu vyema.  Mheshimiwa Spika hizi fursa ambazo tuko nazo hapa ni lazima tuwe 
tutaweka watu ambao wataweza kutekeleza majukumu yao kuli ngana na sheria na nidhamu.         
Mheshimiwa Spika bila ya kuona haki zao za kisheria ambayo kwamba ni malipo yao ya 
kisheria kuweza kulipwa wakati unaotakikana leo hii katika majukumu ambayo kwamba 
tangu ndugu yetu Salim ameweza kuchukua wadhifa huu tume ona mabadiliko makubwa 
kutokana na tofauti ya uongozi ya utekelezaji na utendaji kazi.  Mheshimiwa Spika hivi ni 
kuonyesha wazi kuwa kazi tunazopeana kwenye Jumba hili ni lazima tuwe na mbinu ambayo 
kwamba tutaweza kuchagua watu ambao kwamba kweli wataweza kutufanyia kazi na 
hawakuja hapa kujifanyia kazi wao binafsi.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika mimi langu zaidi ni kuunga mkono kwa sababu kama ni masuala ya 
elimu ameweza kutimiza majukumu yale kisheria amesoma kiwango kinachohitajika kuweza 
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 katika nafasi kama il e na bidii na jukumu ambayo ametekeleza ni kubwa.  Hivyo basi mimi 
nimesimama rasmi ikiwa ni mmoja kati ya wengi ambao wako hapa ya kuweza kuunga 
mswada huu ili kuweza kumpatia fursa ya kusimama kisawa sawa na kutenda kazi akiwa 
anajua pale mahali alipo ni pake. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Shukran.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa wa Changamwe.  
       Hon. Odari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for according me the opportunity to air my views 
in regard to this Motion ; first and foremost Hon. Speaker I wish to support this Motion  100 
per cent . Mr. Speaker I would like to congratulate this team which vetted Mr. Hamisi 
Mwaguya and am satisfied that the job was done very well. Mr. Speaker in my opinion Mr. 
Salim Juma is quite qualified for this po sition; he has all what it takes to occupy this position 
to the observation of the committee, we can see that Mr. Salim Juma has a Master on 
Business Administration, also he has a Bachelor of Arts (Sociology), he went through 
Advanced Education in High Sch ool and he went through other courses from other 
Institutions in civil service in administrative duties. Hon. Speaker Salim Juma is qualified and 
he has been in acting capacity for quite long; we had a tendency of putting people in acting 
capacity for long  and it is high time that he be confirmed as soon as possible, Mr. Juma has 
been with us for a long time and we have seen how he works everyone of us can testify to his 
capacity of work in terms of conducting his duties as the Deputy Clerk of the Assembly and 
now as the Acting Clerk of the Assembly.  Therefore Hon. Speaker I wish to call upon this 
Hon. House not to waste time but to confirm Mr. Salim Juma to be the new County Clerk of 
the Assembly. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mswabah Rashid) : The House will first hear from Mji wa Kale 
then from the Youth Representative and then we will hear from Bamburi and last from....  
       Hon. Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I start by saying Salim has what it takes because it 
is not an ea sy job to serve the public servants with a clean record; it is very hard in such a 
place. It is assuring us how disciplined he is because 90  per cent  of people who worked with 
the local government did not come out clean but he has been in the public servic es all these 
years as Chief Public Relations officer and no single query has been brought and this shows 
he is....  
(Interruption)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Mwabashiri what is it?  
       Hon. Mwabashiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kati ka wanachama waliomdadisi Salim 
Juma mmoja wao ni Mheshimiwa Amur Murfad sasa ningeomba uwawachie wale wengine 
watoe mchango yeye alikuweko wakimdadisi kwa hio awache wengine watoe mchango kwa 
sababu yeye alimdadisi na bado yeye anazungumza, sasa sisi weng ine tutaongea nini?  
(Applause)  
       Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker with due respect i respect my brother...  
(Interruption)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Hatimy what is it?  
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10        Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker St anding Order Number 
90 is very clear. I think Standing Order 90 is very clear everybody has the right to give his 
views and he was the Member of the Committee but that does not mean we should be denied 
to give opinions in this House Mr. Speaker, thank you.   
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay.  
(Applause)  
       Before the leader replies, so before the Leader of Majority replies to the Motion , we will 
give you a chance to support the leader before he replies so neutral, yes Hon. Hatimy.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I’ m a M ember too Mr. Speaker I have the right to be given a 
chance.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay you will be given a chance, first let the 
speaker and before the leader replies you will be given a chance to speak as well, yes Hon. 
Meti.  
       Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kunipa fursa 
kuchangia katika mswada mzuri ambao utaleta mafanikio katika Bunge letu la Mombasa.         
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nakumbuka msemo mmoja unaosema kwamb a, chema cha jiuza 
kibaya chajitembeza;  siwezi kuongea sana kwa sababu ripoti ilioletwa Bungeni yaongea 
yenyewe, lakini tukiangalia ndugu yetu Salim Juma zile njia alizopitia, elimu aliyopitia na 
yale majukumu aliyokuwa nayo mpaka leo kufikia hii kwamba sis i Bunge la Kaunti ya 
Mombasa kutaka kumfanya Karani mkuu wa Bunge letu inatosha.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
tukiangalia Bwana Salim elimu yake inatosha, ujuzi wake unatosha, na pia vile vile tokea 
1996 mpaka leo hii 2016 Bwana Salim amekuwa katika ofisi za serikali,  inaonyesha kwamba 
ni mtu aliye bobea aliye na ujuzi mwingi, na ambaye anaweza kupeleka Bunge letu pale 
mahala panapostahili.  Kwa ule mda mfupi ambao tumekuwa naye katika Bunge letu la 
Mombasa akiwa kama Karani mkuu wa Bunge wa kushikilia nyadhfa hio tumeo na juhudi 
zake; Bunge letu la Kaunti limekuwa kama ni kidonda sugu lakini tokea aingie yeye 
Mheshimiwa Spika tumeanza ona mafanikio. Mheshimiwa Spika mambo mengine katika 
Bunge pia ambayo ni maswala yetu ya kindani pia vile vile yamekuwa yakitokea kwa kipi ndi 
kifupi Bwana Salim ambapo amekuwa kama Karani aliyeshikilia nyadhfa ile.  Nataka 
kuwasihi Waheshimiwa wenzangu kwamba tukumbuke kwamba anae lala na mgonjwa ndio 
anayejua uchungu ule Mheshimiwa Spika. Nawaambia Waheshimiwa wenzangu ya kwamba 
yule ndugu y etu Salim ambaye tuko naye hapa kama mwenye kushikilia nyadhfa ya Karani 
mkuu wa Bunge ni mtu ambaye tumekaa naye, ni mtu ambaye anajua shida zetu na ni mtu 
ambaye anajua ni vipi tukishikana pamoja tutaweza kupata na kusongeza Bunge letu la 
Mombasa mbele.  
       Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sioni pingamizi yoyote wala sioni nipoteze mda 
mwengine kuendelea kujadili hili jambo wakati tuko na jibu Mheshimiwa Spika, na chanda 
chema tunavyojua kinavikwa pete.  Naomba ndugu zangu sisi tulio ongea wa kwanza 
tumeon gelea kwa niaba ya Bunge letu lote Mheshimiwa Spika tumalize mswada huu ili 
ndugu yetu Salim Juma awe kama Karani mkuu wa Bunge la Kaunti ya Mombasa.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Riziki Fundi Kitsao.  
       Hon. Fundi:  Ahsante san a Bwana Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii. Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi nasema kazi hii ilikuwa tuifanye kitambo sana...  
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11                                                      (Applause)  
       Chelewa ufike, kwa hivyo leo nafikiria ni jukumu letu sisi kama Wabunge w a Bunge la 
Kaunti kufanya vile ambalo ni valid , tumpitishe Bwana Salim aweze kutufanyia kazi.         
Mbali na hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika wafanyi kazi wetu ambao tuko nao ambao wanafanya kazi 
chini ya mstaafu Bwana Tubman na chini ya Salim wako pia ambao wanawez a kujaza hichi 
kiti cha Naibu wa Karani wa Bunge.  
(Applause)  
       Naona kwa maoni yangu kwamba tusichelewe kujaza kwa maana naona Bwana Abdallah 
Khamis anafaa kabisa kuchukua kiti hicho...  
(Applause)  
       Kwa sababu anaelewa kazi katika Bunge hii, kw a hivyo mimi ningependa Mheshimiwa 
Spika nikimaliza kazi hii leo kesho iletwe ripoti ingine, ya kumpitisha Bwana Abdallah 
Khamis.  
(Applause)  
      Kama Naibu wa Karani wa Bunge wa Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah  Rashid) : Yes Hon. Kizito.  
       Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for I want to comment first of the Committee of 
Khamis Mwidani for conducting this, and as  Hon. Riziki Fundi what he has said it has been 
long overdue, so in  future we don’t have to keep  someone waiting for eight months, thank 
you very much.  
(Applause)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kunipa fursa, Mheshimiwa Spika 
nasema ahsante kwa ile kamati ambayo iliweza kudad isi Karani wa Bunge Salim Juma.        
Mheshimiwa Spika Salim Juma ni haki yake kupewa nafasi hii, nikiandika hizo bila 
kuangalia nyuma Mheshimiwa nataka kuwaonyesha picha ya Salim Juma vile ilivyo, 
kumekuwa na vugu vugu lakini Salim Juma ameweza kupitia h aya yote, hakuonyesha yuko 
upande huu ama yuko upande huu, amekuwa yuko kati kati, ndio maana nimesema ni haki 
yake Mheshimiwa Spika...,  
(Interruption)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Saad Faraj what is it?  
       Hon. Faraj:  Mheshim iwa Spika ninavyo fahamu mimi Jumba la Bunge la Kaunti ya 
Mombasa ni Jumba moja, Wanachama wanaochaguliwa hapa wote ni wa chama cha ODM, 
na nashangaa kusikia kulikuwa na wengine wako upande wa huku na wengine wako upande 
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 wa huku na labda nikufahamishe peng ine ninavyofahamu hadi sasa Mwabashiri ni ndugu 
yangu, Nasser ni ndugu huku na kule lakini ninavyofahamu hakuna huku na kule.  
       Hon. (Ms.)  Auma : Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kufahamisha Jumba hili kuwa kulikuwa 
na tofauti ya maneno tulikuwa tukitofautiana mara mbili tatu, kwa kweli sisi ni chama moja 
na kulikuwa na matofautiano kati ya sisi na wengine lakini Salim Juma hakuonyesha yuko 
upande gani.  Kila tukienda hivi yuko na sisi, tukienda hivi yuko na sisi mpaka imefika wakati 
tumeelewana maana hizo Kamati  zote Mheshimiwa Spika hata mimi sasa nafurahia Salim 
Juma Mheshimiwa Spika awe ….  
(Laughter)  
       Awe kwa kiti hiki Mheshimiwa Spika, baada ya kupitisha Salim Juma ataweza kuchukua 
nafasi yake Mheshimiwa Spika, atupeleke kama vile Marina swimming  tukaf urahie pamoja...  
(Laughter)  
       Tukunywe kitu chengine Mheshimiwa Spika, ili tuone furaha ambayo tulikuwa 
tunahitaji, kwa mda tuliotaka...  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Nassir.  
       Hon. Nassir Rashid : Mheshimiwa Spika ahsa nte kwa kunipa nafasi hii, mimi 
nimesimama hapa kuuliza Hatimy anamuunga mkono ama hamuungi mkono...  
(Laughter)  
       Akisema anamuunga mkono mimi vile vile nitamuunga mkono mara mia...  
(Laughter)  
       Naunga mkono Salim Juma na vile vile naunga mkono Abdallah ako na ujuzi pia aletwe 
bila kudadisiwa...  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Kalume.  
       Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika naunga mkono 
Bwana Salim Juma kuthibitishwa kama Karani mkuu wa Bunge la Kaunti  ya Mombasa kwa 
sababu hadi sasa sijaona pingamizi lolote.  Kwa hio inathibitisha kwamba Bunge la Kaunti ya 
Mombasa limemkubali Bwana Salim Juma kuwa Karani mkuu wa Bunge hilo.  
(Applause)  
       Bwana Salim Juma ni mtu ambae amesoma na katika ule mda mchac he ambao tumekaa 
nae akishikilia nyadhfa nafikiri sote tumeona jinsi ni mtenda kazi.  Hivyo basi Mheshimiwa 
Spika tunaomba kwa pamoja na sioni haja ya mtu mwengine kuzungumza...  
(Laughter)  
       Sisi tumpitishe Bwana Salim Juma awe Karani mkuu wa Bunge la Kaunti ya Mombasa.        
              Ahsante.  
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13        The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Zainab Kithinzi.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Zainab Kithinzi:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika, nimesimama kuunga mkono 
kuwa Salim Juma awe Karani mkuu wetu; anafaa k uwa Karani wa Bunge la Kaunti ya 
Mombasa.  Bwana Spika tukiangalia vile tulivyosomewa na anastahili hata hakuna mjadala 
hapo, kwanza Salim Juma ni mcha Mungu ukimuangalia ni mtu mwenye busara, ana 
heshima, ana hekima hana dharau kwa mtu ye yote...  
(Applause)  
       Awe mkubwa au mdogo kwake ni sawa, ninachopenda kwake ni kiongozi mzuri ama 
Karani wa Bunge mzuri ambae unampelekea shida zako anakusikiza kukuelewa na 
kukutatulia...  
(Applause)  
       Kwa hivyo naunga mkono naomba ipitishwe kwa haraka kwa sababu n aona yachelewa 
Bwana Spika. Ahsante.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Amur do you have anything?  
       Hon. Amur:  Mheshimiwa kama nilivyokuwa nasema Salim Juma anafaa, ukiangalia 
background  yake ya kisomo sio rahisi kwamba mtu ana weza kufanya katika mashirika tofauti 
ya kiserikali na awe msafi kama pamba; hiyo inaonyesha  kwamba amesimama na sheria ya 
kifungu cha Sita cha Katiba yaani Chapter Six of the Constitution  inayozungumzia mambo ya 
‘Integrity’ . 
(Applause)  
       Kwa kuwa na  wadhfa ile na heshima ile inatosheleza kwamba Kaunti hii leo imepata 
almasi kwa sababu ikiwa waweza kutoa huduma katika Kaunti tofauti tofauti  na mpaka leo 
awe hajapatikana na hitilafu yoyote hii inamaanisha ni mtu amekomaa, ni mtu anaamini 
Mungu na mten da kazi.  Kwa hio leo hapa kuthibitihsa kwetu hapa ni kwamba huyu mtu ni 
msafi kama pamba sio rahisi mumeona katika vyombo vya habari mtu anapopewa wadhfa ya 
miezi sita tu mamilioni ya pesa yanapotea lakini ukimuangalia Salim Juma hata ukimuuliza 
kwamba ame patikana na swala lolote kuhusu mambo ya anti corruption  sio rahisi kupata mtu 
anaefanya katika mashirika ya kiserikali kuwa msafi kama huyu.  Kwa hayo machache 
nasema ni jukumu letu leo kuvalisha chanda hiyo pete. Ahsante sana.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Bwana Spika katiba yetu katika Article 27 inasema 
kuwa... Every person is equal before the law and has a right to equal.... Mheshimiwa Spika 
kusema hivi kwamba Salim Juma ameweza kwe nda kumdadisi alivyokuwa anachukuliwa 
kama Naibu wa Karani wa Bunge hili.  Mheshimiwa Spika kifungu cha 70 na 71 ya sheria ya 
Serikali ya Kaunti yaani County Government Act  iko wazi; sisi tumekuja kusema kuwa 
imefanywa hizi hatua ambazo zimefuatiliwa kuweza  kumchunguza tena Salim Juma na pia 
kutangaza hii nafasi ili kutangaza kama kwenye ripoti ilivyosema lakini ni jambo la 
kusikitisha kuwa sheria haitumiki vile inavyotakikana kwa sababu kifungu cha 70 ya Sheria 
ya Serikali ya Kaunti iko wazi inasema hakuna Promotion  na acting position.  Huyu Bwana 
amepitia zote mbili amepitia kwa Promotion  amepata kutoka kwa Naibu wa Karani wa 
Bunge kwenda kwa Karani wa kushikilia wadhfa huo; sheria inasema katika ndani ya siku 
sitini ikiwa yule mtu ambae umemuweka hukuweza k umwambia jambo lolote kumwambia 
July 19 , 2016                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 sasa kuwa miezi sita imefika ondoka ama hukumwambia kitu sasa automatic  yule mtu ataka 
awe amehitimu kuwa katika ile nafasi.  Jambo hili haikufanyika na pia Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwa acting position  pia haikufanyika,  kwa hivyo nao mba Nyumba hii kila mtu kuna wengi 
ambayo wanashikilia nyadhfa iwe hii sheria itatumika.  Hivyo basi Bwana Spika nasimama 
katika Bunge hii kuunga mkono Salim Juma leo kirasmi awe ataweza kuwa kama Karani wa 
Bunge la Kaunti ya Mombasa na si kushikilia tena M heshimiwa Spika...  
(Applause)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Majority Leader do you wish 
to reply on the Motion ? 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Kwanza 
ninawashukuru Wabunge wetu kwa kutuunga m kono huu mswada na zaidi nawahakikishia 
Wabunge nikinukuu Mheshimiwa Riziki nikinukuu Mheshimiwa Siminyu lakini hivi sitaki 
pia kusema inajionyesha yenyewe na sio haya nataka nihakikishie Wabunge kwamba 
atatuangalia na hatatufinyia jambo lolote na kama ali vyosema Mheshimiwa Hatimy hakuna 
haja ya kumuweka mtu ashikilie nyadhfa tu kwa kitu cha chuki.  Bwana Spika ningeomba hii 
Bunge ituunge mkono nitahakikisha kwamba twapeleka vitu bila kupendeleana, bila 
kuteteana, bila kuleta fitna nyingi, ni kuhakikisha kwa mba kila mtu mwenye haki yake 
imefanyika na imetekelezwa.  Kwa hivyo nawashukuru Bunge kwa kuniunga mkono kwa hoja 
hii, ahsante Bwana Spika...  
(Applause)  
(Question proposed)  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Leader of Majority; with out 
wasting any time Members of this Assembly i would wish to put to question to the Motion .        
Members as many as are of the opinion that this House adopt the Report on vetting of Mr. 
Salim Juma for the position of County Assembly Clerk...  
(Question o ut and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Members there being no other business this House stands adjourned until tomorrow.  
The House rose at 3:44p .m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 