June 1 5, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY  MEMBER  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 15th June, 2017  
The House met at 3:04p.m. 
 (Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)   
PRAYERS  
 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Member s you may sit down. Yes, Clerk.  
STATEMENTS  
 Yes Member s I have information on  my desk that the statement  by Hon. Hatimy is 
not yet ready and it will come Tuesday next week .  
(Statement deferred)  
 Yes Hon. Kibwana . 
 Hon. Kibwana  Baya : Thank you Hon. Speak er I was eagerly waiting for the issue 
of gratuity but since you have given us the direction  my statement is that as we are all going  
this year as Member s of this Hon . House I will urge the Department of Finance to make sure 
that all our dues are in place so that as we wind up the Assembly every Member  will be  very 
comfortable Mr. Speaker. Hon. Speaker as you are aware that most of the Member s are still 
in the race, some of us are independent , some of the Member s are also vying on different 
Parties Hon. Speaker … 
(Applause)  
 …so Hon. Speaker it will also be good for us so that every Member  who is going to 
leave this Hon.  House on 29th will be able to go with his money for  campaign . So Hon. 
Speaker that is very crucial I want you to consider my statement for further deliberatio ns in 
future. Thank you Hon. Speaker . 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you and that statement again 
resemble s statement no. 7 and I give it  this to...double hearing  it should be approached to the  
double hearing  so I give it to Finance Budget and Appropriations together with Majority 
Leader. Yes, Clerk . 
BILL  
 Member s again I have a letter from Hon. Amur Murfad , Chairperson Committee on 
Tourism, Co -operative, Culture and Community Services that the Bill is in the final 
preparations so it will also come on Tuesday .  
(Business  deferred)  
 Yes Clerk ? 
BILL  
 Yes Member s order number 10 is also in the  cooking  there is s ome information 
missing so  this will also come on Tuesda y, the Bill will come on Tuesday.  
(Business  deferred)  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Onyango : Point of or der, Hon. Speaker am up on a Point of order ! 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes, I can see you and I can hear you as 
well but am speaking, so if am speaking I will finish speaking , am communicating to the 
House. So order number 10 , Second reading of the Mombasa County Suppleme ntary 
Appropriations Bill , 2017 is also in the kitchen and is being prepared it will come on Tuesday 
as well. Thank you.  
(Business deferred)  
 Yes Hon. Dan  Onyango  what is it ? 
June 1 5, 2017                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                                 73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  Hon. Onyango : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nilikua nasema  uko na mapendeleo 
maana yake  kila siku taarifa  ikiwa kuna baadhi ya Wenyekiti  wamechelewa kuileta wewe 
huwa wa  kwanza kuwakashifu na kutoa amri kali kwa wale lakini leo nashangaa wengine 
kama hawaku ileta wewe ndio uko katika mstari wa mbele kuwatetea kwamba bado. 
Mheshimiwa Spika unajua wewe ni kama referee  haufai kuchukua msimamo  unafaa kuwa 
neutral ; kama ni sheria iwe inakata mbele na inakata nyuma maana yake juzi tu kuna 
mwenzangu hapa alichelewa kidogo kuleta taarifa yake na ilileta shida sana katika Jumba hili 
lakini kumbe kuna Wenyekiti wengine wakikosa kuleta taarifa  huwa wa nakuja wanakuona 
halafu wewe ..., mimi naomba usiwe ni mtu wa kuchukua upande mmoja. Ahsante . 
 Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay  Hon.  Dan I heard you but there is 
a difference  between  somebody came into my office with proper reasons and those ones 
which you are talking about never appear , they don’t appear  at all in this House. H e has a 
business, he has a statement to give, he has a response to give but he does not appear he  
vanishes b ut this one came in my office with proper reasons, he came before so there is a 
difference between vanishing and coming to explain . Yes Clerk ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
Member s there being no other business this House is adjourned to next week.  
The H ouse rose at 3: 13p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 