August 7 , 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday,  7th August , 2019  
The House met at 10:22a .m. 
 
(The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Chairperson  Committee  on Implementation ? 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker we sat as the 
Department and we are yet to sit as a Committee to deliberate on it , so we kindly ask for your 
Chair to give us until today in the afternoon.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): So today in the afternoon the Report will be 
ready?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay the issue will  be rescheduled  until the 
afternoon sitting.  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Than k you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk?  
 STATEMENT   
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Chairperson Comm ittee on Health or any other 
Member?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker we need to be given up to the afternoon,  so that we 
can give out the report . It’s in the process of being finalised, so  in the afternoon Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): In the afternoon the Report will be ready?  

August 7 , 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay, Hon. Ibrahim do you have anything 
because  I see it’s as if the seat is somehow hot?  
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Spea ker Sir I thought that it could be postponed  but I think in the 
afternoon is okay , thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay Clerk? Yes, Chief Whip . 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mhesh imiwa Mwenyekiti nimesimama na Taarifa k wa 
sababu jana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuna swala ambalo linaendelea mashinani , kuhusu swala 
la mataa na Taarifa  ilikuwa inastahili kuji biwa jana , lakini kulingana na uchunguzi wangu ni 
kama hayo majibu yanakwepa kuweza kujibiwa katika Bunge hili.  
Mheshim iwa Faith alileta Taarifa  kutak a kujua mrad i ambao unaendele a mashinani 
kuwekwa kwa mata a, ni mradi ambayo umegharimia pesa ngapi ? na vile vile BQs ambayo za 
mradi huo ziko wapi ? Lakini ni kama kuna kitu kinaendelea katika Bunge hili majibu haya 
hayajal etwa jana, na ukatoa directive  kwamba ziletwe leo asubuhi , lakini leo mpaka sa a hizi 
hakuna mtu amelizungumzia Mheshimiwa Mweny ekiti. Mbali na hayo pia niko na Taarifa  
ambayo nitaweza kuuliza nilikuwa naomba unipe mwelekeo  wako kuhusu hili Mheshimiwa 
Spika . 
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Chief Whip ? Yes Hon. Amur what is it , 
you want to respond?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  No Mr. Speaker , on the same note what is happening at the Ward 
level , the CEC Minister of Transport and Infrastructure  goes round the Wards, without 
notification or informing the Members and then it  is posted , we are being seen we are not aware 
of what is happening , they just go with Ward Administrator and they tarnish our names in the 
Wards. Mr. Speaker we canno t take that  so a reply must come in the afternoon otherwise this 
House will be taken for granted thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Murfad Amur . Although  these 
are two different cases  Hon. Chief Whip as per the  Order Paper, I can see that it’s not indicated 
but I will order the Table Clerks  to indicate it in our afternoon sitting , so that the person 
responsible to come and notify this House and furthermore  the Table Clerks to inform the Chair 
that, that issue is  coming today in the afternoon so that she  is aware. Yes, Chief Whip?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon.  Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimesimama mbele na Kanuni 
41(c) kwa ruhusa yako niweze kuele za Taarifa  kwa mda huu.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mw alimu ): Chief Whip as per our standing order 
you are also suppo sed to notify the Speaker prior to  the sitting, so if it’s not that urgent can you 
bring it in the afternoon so that it appears in the order paper?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Most  oblige d. 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Okay then I  will notify the Clerks .  
August 7 , 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  (Interruption)  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Just a minute,  what is it Hon. Athman?  
Hon. Athman Shebe:  Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika . Niko chini ya  himay a yako nikitaka 
pia  u toe mwelekeo kuhusu swala langu la ardhi kwa ile shule ya Jomvu tafadhali  kwa sababu 
mara ya mwisho  ulitoa mwongozo lakini pia naona haujafuatiliwa . Kwa hivyo naomba utumie 
uwezo wako  Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi saa nane niweze kupata taarifa kamili kuhusu swala la 
Jomvu  Narco l ECD ’s school ahsante.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Athman , we will notify the 
Table Clerks to go through the ir Votes Books and if it was supposed to be replied today 
afternoon they wi ll allot a time for it to be replied , they will also notify the Chair that the issue is 
supposed to come in the afternoon  but they will go through their Vote Books because am not 
sure if it was allotted  time by the House Business Committee , but as far a s the Vote Book is 
concerned the Table Clerks will go  through it and give it sometim es to see the space on the floor 
of the House in the afternoon . Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker Sir.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I see you are now misusing the Standing Order 
41(c) unless you are up on another issue .  
Hon. Omondi:  Yes. 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): If it is a Statement am sure it has not reach ed the 
table  of the Speaker so that we give you time .  
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir it is not a Statement.  It is an issue which is very 
important .  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I am saying even if it  is an issue it is a Statemen t 
of which let it be a written Statement of which the office of the Spea ker gives you time.  
Hon. Omondi:   Mr. Speaker Sir I just want to give information  from the Department of 
Education on the recruitment of the ECDE’s teachers ... (Technical hitch ). 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Ibrahim if it  is a matter  that concern s the 
Committee ... because I heard you mention ed the Education Committee why don’t you first sit 
and if  it is a matter of urgency  raise it in the afternoon  so that we follow the order of the House 
because I will be bias ed allowing you to inform the  House and yet I told the Chief Whip to 
follow the procedures of the House.  
Hon. Omondi:  Actually Mr. Speaker Sir. 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Just hold on Hon. Ibrahim ... follow the 
procedures of the House, notify the Speaker and the Table Clerks will allot  you time for you to 
raise that concern . Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
August 7 , 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           73 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mr. Speaker in my understanding there is interpretation of 
various ... (Inaudible ). 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): It has been a practic e in this Hon ourable  House 
that Members should notify the Speaker but don’t ambush  the Speaker on the floor , it has been a 
practice of this  House . Yes Clerk?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members there b eing no any other business, this House stand s adjourned until today 
in the afternoon at  2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 10:35 a.m. 
 
 