August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday,  7th August , 2019  
The House met at 2 :53p.m. 
 
(The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
RESPO NSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAI RPERSON COMMITTEE ON  EDUCATION , IT AND MV 2035  HON. 
OMONDI ON THE STATUS OF BUR SARIES FOR COLLEGES AND U NIVERSITIES IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi, or any M ember from the Ed ucation C ommittee ? Yes Hon. 
Robert Nyiro?  
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , on behalf of my Chair and the C ommittee on 
Education I wish to give a response as follows;  Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to give a S tatement 
response in regards to a statement ra ised by Hon. Tobias Samba, the MCA Tudor Ward on the 
status of bursaries for Collage s and Universities in the County : 
 
Mr. Speaker S ir; 
The County Elimu Fund received Ksh 50 million on 15th February , 2019. The money was 
used for the process and disperse bursa ries to 5,222  beneficiaries for form 1 and form 4  
and 532 special needs beneficiaries.  
 
Mr. Speaker ; 
The template for bursaries for both university and collages have been designed and ready 
for printing. Elimu fund is awaiting confirmation of availability of  funds to facilitate 
disbursement of bursaries for colleges and universities to all the wards in Mombasa 
County.  
 
The D epartment of Education, Information Technology and MV 2035 has already put a 
request for fu nding to the D epartment of Finance and have fol lowed up the matter for 
funds to be released into the Elimu Fund Account.  

August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Expected date for the issuing of forms for the college and university bursary is dependent 
on the  availability of funds from  the Department  of Finance . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Dep uty Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro . Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAI RPERSON COMMITTEE ON  HEALTH HON . KIBWANA SWALEH  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : You Hon. Kibwana Swaleh Baya  or any other 
Member from Health Committee? Yes Hon. Lucy?  
 
Hon. Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa kusema kweli tumeku ahidi ripoti 
tutaileta …  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Lucy use your microphone . 
 
Hon. Chireri : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa kusema kweli ninazungumza 
kama Mwanachama wa Kamati hii , tume ahidi ripoti hii tutaileta mchana huu wa leo , lakini ripo ti 
haijatufikia kutokea kwa Executive  kwa hivyo itakuja wakati mwengine . Poleni sana 
Waheshimiwa.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Lucy Chizi since the Hon. 
Member concern ed is not around, so we will be waiting for that response in our next sitting . Yes, 
Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON IMPLEMENTATI ON HON . KALUME ON 
THE STATUS OF IMPLEM ENTATION OF MOTIONS PASSED IN THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes Hon. Chairperson Committee on Implem entation? Hon. Kalume?  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, status on Implementation of Motions Passed 
in the County Assembly.  Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give statement response in regards to a 
statement raised by Hon. Moha med Hatimy, Nominated MC A on t he status of Implementation of 
Motions passed in the County Assembly on Thursday, 4th July, 2019 during the 54th sitting 
2:30pm.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir response to status of implementation Motion passed in the County were 
brought forward by the Acting Coun ty Secretary, Mr. Joab Tumbo and according to our Motion 
Tracker 83 Motion s were approved and 34 were adopt ed for implementation while 49 Motions 
were Procedural Mo tions since the Second Assembly –First Session September  - December , 2017 
to Second Session Feb ruary  - December , 2018. Third Session has not been tracked .  
 They brought statemen t and reports of a total of 16 Motions approved and acted upon. 
We are yet to receive the remaining and as a Committee we have agreed to go into details to 
confirm the actual st atus as per their report as well as report back  the status of the remaining 
Motions . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika niko na supplementary question  ambayo 
sijaridhika, Bunge hili tuliweza kupitisha Mswada w a kusema kuwa tumeweka sh eria za Tuk tuk 
na  hatujaziona zile sh eria zikifanya kazi , je huu Mswada  uko kwenye hizi zilizopitishwa 
ambayo amesem a kuwa kutokana na  Miswada  83, 34 imekubaliwa , huu Mswa da umesimamia 
wapi Mhes himiwa Spika?  
Kwa hivyo hio nd io supplementary question  nataka Bunge hili likifunguliwa aje 
atuambie  kwa sababu mpaka leo sh eria tulipitisha ya Tuk tuk haijaanza ku tekelezwa  
Mheshimiwa Spika , ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri? Are you a Member of that 
Committee?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ni Naibu Mwenyekiti wa Kamati Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay . 
   
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika pengine kama Mheshimiwa 
angetukumbusha hoja inayohusu masuala ya Tuk tuk ilipita katika awamu ya kwanza, pili au ya 
tatu ya Bunge hili tungeweza kujua iko kwa daraja gani kwa sababu Miswada  yote ama hoja zote 
zilizopita kwa awamu ya tatu ya vikao vya Bunge hili bado havijanakiliwa na kutolewa katika 
hifadhi kwa minaajili ya kufuatilia katika utekelezaji.  
Kwa hivyo tukijua kama iko kwa tatu tutafuatilia na Makarani  wetu kuweza kuiregesha 
kwa idara husika na watupatie na utekelezaji wa hoja zilizopita katika awamu ya tatu, hivyo basi  
akituhakikishia ni awamu gani labda tutak uwa na mazingira ya kuweza kujua iko katika daraja 
gani? Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri but I think from the 
supplementary question the Hon. Member has given ample time for the Committee to peruse 
from the Hansa rd Department and see when the Motion was passed in this House so it will be 
wise if the Committee will go to the Hansard and look  for the records.  
And Hon. Members it has also come to the attention of the Office of the Speaker that 
whenever you are speakin g in this Hon. House try to be audible, use your mic properly because 
in the Hansard Department you might find that you are looking for records and find that nothing 
has been captured from what you are saying in this floor of the House so make use of your mics 
and it will be easier for Hansard Department to capture whatever that you are talking. Yes Hon. 
Athman Shebe?  
 
Hon. Athman Shebe:  Yes thank you Hon. Speaker . Hon. Speaker I r ise under Standing 
Order 41. 2 (c) for two pressing Statements . Hon. Speaker w ith your indulgence  I stand pursuant 
to Standing Order 41. 2 (c) seeking a detail ed statement from the Chairperson of Committee on 
Labour and Social Services if he is a ware that the County retirees who have retire d since 2016 
have not been p aid their dues and they are languishing in poverty and misery after working for 
the County of Mombasa more than 30 years Hon. Speaker.  
Hon. Speaker am seeking to know from the Chairperson on Water, Sanitation and Natural 
Resources…  
 
(Interruption)  
August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  
The Deput y Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : That’s another Statement?  
 
Hon. Athman Shebe: Yes that  is another Statement . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes just hold on. So any Member from Labour 
Committee? Yes Hon. Raphael Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker , on behalf of the Committee on Labour we have 
heard the concerns raised by the Hon. Member we may not be able to answer him now but we 
ask for time we will respond in the next sitting. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank yo u. Hon. Athman Shebe , just one 
Statement as Standing Orders states it is one Statement per session not unless your Statement 
you delegate to someone else to read your Statement.  
 
Hon. Athman Shebe:  Okay thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chief Whip?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kikao chetu cha asubuhi 
niliweza kuamka na Statement  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na kuweza kunipatia muelekezo 
kwamba niweze kuja kuleta Statement  leo mchana . Kusema kweli nimeweza kukubali amri yako 
na hivi saa nane nashangaa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti katika Order  Paper  sijaona Statement  
yangu lakini tayari niko nayo kuweza kuisoma katika Bunge hili kwa ruhsa yako.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Kwa kuwa 
umenipatia ningeweza kuwakabidhi Makarani wa Bunge  hili lakini iko ndani ya akilini mwangu 
ningetaka kujua kutoka Idara ya Uchukuzi ndani ya Mombasa waweze kuniletea hii detail report  
kuhusiana na barabara zote zilizoweza kutengenezwa kuanzia Mwaka wa Fedha wa 2016/2017, 
2017/2018, 2018/2019 na sehemu ambazo barabara hizi ziko wapi? Na vile vile gharama kwa 
kila barabara almaarufu kama BQ na payment certificate  katika barabara  zote ndani ya 
Mombasa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
(Silence)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Chief Whip. The Committee of 
Transport have noted your question, Hon. Chair do you have a response today or?  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Spika jibu sina lakini mimi naona kama sheria 
kweli inaniruhusu ni peruse  vitu vya karibu miaka mitatu nyuma au minne ndio nivilete katika 
Jumba hili lakini jibu kwa sasa sina pengine nikaulize kwenye Idara husika kiukamilifu ndio 
niweze kule ta hayo majibu lakini kwa sasa sioni kama sheria inaniruhusu kupekua miaka mitatu 
ama minne nyuma kuleta mambo katika Jumba hili.  
 
August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you. Yes what is it Chief Whip?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti ningependa kumuarifu 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti aliyeweza kusimama kwamba yeye sheria hana, yeye ni mwakilishi 
wetu kutuwakilisha katika idara katika Jumba hili, sheria zipo katika idara bali yeye haleti 
information  hiyo, yeye hatoi ni idara inatoa na tayari ziko hizo information  katika kila idara , 
kuna files ziko tayari . Kwa hivyo ni yeye kuchukua hizo files na kuweza kutuletea tuweze 
kuziangalia kama imeweza kutekelezwa ndani ya Mombasa. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalim u): Okay so Cha ir with your Committee you will 
contact the Department concerned and durin g our next sitting after House Business sits and allots 
a day that you will bring back the response then you will be noted as on when you will report 
back to this Hono urable House. Ye s Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes, Mr. Speaker Sir, I stand pursuant to Standing Order 41 2(c). I would 
like to make a statement Mr. Speaker Sir, if allowed.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Which Statement? You have to notify first . 
  
Hon. Omondi : Yes. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalim u): You have to notify . 
  
Hon. Omondi:  I think I notified the Speaker and he said  indeed it should be put in the … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Then proceed.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir I want to know from the Department of 
Labour or the Chair man of Committee on Labour and Social Welfare about the employment of 
the ECDE teachers.  Mr. Speaker Sir I would like clarification to be given to me or to t he House 
those people that were interviewed in the process, the number that were interviewed, their 
qualifications, those who were shortlisted and also their qualifications shortlisted and 
qualifications and the school that they were posted Mr. Speaker. Th ank you . 
  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So Hon. Ibrahim from your statement what 
really do you want to know?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I want the details for the ECDE teachers that were employed , you 
remember there was an interview that took place an d the Public Board did the recruitment , now I 
am asking compelling the committee on labour and social welfare to feed me with detailed 
information.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There is someone who is up, yes Hon. Bwire?  
August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 Hon. Bwi re: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I would wish to know from the Member who is 
seeking the response on what he has raised whether or what ever is asking falls under the 
Department of Education or falls under the Department  of Labour? Because from where I sit Mr. 
Speake r; one, It  is through the Department that should have the details because he is talking 
about the ECDE teachers and the entire recruitment exercise that sho uld have been conducted by 
the Department itself. So I would wis h to know Mr. Speaker from the Chairm an on education.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Mwamwiri , Hon. Bwire was also up on 
information so let him finish first then you will proceed.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you . Maybe he clarifies on which Department specifically he wants 
the response  from but from where I sit Mr. Speaker it should come from the same Department 
that he is  chairing as the Chairman on  Committee on Education . Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa . Mhes himiwa Spika naomba 
ifahamike katika Jumba hili ya kwamba Idara haziajiri bali zinapendekeza kwa Bo di ya uajiri ya 
serikali  Gatuzi na ni  serikali Gatuzi hiyo ama ni Bodi hiyo katika serikali Gatuzi ndio inafanya 
zoezi zima la uajiri na kupeana wa limu ama waajiriwa kwa idara husika.  Hivyo basi  Mwenyekiti 
yuko sahihi kuomba kutoka kwa idara ya maswala ya Leba  na uajiri ; ratiba na majina kamili ya 
wale walioajiriw a na vigezo vyao na kule wanako  kusudiwa kupelekwa.   
Kwa h ivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti akiwa Mwenye kiti wa Elimu hana taarifa wala 
habari ya walimu hawa walioajiriwa na Idara haina taarifa kufikia sasa kwa sababu bado zoezi 
hili liko chini ya Bodi ya kuajir i hivyo ni jukumu la Idara ama Kamati ya maswala ya uajiri kuwa 
na taarifa hizi na kumjibu Mwenyek iti. Ahsante . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you , well noted. Yes Hon. Raphael?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker if that is the case then as a Member o f Committee on Labour I 
would wish to ask this House to give us one month ; of course it must be known by  all Members 
that we are adjourning for a recess and we will be out of th is House for the next one month . 
So for me asking for one month sh ould not be surprising you guys , so I ask  for one month 
Mr. Speaker then we will come back with th e response. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So Hono urable, just have a seat.  
Hon. Ibrahim as a Member or one Member from Labour Committee has stated that in one 
month time they will bring back the response but as a House we will like y ou to clarify what 
indeed do you want from your statement? Do you just want the list of the names of those who 
were shortlisted and the ones who were recruited that is all or there is something else that you 
want? What is your intention for that statement so that the Committee on Labour to work 
proper ly on what you intend to be responded  on? 
  
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir let me clarify that this is an 
audit of the process that took place on recruitment of these ECDE teachers. When I talk about an 
audit I am talking about the process, I am talking about the interviews, those peo ple that attended 
the interview . 
August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7  I also want also to know the qualifications of those who were shortlisted and those who 
were not shortlisted, those who were shortlisted and those who were not shortlisted with their 
qualifications.  Mr. Speaker Sir I want also to know the schools where there were posted , the 
individuals where  they were posted ; my intention is this , there  is an outcry which has not been 
confirmed and that is why Mr. Speaker it is very important for us to be able…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker indeed my Chair is o kay but why does he h ve to communicate 
a message that is not confirmed to this Hon ourable  House? We only communicate the confirmed 
messages, t he messages that we are sure of , I find that the Member is about to mislead this House 
by conveying the messages that are unconfirmed.  
Mr. Speaker I  would wish to inform him that  that is not procedural and with your 
directive do not allow Members to bring the messages that are not confirmed , in fact indeed he 
has confirmed that the message is not confirmed so I wonder why he has to communic ate 
unconfirmed message to this Hono urable House . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
 
Hon. Nzai:  Mr. Speaker unles s I am dreaming but I believe the Hon. Member is a Chair 
for Education and as far as I know we as Hon. Members in this Hono urable Assembly we are 
expecting to know much from him. Who was transferred where, who was given what and why he 
was given so, all th ese records should be in his docket so that he can tell us exactly  in 
Kadzan dani Ward we posted this in my Department of Education, which Ward I posted this, so 
by him the Chair of Education asking other Members to give him the same information, I don’t 
think he is really giving us any way forward in educa tion. 
This is what we call misleading the House and I do  not think it is good Mr. Speaker, am 
expecting him to come up with the list of all those who were employed, who were shortlisted he 
is the one  Mr. Speaker to bring us the list because everything was done to his favor because he is 
the Chair in Education, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Nzai . I think Hon. Mwamwiri 
was clear enough when he said as to why Labour  Committee is much concerned in this issue so I  
will ask the Labour Committee to respond in a month’s time as they said and if you need any 
more details you will sit with the Chair Education for him to shed more light. Yes Clerk ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
What is it Hon. Ibrahim? Use  your mic rophone . 
 
August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir I had information that I 
wanted to give out , I remember in the morning.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Ib rahim we had ruled out Hon. Ath mani 
Shebe fo r giving two statements at a time so we have allowed you to give out one statement.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker it is not a statement.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): We are on statement time and no matter how it 
will come it is a statement, it is you w ho were supposed to look on your two statements which 
one come first. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I have been  assigned 
by Ho n. Member Jomvu Kuu Ward to issue a statement under Standing order 41,  2, c seeking a  
detailed statement from the Chairperson Committee on Water , Sanitation and Natural Resources 
if he is aware of the project of Mwache dam  which is be ing undertaken by the National 
government and the County government through Kenya Water Tower project. Mr. S peaker Sir, 
the lay ing of pipe s has been done in Jomvu and Mikindani but it has stopped for four months 
now. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank y ou. Any Member from Water?  
 
(Silence)  
 
So we will need the response in one month 's time, in our next sitting after  the House 
Business s it they will give us when the state ment response is going to come on the floor of the 
House. Yes Clerk ? 
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMB LY 
 
 Yes the Leader of Majority.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Spe aker.  Mr. Speaker let me 
move a Procedural Motion . 
That pursuant to  Standing Order number 25(3) of the County Assembly , this House 
resolves to adjourn today on Wednesday 7th August, 2019 and resume its sitting on 
Tuesday 10th September, 2019.  
 
Mr. Speaker I  would re quest Hon. Mumba to second the Motion.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Prischilla.  
 
Hon. Mumba:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker, I second the Motion.  
 
August 7, 2019                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           74 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): I now propose a question that the Motion on 
adjournment of the County Assembly as moved by the Leader of Majority be debated in this 
Honourable  House . 
 
(Silence)  
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members ev en before I put the stand on a 
question put , you must be aware  that no matter what this Motion when it comes a question it is 
not put and we are following the Assembly calendar so I now allow ..., I want to all ow the Hon. 
Leader of Majority . Yes Leader of Majority.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Si r the 
House is scheduled to proceed for a long recess for four weeks from today Wednesday 7th 
August, 2019 to Tuesday 10th September, 2019 as per the County Assembly calendar 20 19 which 
was passed by this Hon ourable  House on Tuesday 26th February, 2019 at 2:30 p.m.  
Mr. Speaker Sir I also  would  like to inform this House that the recess period is meant to 
touch base with the needs and issues in the respective Ward s, therefore I urge Hon. Members to 
use this time to understand and interact with the public and I hope when yo u come back, you will 
be in a much better position to articulate their needs . Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Leader of Majority . Since there is no 
other person to deliberate on this M otion the House stands adjourn ed until Tuesday 10th 
September, 2019 at 10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3: 30p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 