October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 4th October , 2023  
Third Assembly – Sevent y Fifth Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  3:30p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Deputy  Speaker ( Honourable  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the Chair] 
 
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Have your seats. Yes , Clerk order 
number one please?  
 
STATEMENT S 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON FINANCE , BUDGET AND 
APPROPRIATIONS HONOURABLE KIBWANA SWALEH ON ALLEGED NON -REMITTA NCE OF 
STATURORY DEDUCTIONS BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT  
 
Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Baya.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
What is it Hon ourable  Abdirahman?  
 
Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir : No, it’s okay Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Yes, Honourable  Kibwana Swal eh or a ny 
Member from Finance Committee?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you , Mr. Speaker . Being the vice Chair for Finance, I wil l answer the 
question  Mr. Speaker Sir . I seek to give the response to the statement  which was issued by 
Honourable  Makanga , MCA Ch aani Ward during th e 57th Sitting o n Wednesday, 9th August , 
2023 on the allege d on non-remittance  deductions by the County government. Honourable  
Speaker , the Committee of Finance , Budget and Appropriation s wrote to the respective 
department asking to be f urnished with the relevant a nswer pertaining  to the above raised issue.  
On their response, the Department of Finance and Economic Planning informed the Committee 
that the County government has a pending loan facilitated from the equity bank for shillings 
100million and they plan to ensu re full settlement of the loan before embarking on the remittance 
of the deducti ons. 
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 2 Honourable  Speaker , the department also informed the Committee that the County 
government of Mombasa expects to start remitting the deductio ns during the month of December 
2023. Attached is a letter from the Department of Finance, Economic Planning.  Thank  you, Mr. 
Speaker , I think every Member has a letter. Thank you , Mr. Speaker  Sir.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Hamida. I 
think … Honourable  Makanga , are you s atisfied with the response?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I ack nowledge receipt of the response. 
However, the context therein is so disheartening ; Mr. Speaker , the response from the Committee 
and the said letter from the Chief Officer Finan ce, Budget and Appropriation  is so sh am in its 
entirety because the issue before us  is not an issue of this financial year . It is an issue of financial 
year 2021/2022 and they have not explained what happened a fter us passing the Motion here as 
regards to the funds ; they had indicated they were borrowing from Equity  Bank to facilitate the 
payment of these deductions . Mr. Speaker , as it stands now the staff  of this County are su ffering 
pecuniary embarrassment  in that some of them cannot ac cess the insurance assured sums having 
attend their maturity because of these deduction s that were made and not remitted , some have 
already gone to …, some have already retired and exited service and their pension cannot be 
proces sed because of the se pending d eduction s. Therefore , Mr. Speaker  when the Chief Office rs 
and the Commi ttee in the response indicate that they will start paying from December it is 
nothing but insult  to the already suffering staff of this County . Therefore Mr. Speaker , I feel the 
Committee have not been able to do their job and therefore we need directions on ho w we can 
bring the CEC M before this Assembly to answer this question and give a way forward and a 
solution that will be to address the issues at hand with immediate effect. Tha nk you we are 
looking forward for your directions Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Makanga. I think 
it’s wise for the Hon ourable  Member who brought the statement on alleged non -remittance 
statutory deduction by the County government  to sit with the Committee on Finance first, so I 
will instruct the Vice-Chair to schedule a meeting and s it with the Committee because you are 
not in agre ement with the response by the Committee in th is Hon ourable  House so that you can 
plan for the f urther arrangements that you have raised in this House. Yes Clerk ? 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIR PERSON OF HEALTH HON OURABLE BENARD OGUTU ON THE 
ALLEDGED DISCRIMINATION IN RE LEASE OF HEALTHCARE PRACTITIONE RS FOR FURTHER STUDIES  
 
Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is not the norm of the Health 
Committee to request for an  extention of time but this one we want to do so,  I have just received 
the response fro m the department and as a Committee we have not discussed it a nd come up with 
a common position so I am requesting your able Chair to give us up to next week Wednesday so 
that we can present the response to the House.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. F adhili M akarani ): Well , noted. Yes Clerk?  
 
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 3 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIR PERSON COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMENTATION , HONOURABLE 
SAMU EL MWAURA ON THE STATUS OF IMPL EMEN TATION OF RESOLUTIONS ON INCLUSION OF KIOSK 
TRADERS AS BENE FICIA RIES  OF MOMBASA COUNTY REVOLV ING FUNDS LOANS  
 
Yes, Honourable  Samuel Mwaura?  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker , thank you but the Committee already has the Report and 
the response for this particular question but I think there are some miscommunications  that is  
lying wit h the Clerk so maybe you could give me some  very few minutes I will be able to a nswer 
this particul ar question . I’m begging for your indulgence that you give me some very few 
minutes.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fad hili M akarani ): Honourable  Mwaura , in the  interest of 
time, I will refer it to the Hou se Business Committee so that you s eat with your Committee and 
plan well then you will come back, the response will come to this Hon ourable  House so am 
giving you, I have referred it back to the House Business Committ ee so that means you have got 
another o ne week.  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Thank you Mr . Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Okay. Yes Clerk?  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Much oblig ed. 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIR PERSON COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND IN FRASTRUCTURE 
HONOURABLE HASSA N MOHAMED ON UPGRADING O F FEEDER ROADS IN MTOPANGA WARD  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Chairperson Transport?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Any other Member from Transport Committee? Yes , Honourable  Ogutu?  
 
Hon.  Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker , we are requesting for more time because  we hav e not  
received the response from the depart ment . Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . So, we are referring it back 
to the House Business . Yes  Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT HONOURABLE HASSA N 
MOHAMED ON POOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM ALONG MTO PANGA AND JORDAN ESTATES  
 
Chairperson , Committee on T ransport or any other Member from Tr ansport Committee?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika . Pia ba do tunaomba m uda kidogo ili tuweze 
kupata majibu kutoka ida ra husika. A hsante.  
 
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 4 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you that is a ll well, it will be 
referred back to the House Business Committee. Yes C lerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND SO LID WASTE 
MANAGEMENT HONO URABLE JUMA MWALIMU ON MTOPANGA RIVER WEED I NFESTATION  
 
Honourab le Juma Mwalimu or any other Member from Env ironment and Solid Waste 
Management Committee ? Yes, Hon ourable  Mtoto Khamis?  
 
Hon. Mwiny i Mtoto:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika . Pia mimi naomba m uda kama 
wiki moja hivi  ili tuweze kumletea mw elekeo Mhe shimiwa m wenza hapa, Mheshimiwa Matsaki. 
Ahsante sana.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): What is it Hon ourable  Matsaki?  
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon.  Matsaki ): Ahsan te Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa na fasi hii 
umeweza kunipatia. Langu tu ni  kuwaelezea kwamba hizi ni statements  ambazo sa a hizi 
zinaelekea mwezi na si pendo langu  bali ni kwa sababu ya msuku mo wa wananchi na tuko hapa 
kwa sababu ya wananchi. Ningependa tu Mhe shimiwa Spika uele ze shida ni ni ni kwa sababu, 
tangu tarehe 13, mwezi w a tisa hivi tunamaliza mwezi. Naomba tu unieleze shida iko wapi 
ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Hon ourable  Khamisi 
Mtoto? Mwinyi Mtoto , sorry.  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Ahsante  sana Mhe shimiwa Spika . Nafikiri baada ya kupata hii 
Order Paper  nafik iri nimekaa chini na Mwenyekiti na akaniambia bado kidogo kuna mambo 
ambayo tunayasubiri kutoka kwa Waziri  ili tuweze kuwapatia mwelekeo Mheshimiwa, kwa 
hivyo yeye ni asubiri tu kwa wiki moja hivi Insha Allah. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): So, in a week time  you will respond?  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Yes, after seven days Insha Allah. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Okay thank you.  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): I will be waiting for the response in a 
weeks’ time, failure to which the Assembly will look for other measures so us to get the 
response . Yes  Clerk?  
 
MEASURES TO MITIGATE AGAINST DISA STER DURING IMPENDING EL  NINO RAINS  
 
Yes, Honourable  Leila Nyache?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 5 I am referring it back to the House Business Committee . Yes, Clerk?  
 
MITIGATIO N MEASURES AGAINST CHOLERA OUTBREAK  
 
Honourable  Leila Nyache?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
It is also referred back to the House Business Committee . Yes C lerk? 
 
IMPLEMENTATION STATUS OF THE MOTION ON AUTISM SPRECTRUM DISORDER (ASD) IN THE COUNTY  
 
Honourable  Hamida Noor?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you , Mr. Speaker Sir . Implementation status of Motions of Autism 
Spectrum Disorder of County government . Mr. Speaker , pursu ant to Standing Order 41(2) (c) I 
seek request of statem ent from the Chairperson Committee of Implementation, regarding  the 
Implementation status of the Motion o n Autism Spectrum Disorder. Mr. Speaker , during the 
109th Sitting of th e secon d Assembly, I spo nsored a Motion o n Autism Spectrum Disorder in the 
House  which  was adopted on Wednesday 20th November , 2019 . Later the Committ ee of 
Implementation wrote  to the County Secretary seeking to know  the Implementation status of the 
foresaid Motion  and i n his res ponse the County Secretary informed the County Assembly  that 
the County government had already started taking steps to implem ent the Motion. Mr. Speaker , 
at the personal level I have been working in co -operation with the County Personnel, to better the 
lives of those affected with autism spectrum disorder , but the eff ort has not been enough, 
therefore I request the Chairman Comm ittee of Implementation, to require and report on the 
Implementation sta tus of the Motion in the County.  Thank yo u, Mr. Speaker.  
 
[The Dep uty Speaker (Hon . Fadhili Makarani) exited  the Chair]  
[The Temporary Speaker (Hon . Abdirahman Abdulkadir) in the Chair]  
 
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadi r):  Thank you .  
 
[Interruption]  
 
Honourable  Allen Katana, please take your seat? Please take your seat!  Yes Clerk?  
 
[Consultation ] 
 
Okay , Chairman Implementation d o you have a response?  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker thank you for giving me this opportunity ; just to see that 
indeed this is a very new Motion to me ! As you look at it , it was a Motion or it was a Statement 
sought during  the Second Assembly and I am not priv y to details but Mr. Speaker I commit to do 
my job an d seek for more clarification from the relevant Departmen t then I will give back  or 
communicate back to the House in two weeks time . Thank you.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Okay Chairman, two weeks it 
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 6 is enough. Yes Clerk?  
 
UPGRADE PLANS FOR MITEDI MKOMANI  AND GUNGOMBE ACCESS ROADS IN MWA KIRUNGE  
 
Honourable  Hamisi Mwinyi , please make your request?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mtoto:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Pursuant to Standing Order 41 (2) (c) I 
seek to request for a statement from the Chairperson Committee on Transport and Infrastructure 
regarding what pl ans the department of Transport and Infrastructure have to upgrade the Mitedi 
access road two kilometers in length , Mikomani access road two kilometers in length and 
Gung’ombe ac cess road two kilometers in length in Mwakirunge which are in deplorable 
condi tion. Honourable  Speaker , in the statement the Chairperson should inquire into and report 
on the plan s the department of Transport and Infrastructure ha ve to enhance the status of th e 
above of the above named.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirah man Abdulk adir) : The Chairperson or rather 
any Committee Member for Transport ? 
 
[Silence ] 
 
Yes, I think we will have it back next Wednesday . Yes, Honourable  Leila?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika naomba samahani 
nilikuwa nimechelewa kidogo na  nilikuwa na statement  yangu nataka kuisoma . 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Proceed?  
 
MEASURES TO MITIGATE AGAINST DISATER DURING IMPENDING ELNINO RAINS  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker , I stand pursuant to Standing order  
41 (2) (c) to request for a statement from the Chairperso n, Committee on Labour and Public 
Administration as follows;  what measures has th e County government put in place against 
disaster during the im pending El -Nino rains in the County to prevent loss of  lives and destruction 
of property . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Yes, Honourable  Mwaura are 
you resp onding?  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker , I thought the Deputy Sp eaker who was sitting on the Chair 
has already rul ed on that matter and he had already taken that matter to the H ouse Business 
Committee because of time Mr. Speaker.  
 
  The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Okay.  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  I wish to seek your indulgence because I had also so ught for two minutes 
just to collect my statement which I was to give but  just because of two minutes I was denied the 
chance . I do not know how it will be i f I was denied that chance and another Hon ourable  
Member who has just  come late would be given a chance but Mr. Speaker due to the…  
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 7  
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Abdirah man Abdulkadir) : Okay, are you making a 
request now or you are making a response ? 
 
Hon. Mwaura : No! No! I was seeking your ruling and you r guidance on that matter.  
 
The Temporary  Speak er (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : I want to believe that the 
reason why the Deputy Speaker referred the matter to the House  Business C ommittee becau se 
the Hon ourable  Member was absent but I thought it wise that now sh e is present and I gave her a 
green ligh t to make the Statement so that is well in order . She  made her statement and i f you 
wish to make your two minutes right now then I will give y ou the opportuni ty to do that. Yes? 
 
 Hon. Makanga:  Sorry Mr. Speaker for the directions you are giving . I see a s cenario Mr. 
Speaker where in the future records will have already bee n taken by Hansard and directions 
given and then from your seat Mr. Speaker you move away from the same very decision made on 
that Holy seat to  again re -introduce a House Business that ha s already been determined and 
already in record of the Hansard. So , I wish Mr. Speaker whatever decision that has already been 
made from the same seat  that you are sitting we wait for the next House B usiness for a 
determination. Otherwise , the Hansard will  have a very hard time to edit and they will be 
shocked to  realize the decisions made on that seat are not binding Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Te mporary Speaker (Hon. Abdul rahman Abdi kadir) : I am surprised th at you are 
more concerned with the work of the Hansard  than the decision of the Hon ourable  Speaker! So 
just take your s eat please.  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 Hon. Makanga:  It is a House of records am  not complaining . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Ab dulrahman Abdi kadir) : It is ok take your seat now, 
thank you.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
You are up on a Point of Order?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdul rahman Abdi kadir) : Ok proceed.  
 
Hon. Katana:  You know me I like learning new things Mr. Speaker . I was also asking 
whether it is in order for the  Honourable Member to  put you in order Mr. Speaker , not unless he 
cites a Standing Order that is in our Standing Orders that he has the mandate to pu t you in order . 
Thank you.  
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 8 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdul rahman Abdi kadir) :  Thank you  for your defense 
but the right Honourable Member has a right to questio n my rulings without disrespecting me 
and I searched that and found that to be w ell in order. I would refer you to Standing Order 
No.37(2), that Businesses shall be disposed off in the sequences in whic h it appears in the Order 
Paper or in such other seque nce as the Honourable Speaker may for the convenience of the 
County Assembly dir ect. So, I directed that Hon ourable  Leila make her Statement and now 
without further engagements with you, I will give two minutes to Hon ourable  Mwaura or rather 
one minute to Hon ourable  Mwaura to … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
Are you making a response or you are making a Statement yourself?  
 
Hon. Mwa ura: A response.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdul rahman Abdi kadir): A response ; okay you made a 
Statement , you wanted Hon ourable  Mwaura to respond to that Statement. Hon ourable Mwaura 
you ha ve two minutes to …, Chairperson  Labour , yes, he is not around . Any Member of the 
Commi ttee?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Okay back to House Business. Hon ourable  Mwaura , have  your two minutes . Honourable  
Leila you have any issue?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdu lrahman Abdi kadir) : Another Statement?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Yes Mr. Speaker , I have another Statement  here.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdul rahman Abdi kadir) : 30 seconds . 
 
MITIGATION MEASURES AGAINST CHOLERA OUTBREAK  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ok. Thank you , Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to Standing Order 
No.41 (2C) I request a Statement f rom the Chairperson Committee on He alth on the outbreak of 
cholera in Mombasa County as follows : We kindly request that the Statement provided inclu des 
but it is not limited to the following information.  
1. Details of the current s tatus of cholera outbreak in cluding the number of the confirmed  
cases, hospitalization and fertilities ,  
2. An outline of the Public Health Awareness Champaign and educational ini tiatives aimed 
at informing the public about cholera pre vention, symptoms and tr eatmen t. 
3. A summary of the me asures taken to ensure the safety o f our water supply, sanitation 
systems, and food distribution networks to prevent further contamination.  
4. The a llocation of financial resources and emergency funding for cholera outbreak 
response and mitigation efforts.  
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 9 5. Information on any restrictions , advisories, or guidelines issued to the public to 
reduce the risk of cholera transmission.  
6. Future plans and strategies for ongoing monitoring, containment, and prevention 
of cholera outbre aks in Mombasa County.  
 
Thank  you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Spe aker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, thank you . Honourable  
Mwaura are you ready yeah yeah sorry that statement was  addressed to Committee on Health . I 
think we will expect a response from them in two wee ks? Is that okay in two week s time  please ? 
Yes, Honourable  Mwaura ? 
 
Hon. Mwaura: Mr. Speaker thank you for giving me this oppo rtunity . I was interjecting 
the Hon ourable  Member because she has so many statements including this one that I am 
responding to and maybe I may ask the Serjeant to pl ease give to the Members the respon se that 
I am just to read right now . Mr. Speaker , we had a statement request from the very Hon ourable  
Member f or Kipevu Leila Nyache which came sometimes back and I wish to respond it now  Mr. 
Speaker . Honourable  Speaker , I wish to ad dress the statement issued by Hon ourable  Leila 
Nyache MCA Kipevu Ward regarding the status of implementation of the resolution on inclusion 
of kiosk trad ers as beneficiaries of Mombasa County revolving fund loans . Honourable  Speaker , 
the Committee on Implementation had previously requested the relevan t of information from the  
department of Youth Gender and Sports and Social Services regarding the aforementioned  matter 
in response the department informed the Committee the resolution which w as adopted by the 
County Ass embly during its 23rd Sitting on Tu esday 28th March, 2023 has yet to be put into 
action . In the interim it has been forwarded to the County Executive  for assessment and advice.  
Honourable  Speaker , the Committee on Implementation convene d a meeting on Wednesday 4th 
October , 2023 at 9:00a.m  in the Commit tee room one to deliberate on the department response 
the Committee has determined that the department response w as unsatisfactory consequently the 
Committee intends to invite the County Secret ary for a meeting to obtain other clarification on 
the matter a t hand . Honourable  Speaker attached his letter from the Department of Youth, 
Gender and sport and Social Services . Thank you , Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , that is what I was 
asking the Sergeant -At-Arms  to provide the statements t o the Hono urable Members  because I 
know the statements are available.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Mwaura , the 
Chairperson of  Implementation  you were telling me the response you got from the Department of 
Youth Gender , Sports and S ocial Service was not satisfactory to your level?  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker…  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Did I get that corr ect? 
 
Hon. Mwaura: Mr. Speaker , the response that we got as a Committee  was not 
satisf actory according to me and the M embers of the Commit tee and we decided that we must 
give out this Report today because it has taken time in our desk and maybe the Ho nourable  
Member could have thought that we are not wil ling to follow up on the matter and t hat is why 
Mr. Speaker I really wanted to give this Report  today so that we may seek for more time as we 
invite the C ounty Secretary  to shed more light on the same issue . 
October 4, 2023                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                          75 
DISCLAIMER: The elect ronic version of t he Off icial Hansard Report is for i nformation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor  Page 10   The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Okay so this letter written by  
the County Chief O fficer Yo uth, Gender, Sports and Social Serv ices you were not satisfied with 
it? So am advising perhaps you could call in the Chief  Officer as opposed to the  county Secretary 
because it is the Chief  Officer that responded to this just my  humble advice.  
 
Hon. Mwaura: Mr. Speaker according to the  letter if you go down the last paragraph , they 
say Chief Officer responds  that, if I may, ‘granted that there  was a policy shift, to operationaliz e 
the proposed governors airlift programs  through the revolving fund th e decision of the county 
Assembly a dopted that its 23rd Sitting held  on Tuesday  28th M march 2023 will have be referred 
to the County executive for determination and a dvice ’. Mr. Speaker , the reason as to why we saw 
it best to inv ite the County Secretary is because  it seems since that time wh en we passed that 
Motion  and it is sometime in M arch, up to this moment it has not reached the tip of Executive  for 
determination.  Mr. Speaker that is why we wanted to seek clarification from  the County 
Secret ary as to the reason for which h e has not com municated to the Executive  the resolutions of 
this House Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkad ir): Okay, we stand guided as well. 
So, we will w ait for a response from you in t wo weeks is that okay . 
 
Hon. Mwaura: Yes Mr. Speaker ?  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Leila is that okay 
as well?  
 
Hon. Nyache : Okay Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank  you. Yes  Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNM ENT  
 
This House stands adjourned until Tuesday  10th Octobe r, 2023 at 10:00am. Thank you . 
 
The House rose at  4:07p.m. 
 
 