September 10 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 10th September , 2019  
The House met at 10:30a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members, You may be seated . Yes Clerk , next order ? 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Hon. Members good morning once again . I wish to extend a warm welcome to you ; we 
meet ag ain after being away for the recess which commenced on Thursday, 8th August, 2019 and 
ended on Monday 9th September, 2019 in line with our County Assembly Calendar. I know it has 
been a long recess and definitely you have had a lot of activities with your electorate and 
families.   
Hon. Members as we are all aware, there has been a stalemate in Parliament for the past 
three months over which amount of shareable reve nue should be allocated to the Counties. As a 
result, Counties are yet to receive their share o f the nationally raised revenue due to the delayed 
enactment of the Division of Revenue Bill , 2019. However, the stalemate between the National 
Assembly and the Senate is over, and the Division of Revenue Bill , 2019 is expected to be 
passed. Thereafter, the Counties will be able to access their share of the revenue.  
 Hon. Members,  I would like to commend our Governor His Excellency Hassan Ali Joho 
for his leadership, in making sure that the County government of Mombasa continued to deliver 
services to t he residents of Mombasa despite the de lay in funding by the National government. 
Moving forward, it is our hope that under our Governor 's stewardship, Mombasa County will 
ascend to even higher heights.  
 Hon. Members,  as you are all aware, top on the l ist of the pending business is the 
Mombasa County Investment Authority Bill, 2019. The Bill has already been subjected to the 
First Reading on Tuesday 23rd July, 2019 during  the 63rd Sitting and thereafter public 
participation was conducted.  I therefore urg e the relevant Committee to fast -track the tabling of 
the public participation report, for the subsequent stages of the Bill to be undertaken. The Bill 
once passed w ill enhance investments in the County. In the same breath, I wish to encourage 
Members to c ontinue generating more Bills in order to provide a legal  framework for other 
important County functions.   

September 10 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Members,  during the recess period, the County hosted its annual Mombasa 
Agricultural Soc iety of Kenya Show. The County government was well  represented with both 
the County government and the County Assembly having exhibition stands at the show. It is my 
hope that the residents and other visitors learned a few things about our County and how we can 
improve it.   
 Hon. Members,  the Count y Assemblies Sports Association (CASA) games are scheduled 
to start in Uasin Gishu County on Friday, 27th September, 2019 and end on Saturday, 5th 
October , 2019. It is my hope that the preparations are well underway for the different disciplines 
and that wh en the time comes, those who will be representing the County Assembly will be able 
to perform well.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Hon. Members,  the County Assembly is a House o f rules and decorum and as such  we 
must st rive at all times to give this House a good image. We must remain alive to the values that 
we stand for as County Assembly of Mombasa and as espoused in Chapter six of the 
Constitution and the Leadership and Integrity Act.  
 Once again, Hon. Members,  may I take this opportunity to officially welcome all of you 
and wish you fruitful engagements and deliberations.  
  
(Applause ) 
 
 I thank y ou all. Clerk , next order . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 10th September, 2019 at 
10:00a.m.  
 
The House rose at 10:40 a.m. 
 