September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 27th September,  2018  
The House met at 3:45p.m. 
 
(The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Have your seats, y es Clerk?  
MESSAGES  
Hon.  Memb ers we have received a letter from His Excellency Governor Ali Hassan Joho 
regarding the nomination of Chief Officer Vision 2035 under the Department of Education, 
Information Technology and Mombasa Vision 2035. Yes Clerk?  
PAPERS  
Yes the Chairperson  Commit tee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I beg to lay this P aper. 
Thank you.  
(Report of the Finance, Budget and Appropriation Committee  on the Mombasa County 
Finance Bill , 2018  
(Paper laid)  
The Depu ty Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENTS  
NOMINATION OF CHIEF OFFICER VISION 2035  IN THE DEPARTMENT OF  EDUCATION , 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND MOMBASA VISION 2035  MR ALPHONSE MRIMA  
Yes Leader of Majority Party . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank  you Mr. Speaker to give me this 
opportunity to have a statement. Mr. S peaker Sir, I wish to give the g overnment position on 
nomination of Mr.  Alphonce  Haro  Mrima as the Chief Officer Vision 2035 in the Department 
of Education, Information Technology and M ombasa Vision 2035.  

September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 Mr. Speaker Sir, Mr.  Alphonce is an officer who has served in the Department of 
Education as Chief Officer prior to his appointment. He was vetted by  the relevant 
Committee  and a report was tabled in this Assembly on 2nd April , 2014 wh ich approved his 
nomination.  
Mr. Speaker Sir since his appointment Mr.  Alphonce  Haro  Mrima  has diligently served 
the County Government of Mombasa and to the best to my knowledge he is still fit to hold 
office. The decision not to conduct a fresh vetting on  Mr. Alphonce  Haro  Mrima is borrowed 
from what happened in the National Assembly where six Cabinet Secretaries who had served 
in the first term of His Excellency President Uhuru  Muigai Kenyatta were not subjected to a 
fresh vetting process when they were n ominated to serve in his second term. So Mr. Speaker 
Sir, I therefore maintain that Mr.  Alphonce  Mrima is fit to continue holding office as Chief 
Officer Vision 2035 and I hope Members  will support it. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalim u): Thank you Leader of Majority and as t he Leader 
of Majority has asked  for support from this Honourable  House I will give a chance to the 
Hon.  Members  to at least say something either you approve or you reject whatever that was 
said by the Ma jority, yes Hon. Bwire ? 
Hon.  Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker since there is no one with a contrary 
opinion and because we  also have a lot of work ahead of us I would wish that we just move 
on. Thank you.  
(Question put)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Hon.  Members  I will put a question on the same .  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
      Yes Clerk?   
STATEMENT  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Chairperson Committee  on Justice and Legal 
Affairs or the Leader of Majority ? 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwid ani): Mr. Speaker I would like to ask my fellow 
Chairman Hon. Juma  Renson  Thoya , he can respond on this one. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Hon. Juma  Renson  Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker . The statement is ready  and I would req uest this 
House to give us time so that we can go through the clerical work that has been done  by both 
two Committee s. I should be very certain that the earliest day possible for you next week but 
it is already with us but we want to call both Committee s to go through it after the clerical 
work that have  been done. Thank you.   
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Ok, so next week Thursday you will respond on 
the same. Yes Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
Chairperson Committee  on Transport, Infrastruct ure and Public Works Ho n. Prisc illa 
Mumba . 
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker I had an opportunity to go and talk to 
the Waziri about this issue yesterday  because Waziri was not around for sometime and I 
needed to talk to the  Waziri himself as you know I have  been in  the s eat for less than a 
month, so I had to clarify some issues including this issue and Waziri  promised…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): So you are trying to say that you are not 
ready with the response?  
Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : Yes, but the Waziri  promised  me that by next week he will 
compile this report and bring it  to me.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Ok, she has asked for one more week, so 
next week Thursday  we are hoping to have the response. Yes Clerk?  
DILAPIDATING STATE O F ACCESS ROAD TO  MWAKIRUNGE DUMPSITE  
Hon. Feddis  Mbura . 
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir , I seek to know 
from the Chairperson Committee  on Environment, S olid waste management and E nergy 
whether he is aware that the access road leading to Mwakir unge dumpsite is in dilapidating  
condition and whether the County g overnment has any plans of putting murram on the road , a 
short term measure to ease the accessibility to the dumpsite. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Chairpe rson Committe e on 
Environment, Solid waste management and E nergy? Yes Hon. Charles Kitula ? 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa  ningependa  kupata  muongozo  wako  
ikiwa taarifa  hii ni sawa  iweze  kupelekwa katika  Idara  ya Mazingira au Idara  ya Uchukuzi  
naona  imekoseka  kidogo.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Hon. Feddis  Mbura . You wanted a 
response from Chairperson Public Works and Infrastructure? Or Chairpe rson Committee  on 
Environment, s olid waste of which  to my understanding you are a M ember of that Committee  
and the Vice Chair of the same Committee . 
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura : Ahsante  sana Bwana Spika. M imi ningeomba  tu Kamati  ya 
Mazingira  ambapo  mimi  ni Naibu  Mwenyekiti  na Kamati  ya Uchukuzi  wakae  pamoja  ili 
waweze  kuweka  barabara  ama murram  mahali pale jaa  liko kwa sababu saa hii kusema  kweli  
hali ni mbaya  na ni ngumu  sana kwa upande  wa uchukuzi, upande  pia wa barabara. Kwa  
hivyo  hao watu  wawili  wakae  pamoja  ili waweze  kuniletea  majibu  wana  mikakati  gani.  
Ahsante  sana.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ): Thank you Hon. F eddis  Mbura we have 
noted your point I will direct you as the Vice Chair to talk to your Chair and the Chairman 
Committee  on Transport and Infrastructure for you to convey in your own meetings and 
hopefully you will come with an agreement which you will be  a benefit to you and your 
people from Mwakirunge before asking that question or bringing the statement to this Hon.  
House . If the meetings will bring no fruits then you can bring the question this Hon.  
Assembly. Yes Clerk?  
INSTALLATION OF HIGH MAST LIGHTI NG IN FRERE TOWN  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 Yes Hon. Charles Juma  Kitula.  
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee  on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works if he is aware that some densely 
populated areas are yet to be installed w ith high mast lighting and as a result posing security 
threat to the residents and negatively impacting on productive economic activities  and what 
plans the County g overnment have to install this high mast lighting in this areas in order to 
provide securit y and surveillance and create conducive environment for economic activities 
within the County. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Chairperson Committee  on Transport and 
Infrastructure and Public Works?  
Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Ahsante  Mheshimiwa  Spika  nafikiri  haya ndio majukumu  ambayo  
tunatarajiwa  kuyapa  majibu  wakati  hata nikileta  hata hizo ripoti  zengine  zote kwa jumla  kwa 
sababu  ni kitu saa hizi kimekuja  kwa Bunge na  ni lazima  nitakapokuwa  nina leta majibu  ni ya 
lete kwa pamoja.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): So you are trying to say that in a week’s time  
you will be having all the responses or we give you more time?  
Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : I think they are more issues, so I think I need even more time a 
little bit longer so that I ca n arrange all the issues and lay them at once. Two weeks can be 
possible with me because they are even more than this still laying on my desk so I need 
quality time so that I can work on this.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Yes Chief Whip?  
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa  Spika  nafikiri  Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati  ya 
masuala  ya Usafiri  na Uchukuzi  ameweza  kulizungumzia  suala  hili lakini  nikama  anabeba  
mzigo  huu kwa jukumu  akiwa peke  yake lakini  ningependa  kufahamisha  kwamba  ana Naibu 
wake kwa  hivyo  asibebe  majukumu  haya kama  yeye Mwenyekiti  peke  yake ila Naibu wake 
aweze  kufanya  kazi ipasavyo  ili tuweze  kuletewa  majibu  kwa wakati  unaofaa.  
Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Ahsante  Mheshimiwa  Spika  lakini  nikiwa  mimi  ni kiongozi  
ambaye  ninajiamini  kwa kazi tunayoifanya…  
(Applause)  
Na nikiwa  katika Bunge hili  kama  kichwa cha Kamati  ambayo  inalimbikiziwa  
majukumu  ni lazima  nijikabi li vilivyo  kama  kiongozi  ndipo  sasa nikitoka  hapa niweze  kukaa  
na wenzangu  wahusika  ambae  ni mdogo  wangu  na Kamati  yangu  lakini  si wajibu  kuwa  
nisem e kuwa  hao hapa nitakaa  na wengine  na kichwa  ni mimi . Kwa hivyo  majukumu  yote 
yako  juu yangu  na kwa sababu  niko katika Bunge  ikiwa  siko katika Bunge ndio pale mdogo  
wangu  anaweza  kuchukua  hatamu  na kufanya  haya  majukumu…  
(Applause)  
Lakini  ikiwa  mwenyewe  niko, niko  na wakati  muafaka  wa kujieleza  na kusema  kuwa  
niko tayari  kufanya  haya majukumu  ambayo  nimeweke wa. 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Hon. S amba a statement is not debated.  
Hon.  Samba : No, I am not debating.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Ok, what is it?  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker , the Chairperson concerned Hon. Mumba and she has 
been very categorical and I have been requesting that whenever they have made a request that 
they be given an appropriate time. Mr. Speaker we are going to give them two weeks  or three  
and then when they c ome back it will be the same th ing, same issues.  Mr. Speaker…  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M walimu ): Order! Order! Order Members ! Order!  
Hon.  Samba : Mr. Speaker let us give her enough time so that when she wi ll be back, 
she gives  us the exact information that we need. Hon. Speaker I am not opposing her but for 
those people...  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just give him time I will give you the chance.  
Hon.  Samba : For the Hon . Members  who have... maybe they seemed like they are 
hired. I have not hired anybody ... 
(Interruption)  
But Hon . Speaker…  
 (Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Order Members ! 
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker my concern is very genuine I don’t see the re ason why a n 
Hon. Member should heckle me.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay . 
Hon. Samba:  I am on the floor.  
(Interruption)  
And she can’t even…  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order Members ! Order! Thank you 
Hon. Samba .  
Hon.  Samba:  Hon. Speaker my concern is; let us give her enough time when…  
(Interruption)  
When she ha s enough time, when she will be back she will give us appropriate 
answer s that we need, thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you.  Hon. Shilla h Mumba 
Chairperson Transport , Public Works as you have stated before this Honorable House that 
you have a lot of work, so the House will give you a time limit of now in a month’s  time you 
complete all your pending issues and bring them to this Hon orable House. You will program 
yourself plus your Committee  on how you are going to be responding to whatever has been 
raised today and the previous responses that are p ending.  
(Applause ) 
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Yes Clerk . 
POOR CONDITION OF HOL Y CROSS CATHOLIC LAKE CHURCH CHAANI TO MIGADINI MWISHO 
ROAD  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith?  
Hon. (Ms.) Faith Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I am stand ing under S tanding 
Order 41 (c) . I would like to enquire from the C hairperson on Committee  on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works if she is aware of the poor condition of Holy Cross Catholic 
Lake Church  Chaani to Migadini Mwisho road and what st eps the County g overnment will 
undertake to reme dy this situation. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Chairperson Committee  on Transport and 
Public Works, d o you have a response?   
Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ninaona Bunge hili kweli lina  
majukumu ya kutaka Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi afanye kazi kuliko zaidi ya kazi na 
nitaifanya zaidi y a hiyo kazi wanayoitaka. .. 
(Applause ) 
Na mimi nataka kuhakikishia J umba hili ... nafikiri hakuna ambaye hajui matatizo 
ambayo yamekuwako katika uongozi wa Kamati ya  Uchukuzi  ndiposa matatizo 
yakalimbikizana kwa muda mrefu na kama mnavyojua pia mvua imenyesh a kuanzia jana 
matatizo yamezidi kulim bikizana.  Kwa hivyo ninaahidi J umba hili kama nilivyoambiwa na 
Spika nipatieni muda wa mwezi mmoja tukiwa na Kamati yangu vilevile tuweze kutatua kila 
tatizo moja baada ya jengin e na kabisa pia kama kuna wale W aheshim iwa ambao hawajaleta 
ripoti yao leo hapa ofisi na nafikiri Mheshimiwa Spika nikiwa nikijibu hivi pia ninaomba 
pendekezo kutoka kwako uwezo kunitetea niweze kupata ofisi nyengine katika Jumba hili 
maana kama unavyoona matatizo yanapoletwa yaweze  kuletwa kat ika ofisi yangu katika 
Jumba hili kwa wakati unaofaa ndio niweze kuyatatua . Hii ni  kwa sababu hii ni wizara yenye 
matatizo na yenye mzigo mkubwa na yenye ma jukumu maku bwa sitaki niwe nikipitapita 
huku kama panya  route  alafu kisha nina kuja hapa kuulizwa ma swali wakati sijui pengine 
yangekuwa yamefika katika meza yangu katika J umba hili  pengine kutoka asubuhi na mimi 
ninasikia niko na homa vibaya sana lakini kwa sababu ya kupenda kazi yangu na majukumu 
yangu ndiposa niko hapa wakati huu kuyajibu ninaomba wak ati m unaleta haya mashtaka na  
munitetea nipate ofisi katika J umba hili.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Hon. Priscilla Mumba. You 
have asked for time the Assembly has given you time so it is upon you to work on the time. 
Yes Clerk?  
(Chief  Whip (Hon.  Kitula ) rose)  
Yes Hon. Chief W hip? 
Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Mr. S peaker I seek to know from the Chair person 
Committee  on Youth , Gender , Sports and Cultural Affairs if he is  aware that some County 
employees have been posting tremendous results in national sports sco oping awards in 
different categories and w hether the C ounty government has  any plans to reward such 
employees as a way of motivating them. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Chief Whip . Yes Hon. Aran 
Moses Chairperson, Committee  on Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs.  
Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker before I respond I  fail to understand Hon. Chief 
Whip  he is a M ember of my Committee  he could have ask ed in our Committee  meeting that 
we had, so we should avoid conflict of interest or lack of information. Mr. Sp eaker to respond 
to what Chief W hip has r aised  I am aware and together with my de partment we are working 
on it so give us two weeks and we shall submit the report. Thank you . 
The Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you and the last statement will be 
from Hon. Raphael Bwire.  
Hon. Bwire:  Shukran Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika ina onekana leo ilikuwa 
ni siku ya K amati ya uchukuzi kwa sababu si maonevu lakini tunatoa hoja ambazo ziko 
mashina ni ambazo zinatuathiri sisi kama viongozi na watu wetu. Mheshimiwa kabla 
hatujaenda mapumzikoni nilileta hapa swala la barabara ya Junda;  jana na juzi mvua 
imenyesha Mheshimiwa hakupitiki. Watu jana wamekat wa mapanga askari wameshindwa 
kufika kuokoa watu k wa sababu gari halipiti kumekuwa na sh ida kubwa sana katika hali 
hiyo, n diposa leo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba Kamati hii ya U chukuzi endapo kesho 
watapata muda tuandamane tukaangalie ile  shida ambayo inakumba wale watu ili tuangalie ni 
vipi tutaweza wasaidia watu wetu wa Kaunti ya Mombasa. Ahsante . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Shilla Mumba, Chairpe rson 
Committee  on Transport , Infrastructure and Public Works will your Committee  be available 
to go wit h Hon. Bwire to Junda. Yes the V ice Chair ? 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante san a Bwana Spika nikiweza kumsaidia 
Mwenyekiti wangu ambaye yuko pale naona leo mumetuvamia sana kama mlivyosema 
Kamati yetu ina  majukumu mengi na ni kweli nataka kumuambia Mheshimiwa Bwire…  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just inform the Chair .  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Kwa kweli K amati yetu ya  Uchukuzi  ilikumbwa na 
matatizo ndip osa kwamba haya maswala haya yote yamerundi kizana kwa kusema kweli 
umesema hata watu wana katwa mapanga mimi mwenyewe ni M wenyek iti pia kwangu 
mlangoni hakuna taa…  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Member, respond on what Hon.  Bwire 
has raised!  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante sana kwa  hio napenda kukuhakikishia kwamba 
swali hili tutashughulika tukiweko pamoja na Mwenyekiti wangu pamoja na Kamati. 
Ahsante . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Bwire has asked that if it is possible 
you go on a site visit to Junda Ward. So respond on that please?  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Hatuwezi kwenda atupatie muda sio kesho,  tutampatia 
muda na tuta mueleza tut aenda lini pamoja na K amat i yote.  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : And you have to p ut in mind that it is an 
urgent issue  because the road is impassable.  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Naomba Mwenyekiti wangu tukae tupange n a 
Mwenyekiti wangu.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you, so Hon. Bwire you will sit 
with the Chairperson and Vice Chair for you to plan on when they will visit Junda Ward.  
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker of c ourse I respect you r directives but I brou ght it here and 
I wanted the directives to come from this Assembly whether it is possible for the Committee  
to have a site visit tomorrow or not? If it was a kamukunji then I would have sorted it outside 
there Mr. Speaker please. Thank you.  
The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes the Majority l eader is up . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Yes Mr. Speaker  let us sometimes look into 
issues , In fact what he raised , the h onourable of Junda is something very serious  in my 
opinion.  I would rather say that the Members  can just be organised tomorrow with transport 
so that they can go physically and see how things are  so that we see the way forward becau se 
if people are now being cut b y knives and it is impossible even for the transport of the police 
to reach then i t is a very big issue. So Mr. Speaker with due respect, I would wish that the 
Committee  tomorrow by ten ‘o’ clock they can acc ompan y the Member of County Assembly 
of that area so that they can see the issue physically. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Lucy, are you a M ember of that 
Committee ? 
Hon. (Ms.) Chireri : No. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : If not let the Chair respond on what has been 
raised Yes Hon. Chair?  
Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nimesikia kilio ambacho 
kimeletwa katika N yumba hii na mimi kama kiongozi wa Kamati hii ameniomba 
Mheshimiwa kuwa twende kesho tukaangalie hali ilivyo na mimi hapo kesho nilikuwa 
nimepanga nipeleke haya makaratasi yangu pahali husika kwa sababu ya hali ya dharur a hata 
hizi zengine ambazo ziko m aana yake zote ni zadharura. Kwa hivyo ninamuomba na 
ninaomba Mheshimiwa Spika anipe hata kama ni siku mbili ndio niweze  kutatua na Kamati 
yangu ndio tujue tutaenda kuangalia hiyo hali ilivyo vipi?  Kwa sababu huwezi kusema 
umepanga leo kwa leo na kesho uniamulie kwenda na hujui mwenyewe n imepanga mikakati 
gani mi ngine p ia ambayo iko katika kazi zangu . Kwa hivyo ameleta hoja na mimi kama 
Mwenyekiti nitachukua jukumu hilo kwa siku mbili nitamjibu ili  tupange na K amati yangu 
ndio tuweze  kuenda hapo mahali.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think I had directed that the Chair, t he 
Honorable Member from Junda Ward to sit with the Chair, Transport and Infrastructure and 
the Vice C hair to plan on whe n they will be going to Junda so as a d irective from the 
Speaker, just sit and plan when to visit but it should not take more than five days. Yes Clerk?  
(Hon. (Ms.) Chireri rose)  
Yes Hon. Lucy ? What is it Hon. Lucy? Is it a statement?  
Hon. (Ms.) Chireri : Ndio, Mheshimiwa Spika.  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mwalimu) : With due respect…  
Hon. (Ms.) Chireri : Niko na burning issue , kwa heshima na taadhima Mheshimiwa 
Spika niruhusu kidogo , ni jambo la kuhuzunisha sana ambalo niko nalo. Juzi siku ya 
Jumatatu katika eneo la kwangu Mheshimiwa Spika kuna m toto wa miaka minane sehemu ya 
Kiembeni aliweza kubakwa na Pastor . Mheshimiwa S pika mtoto yule alichukuliwa moja kwa 
moja mpaka hospitall i yetu kuu w alipofika pale ni hali ya kuhuzunisha mwanzo wa saa tano 
asubuhi mpaka yaelekea saa moja  yule mtoto alikuw a haj apata huduma ilinibidi nipigie  
Naibu Mwenyekiti wangu wa Kamati ya Afya akaweza kuwajibika , nikampigia Waziri 
akawajibika kwa lile jambo.  Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa Kamati ya afya iweze kuzuru ile 
sehemu ambayo watot o wetu wakibakwa wanahudumiawa l akini s ehemu ile ikif ika saa kumi 
imefungwa unaambiwa njoo kesho. Mtoto akibakwa ama mtu y eyote akibakwa huwa kuna 
masaa ambayo ni akae yakipita yale masaa kam a ni ugonjwa atakuwa ameubeba ule ugon jwa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni hali ya kuhuzumisha sana pale kama wataku wa na yale masaa; hizi 
kesi za kubakwa zimezidi hivi ninavyokuambia sehemu ya Mwakirunge mama Fed dies saa 
hii yuko na matanga , kuna kijana alibaka ndu gu yake akamshikisha mimba jana walivyofika 
kwa kesi ikawa waende hosp itali apimwe kijana huyo amejiu a leo leo. Hivi leo amejitoa 
uhai!  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So that is a statement on another statement . 
Hon. (Ms.) Chireri:  Ndio Mheshimiwa Spika ubakaji umezidi Mombasa Kaunti,  hili 
swala tumechoka nalo.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwali mu): Thank you Hon. Lucy . 
Hon.  (Ms.) Chireri : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Committee  of the Health , any response 
on the issue from Hon. Lucy ? She wants you to go to Coast General Hospital.  
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kama unavyojua mimi 
ndio Naibu M wenyekiti wa Kamati ya Afya; mtenda  kazi, mchapa kazi. Mheshimiwa Spika 
nafikiri kama sijakosea Mheshimiwa amesema aliweza kuhudumiwa japo kuwa ni kuchelewa 
kidogo lakini aliweza kuhudumiwa. Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa sababu kitengo cha afya 
Mombasa kaunti hakina dharau na mtu yoyote Mheshimiwa Spika na tutazi di kuwahudumia 
watu wa Mombasa K aunti na pia tutaweka vituo katika kila W odi ili watoto wakiweza 
kupatikana na mambo ya ubakaji waweze kuhudumiki wa haraka iwezekanavyo. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Vice Chair. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
Yes Chairman , Committee  on Finance, Budget and Appropriation ? 
Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speak er I beg to  move the 
following M otion ; 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved the Motion)  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 That this House adopt the report of the Finance, Budget and Appropriation Committee  
on the Mombasa County Finance  Bill, 2018 laid on the table on Thursday 27th 
September , 2018.  
Thank you M r. Speaker I beg to move Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is your Seconder?  
(Silence ) 
(Leader of Majority ( Hon.  Mwidani ) bowed ) 
I now propose that the Motion on adoption of report of the Finance, Budget and 
Appropriation Committee  on th e Mombasa County Finance Bill be debated in this 
Honourable  House. Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kwenye Nyumba hii kuomba 
Waheshimiwa kama wameweza pitia hii ripoti, tuweze kuipitisha. Kwani Mheshimiwa Spika 
tuliweza kukaa  kama Kamati ya fedha na tukaweza kuleta hii ripoti iliyosainiwa na 
wanachama wote , kwani sote tuliku baliana juu ya hii ripoti. Mheshimiwa Spika tumeweza 
kueleza juu ya public participation  vipi ilifanyika  na maoni ya watu kwa mujibu ya Finance 
Bill tukach ukua na tukakubaliana kuwa tumefu ata zile sheria zote zinazotakikana . Kama 
unavyojua public participation  ilifanyika Tononoka Social Hall tarehe nane mwezi w a tisa 
2018 na tukaweza kuchuku a maoni ya watu waliokuwa huko tulipopokea ripoti kutoka kwa 
executi ve wa finance  na pia tuliweza hapa ndani ya B unge  chumba cha mikutano  tuliweza 
kupokea watu kuja na maoni yao na pia w atu walioweza kuandika ikiwemo Kituo cha S heria , 
Lengo  na chama cha  Mugoka na wengineo . Mheshimiwa Spika kumekuja na makaratasi yao 
ambayo  walitukabidhi na tukaweza kupitia yale makaratasi  na kama unavyojua v yengine 
vimekuba lika na v yengine havikukubalika na pia tumeweza kukaa sisi kama W aheshimiwa 
pia nao tukas ikiza maoni ya W aheshimiwa kabla kufika ndani ya N yumba hii tukaweza 
kuchuku a mao ni ya W aheshimiwa ndipo hapa leo tumefika na kukubaliana k usema leo 
kuweza kuipitisha hii.  
Kwa hivyo sina mengi ya kuzungumza isipokuwa naomba Nyumba hii ipitishe hii 
ripoti ili tuweze kuendelea mbele na kushu ghulika na hii Finance Bill na pia nataka kusem a 
kuwa kwenye mapendekezo yetu kuwa N yumba hii ikubali ripoti ya  Kamati ya Fedha pia 
Nyumba hii i idhinishe hii ripoti ya Kamati ya Fedha na marekebisho ili  kama kutakuwa na 
jambo lolote ama kuna shida yoyote , kwa hivyo i beg to move that Hon . Members  of th is 
Assembly do adopt, thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Members , yes Hon . Fatma Mote ? 
Hon.  (Ms.)  Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Namshukuru 
Mwenyezi Mungu mimi pia niko katika Kamati ya Fedha  lakini vilevile sikuweza 
kukubali ana na mambo ya Mugokaa  Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa hivyo naomba hili swala 
liweze kuangaliwa kwa kina, a hsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Fatma Mote from the minutes that we 
have we are seeing nowhere that you have opposed or  raised any issue concerning Mugok aa, 
are you opposing it on the floor of the House or from the Committee  level? Yes C hairman ? 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri hii N yumba ni ya sheria 
ukiangalia kwenye ripoti number 5 kuna s ahihi  ambayo imeku baliana na hii r ipoti sasa naona 
kuwa sijui kitu gani kimemfanya kusema yeye anapinga hii ripoti.  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : That's why am saying from the minutes we 
are seeing nowhere or any concern that you have raised in the Committee  level oppo sing the 
issue of Mugoka a you have raised , so my question is are you opposing on the floor of the 
House or during the Committee  meeting . 
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika katika Whole House  Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Okay  thank you , then we are yet to go to the 
Whole House Committee  so wait when we proceed to the W hole House Committee  then you 
will r aise your concerns. Y es Hon . Athman Mwam wiri. 
Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, nimesimama k uunga mkono 
ripoti ya K amati ya Fedha  na nikitangaza msimamo wa kwamba mimi ni mkereketo na 
mwanaharakati wa haki za kibinadamu nina wapongeza kwa hatua walizochuku a katika 
mapendekezo ya utekelezaji wa shu ghuli hii ya Finance B ill. Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna kitu 
kinapendeza ka tika serikali ya ugatuzi kama kupeana fursa wananchi kutoa maoni yao na 
kuchangi a pale wanapohisi wamebanwa na K amati h ii pamoja na idara ya fedha na 
mipangilio ya bajeti imeweza kupeana nafasi kwa watu kuja kutoa mapendekezo yao na zaidi 
kupeana nafasi kw a mashirika ya kijamii kuja n a mapendekezo yao kuhusiana na Finance 
Bill ya mwaka huu 2018 /2019. Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti tukiwa hapa sisi kama wa wakilishi 
tupo kwa ajili ya wananchi wetu na mapendekezo haya tumekuja nayo sio mapenzi yetu bali 
ni yale tunayoy achuku a mashinani, kwa hivyo kwa wananchi wetu kupewa fursa moja kwa 
moja na mashirika kupewa fursa moja kwa moja ni hatua ambayo inastahiki tupeane kongole 
kwa Bunge hili na hususan K amati ya  Fedha .... 
(Applause ) 
Kwa hali hii Kaunti ya Mombasa ama B unge h ili litaingia katika daftari la 
kumbukumbu la kwamba lilisimama kidete kusimamia haki za wananchi na kupeana fursa 
kwa wananchi kama inavyotak ikana katika maswala ya ugatuzi. Hivyo basi Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti binafsi naunga mkono ripoti hii na naomba Wahesh imiwa wenzangu tuafikiane 
kwa sababu nafasi ya wananchi wetu walipewa moja kwa moja na mashirika kuwekwa katika 
ripoti hii, a hsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
(Applause ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) :  Yes Members  I can see you have exhausted,  
I will ask the mo ver of the  Motion to respond and we proceed.  
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy: Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika  napongeza  Waheshimiwa  kwa 
kuweza kuona kuwa kazi tumejar ibu kufanya kulingana na sheria , LENGO ina civil societies  
karibu wanachama  walioko karibu wote wa Mombasa kw a hivyo wao walikuja 
wakawakilisha wanachama  wengine na memorandum yao kwa hio  huu ndio mw elekeo 
ambao sisi sasa twatakikana tufuate kwa sababu Mheshimiwa S pika public participation  ni 
demokrasia hiyo ninayos ikia  ugatuzi  ni kwenye Katiba yote ni jambo mo ja tu ya public 
participation  kila mtu anapatiwa uhuru wa kutoa maoni yake . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika 
napongeza N yumba hii kwa kuweza kuiona hii r ipoti kuwa iko ya kisawasawa na pia 
tutaendelea kufanya kazi pamoja na Kamati yetu ya fedha  na W aheshimiwa wo te ili tuweze 
kuhudumia wananchi wa Mombasa . Kwa haya shukran nasema a hsanteni sana . 
(Applause ) 
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon. Members  I now r ise to put a question 
that the Motion on adoption of the rep ort on the Finance, Budget and A ppropriation  
Committee  on the Mombasa C ounty Finance B ill, 2018 be approved in this Hon ourable  
House.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
(Applause ) 
Yes C lerk. 
BILL  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY FINANCE BILL, 2018  
Yes Chairperson , Committee  Finance Budget and Appropriation.  
Hon. Mohame d Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to move that the Finance Bill 
number 4 of 2018 be now read a second time . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes C lerk. 
SECOND READING  
Clerk:  A Bill for an Act of Mombasa County Assembly to provide for the various 
taxes, fees  and charges for services and for the other r evenue raising measures by the C ounty 
government and for  the matters incidental thereto .  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  now that the Bill has been 
read for the second time , second reading you can n ow debate on principals  of the Bill but put 
into consideration that in this stage there are no amen dments until when we go to the W hole 
House, yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I do request this House to disband 
the Assembly and g o for Whole House Committee . Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : It is your request but Hon . Members  it is 
now on you to debate on the Bill before we proceed to the Whole House as requested by the 
Chair and if you have noth ing to say then we will  proceed,  Hon. Members  the principals, 
what you think the C ounty will bring to this Bill, yes Hon . Bwire.  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sometimes the silence means everything is okay 
and I think as requested by the  Chair for the sake of saving time we are contented with the 
document its elf we can as well move to the W hole House. Thank you. 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  I have no objection to resolve 
that the House moves to the Committee  of the Whole House.  
WHOLE HOUSE COMMITTEE  
(Serjea nt-At-Arms lowered the Mace  from the Table ) 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) exited the Chair)  
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
IN THE COMMITTEE  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 (The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Members  welcome to the W hole House Committee  
and it is in this stage th at if you have amendments to any clauses you are at liberty to bring 
the amendments.  
(Loud consultation s) 
 Yes Clerk.  
 Clerk:  The Mombasa County Finance  Bill, 2018 clause 3, 4, 5.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I propose that clause 3 , 4, 5 be part o f the Bill .  
(Silence ) 
 Having  there no debate I now put the question that Clause 3 , 4, 5  be part of the Bill . 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 Clerk:  Clause 6.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chairman . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  (Inaudible) . 
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Be audible Hon. Hatimy, use your microphone, it's 
working.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I propose Mr. Speaker, I propose the Bill be amended in 
Clause 6 sub clause 4 by deleting the   afore said clause in all Mr. Speaker . Thank you.  
(Question p roposed ) 
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members  I now propose that Clause  6 be 
amended by deleting the  afore said clause in whole, 6 (4).  
(Silence ) 
 I now put a question that Clause 6, (4) as amended be part of the Bill? 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 Clerk:  Clause  7, 8, 9, 10, 11 , 12, 13, 14.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I propose that clause 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and  clause 
14 be par t of the Bill? 
(Silence ) 
 Havi ng there no debate I now put a question that clause 7, 8,9,10,11,12.13,14 be part 
of the Bill ? 
(Question put and agreed)  
 Yes Clerk . 
 Clerk:  Clause 15.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy.  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
 Mr. Speaker I do propose that the Bill be amended by renumbering  the existing 
Clause 15 to be Clause 16 and 16 to be 17 and inserting therefore the follo wing words as the 
new Clause 15 , the facility improvement fund shall continue operation until su ch time as the 
Mombasa Health Bill , 2016 is enacted . Thank you, I beg to move.  
(Question proposed)  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now propose that Clause 15 be amended by 
renumbering the existing Clause 15 to  be Clause 16 and Clause 16 to be Clause 17 and 
inserting therefore the following word s as the new Clause 15, the facility improvement fund 
shall continue operation until such time as the Mombasa Health Bill , 2016 is enacted . 
(Silence ) 
 Having  there no debate I now put the question that Clause 15 be amended by 
renumbering  the existing Clause 15 to be Clause 16 and the existing clause 16 to be 17 and 
inserting therefore the follo wing words as the new Clause 15 , the facility improvement fund 
shall continue operation until such time as the Momba sa Health Bill , 2016  is enacted . 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 Clerk:  Schedule of the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2018, item number 1.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Item number 1. Full Hansard transcript, Committee  
minutes, Hansard extracts, Committee  minutes extracts. Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy wha t is 
it, use your mic rophone . 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, schedule 1 item number 1 , I do 
propose that the Bill be amended in the schedule item number 1. R eading full Hansard 
transcript/ Committee  minutes by deleting in the last column 2018/2019 and the figure 500 
and inserting the fi gure 400 in replacement thereof . Thank you Mr. Speaker I request Madam 
Fatma Mote to second.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh : Thank you Mr. Speaker I second.   
(Question p roposed ) 
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  I propose that the amended schedule, 
schedule 1, item  number one that  the Bill be amended in the schedule item number 1  reading 
full Hansard transcript/ Committee  minutes by deleting in the last column 2018/2019 and the 
figure 500 and inserting the figure 400 in replacement thereof . 
(Silence)  
 Hon. Members  as I can see you are all in support of the  amended sc hedule, I now put 
a question that schedule number 1 item number 1 be as amended . 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 Clerk:  Item number 2 of the schedule.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hansard extract plus/ Com mittee  minute extract, yes 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy. Yes proceed.  
(Loud consultation s) 
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I intend to move the 
following amendment s in respect of the Mombasa County Finance Bill number 4 of 2018 at 
the Committee  stage on Thursday 27th September , 2018. Mr. Speaker I propose Clause 
number 6, clause number 15, 6(4), schedule number 1, schedule item number 2,6,8,13, 
52,53,54,55, 56, 261, schedule section 40 n umber 40, item numbers 297,302,  304, 308, 306. 
Sched ule item number, 297, 316,  376, 580, 581. Item number 623,  624, 625, 766,  767, 771, 
819, 820, 921....92 1, 922, 961, 964, 965, 966, 967 . Schedule Item number 1127, 1128, 1129, 
1130, 1131, 1132, 1133, 1134, 1135, 1136, 1137, 1138, 1139, 1140, 1141, 1142, 1143, 1144, 
Schedule Item number 1145, 1146, 1147, 1148, 1149, 1150, 1151, 1152, 1153, 1154, 1155, 
1156, 1157, 1158, 1159, 1160 that be amended in the schedule Item number 1160 reading 
Changamwe one room provision and store by deleting in the last column 2018/2019 fig ure 
5,000 and inserting therefore the figure 7 ,500 in replacement thereof.  Mr. Speaker Schedule 
Item 1161, 1162, 1163, 1164, 1165, 1166, 1167, 1168, 1169, 1170, 1171, 1172, 1173, 1174, 
1175, 1176, 1177, 1178, 1179, 1180, 1181, 1182, and the last one is 1183.  Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Hatimy Chairman Committee  on Finance, 
Budget and Appropriation of all the schedules that you have proposed please declare what is 
your intention on all the schedules that you have read before this Committee , what do you 
want us as Committee  to do?  
 Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker as long as there's no amendment in writing I 
don't think we have any powers to amend anything if it is not in writing...  
(Interruption)  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Hatimy you h ave read all these schedules so we 
want to know what is your intention, do you want us to amend these schedules or what do 
you want us to do?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I think Mr. Speaker I have given you a notice and I will 
read the notice;  
Notice is hereby given that  the Chair Committee  on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriation intend to move the following amendments in respect of the Mombasa 
County Finance Bill No. 4 of 2018 at the Committee  Stage on Thursday 27th 
September, 2018 . 
(Laughter)  
 Mr. Speaker I think the Stan ding Order is very clear ; any amendment must be in 
writing so there's nothing, we have n't seen any amendm ent so I want you to put a question so 
that we can ...  
(Loud Consultations)  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members  I would like to bring to your  attention 
that Standing Order 126 Procedure of the Committee  of the Whole House in the County 
Assembly on a Bill ;  
(Chairperson ( Hon. Mwalimu ) read) 
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16 126 (2) No amendment shall be moved to any part of the Bill by any Member, other 
than the Member in charge of the Bill, unless written notifi cation of the amendment 
shall have been given to the Clerk twenty -four hours before the commencement of the 
sitting at which that part of the Bill is considered in Committee ; 
(3) Despite paragraph (2), where an amendment has been moved to any part of a Bill  
in accordance with this paragraph, any Member may move an amendment to that 
amendment on delivering to the Chairperson the terms of his or her amendment in 
writing . 
 So any Member he or she has an amendment in writing can deliver the amendment to 
me. 
 Hon. S amba:  Hon. Speaker if that is the situation or that is the case I think we should 
adopt the whole thing as per the clauses because the last time I think we went for a certain 
forum there were some amendments that we had proposed and it is quite unfortunate  we don't 
see them ; the ones that deem suitable for them they have been approved and the ones that are 
not deemed for them have been declined . So I think when you subjected the House to Whole 
House Committee  we were to facilitate the amendments and if it cannot I req uest that we may 
adopt the whole Bill so that we may go home and come with the written amendments, maybe 
we can move some amendments in written form.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalim u): Hon. Member when am saying in written form , am 
not saying that it has to be typed ; that Standing Order is clear you can give your amendment 
to the Chairperson and I have said am the Chairperson it 's just that you give us the intention 
of your amendment to the Chairperson of the Whole House so Members  I can see that it 
seems...  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Samba:  We are writing just give us time . 
 Chairperson (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members  I now propose  that the amendments 
moved by Hon. Hatimy on the schedules first needs secondment then we proceed, so who is 
seconding the amendments?  
(Leader of Majority ( Hon.  Mwidani) bowed)  
 Yes thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa i now propose a question that the amendments read 
by Hon. Hatimy stand part of the Bill, any Member with any rising matter before I put a 
question?  
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker even the ame ndment that we have is not signed so I don't 
know if it is supposed to be signed, sorry it is not signed so we don't know if it is genuine or 
not. 
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwal imu): That is a Notice Paper it does not have to be signed, it 
is supposed to be as i t is with the Order Paper. Yes Hon. Charles?  
 Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika tungependa kupata maelezo kutoka 
kwa Mwenyekiti wa Bajeti atueleze hii notisi yake na hii appendix tofauti iko wapi maana 
mapendekezo yetu me ngine yako hapa na mengine yako hapa sasa tungependa tujue 
mapendekezo ya hii na hii Mheshimiwa Spika ili tupate muongozo kamili.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Moham ed Hatimy?  
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17  Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika ijapokuwa hii stakabadhi  mambo yake 
yalimaliz ika kitambo ingekuwa wameuliza kitambo lakini  ripoti ya Kamati ya Fedha  
ishapitishwa . Mheshimiwa Spika sisi twazungumza habari za marekebisho  lakini hata hivyo 
kuwa appendix  kuwa imeshikana na ripoti ile tuliopitisha ya kuonyesha yale matakwa ya 
watu waliozungumza ; kama  ukiangalia Coast Civil Society wamekuja n a Human Rights 
security allies govern ance network wameuliza sisi tu rekebishe  haya marekebisho  si kichwa 
chetu ni watu wameuliza na marekebisho mengi  yameletwa na ha ya  mashirika , niko na 
memorandum  mukitaka nitawapati a saa hi i naweza kuziitisha nikawapatia . Haya mareke bisho 
mengi yameletwa na wao na sisi kutaka kuwa na  uhusiano  mzuri na wao ; kuwa wao 
wanaangalia mahitaji ya wananchi tukaangalia na tukaona kuwa ni kweli vitu ambavyo 
wamevileta si  vyote tulivyokubalian a navyo lakini kuna baadhi ya vitu ambavyo sisi 
tumekubaliana navyo. Kwa hivyo hii ni  kueleza tu namna gani maombi yalivyokuja na hii 
ilikuwa ni stakabadhi  yatakikana iwe inasomwa na ile ripoti ya Kamati, sisi sasa tunasoma 
notisi ambayo imeshikana na hii Order Paper . 
(Silence)  
 Mr. Speaker I request your Chair that the Bill as amended to be reported to the 
County Assembly. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): We have not yet put a question Hon. Chairman 
Finance, Budget and Appropriat ion! We are yet to put a question then we report back to the 
County Assembly. There are some Members  who have requested that they have got their 
written amendments ...  
(Silence)  
 Hon. Members  I have received an amendment from Hon . Kitula and another one from 
Hon. Ibrahim Omondi and another one from Hon . Samba Tobias and there was also an 
amendment from Hon . Fatma Kushe but she has withdrawn. Yes Hon . Kitula please read 
your amendment . 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mr. Speaker I woul d like to amend in the schedule 
number 910 for religious gatherings by deleting in the last column 2018/2019 and insert 
therefore the fi gure nil in replacement thereof . Thank you.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Seconder?  
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): May I ask Hon . Mary O nsongo to seco nd? 
(Hon. (Ms.) Osongo declined to second ) 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni Nyumba ya sheria na huu si 
mchezo wa draft , ametaja mtu ku muunga mkono lakini  amekataa kwa hivyo hakuna.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members  now that Hon. Kitula’s seconder has 
refused so the amendement fails in this Committee . Hon. Tobias Samba . 
 Hon. Samba: Mr. Speaker I beg to read the amendment schedule number 1137 that 
the Bill to be amended  in the schedule reading Tudor one room Swahili type by maintaining 
the figure Ksh.800 for the year 201 8/2019.   Second amendment Mr. Speaker on the same I 
need t o make the following amendments ; that the Bill be amended in schedule 1138 reading 
Tudor single room by maintaining  Ksh.800 for the year 2018/2019 . 
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18  Hon. Speaker I wish to also make the following a mendment schedule item 1139 that 
the Bill be amended in the schedule 1139 reading Tudor room by maintaining the figure of  
Ksh.800 for the year 2018/2019 . Mr. Speaker I also wish to make the following amendments 
that item 1140 that the Bill be amended in the schedule 1140 reading Tudor single room by 
maintaining Ksh.800 for the year 2018/2019.  Mr. Speaker I also wish to make another 
amendment schedule 1141 be amend ed schedule 1141 reading Tudor one bedroom ed by 
maintaining the figure Ksh.  2320 for the year 2018/20 19. Mr. Speaker I also wish to make the 
last amendment to the Bill in schedule number 1142  reading Tudor two bedroom ed by 
maintaining the figure Ksh.  3065 for the year 2018/2019 . I beg Hon. Moses Aran to second.  
 Hon. Aran:  Hon. Speaker I beg to secon d Hon.Samba.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members  I propose that the amendments by 
Hon. Tobias Samba be discussed in this House.  
(Silence ) 
 Having there no discussion I therefore put a q uestion that the amendments by Hon. 
Tobias Samba be approved in this Honorable House .  
(Question put and  negatived ) 
 Hon. Members  I also have amendments from Hon . Ibrahim Omondi but the 
amendments will not see the day because they have not been signed .  
(Applause ) 
 So the amendments will not see the floor of the  Hous e. Hon. Members  I now put a 
questio n on the initial amendments by Hon. Mohamed Hatimy that the initial amen dments 
proposed be part of the Bill.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 Yes Hon . Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I request the Committ ee to report to the 
County Assembly.  
 Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  I now put the question that the Bill be 
now re ported to this Honorable House.  
(Question put and agreed to ) 
COMMITTEE  OF THE  WHOLE  HOUSE  DISSOLVED  
PLENARY RESUMED  
(Serjeant -At-Arms raised the Mace  on the Table ) 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair )  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Chairman Finance Budget and Appr opriation 
report back to the Assembly.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. S peaker the Committee  does agree with the County 
Assembly . 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Did you make any amendments?   
September 2 7, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     75 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for inf ormation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: With am endments.  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok. Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
BILL  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY FINANCE BILL, 2018  
 Yes Hon . Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  That the B ill be read a t hird time Mr. Speaker , thank you.  
THIRD READING  
 The Mombasa County Finance Bill , 2018, A B ill for an Act of Mombasa County 
Assembly to provide for the various taxes, fees and charges for services and for the 
other r evenue raising measures by the County government and for the matters 
incidental thereto.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon.  Members  having no other business the House stands adjourned unti l 2nd 
October , 2018 Tuesday at 2: 30p.m. 
The House rose at 5:45p.m.  