July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 21st July, 2016  
The House met at 2: 45p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Members you may have your seats.  Yes 
Clerk . 
COMMUNICAT ION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Thank you C lerk, Members of this County Assembly;  we recog nize the presence of Tudor 
day Secondary S chool , form three History students  who have come to visit us plus the ir two 
teachers . They are here on a learning mission I hope t hey will achieve what they have come here 
for. Members I will introduce them ; 
(Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) called out names of the visiting students  and 
teachers  from Tudor Day Secondary School who  stood and  bowed)  
1. Amir Said  
2. Jacob Kalama  
3. Samuel A mani  
4. Abdirahman Bile  
5. Capistrian Okoth Ouma  
6. Mahmoud Ramadhan  
7. Omondi Kennedy  
8. Bakari Athman  
9. Abdulaziz Ali  
10. Mohamed Maalim  
11. Said Maa  
12. Hassan Hussein  
13. Kalaheo Maingu  
14. Masud Said  
15. Abdil lahi Abeid  
16. Ramadhan Chuphi  
17. Victor Sila  
18. Odera Wyclife  
19. Kassim Nzaka  
20. Martin Mwangemi  
21. Mauritius Mwilitsa  
22. William Kimanzi  
23. Athman Swaleh  
24. Abdalla Twahir  
25. Suleiman Juma  
26. Issa Ali  
27. Levis Okumu  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 Teachers  
1. Mr. Mwiti Jotham  
2. Mr. Wanguba Dennis  
Thank you.  
 (Applause ) 
       You are welcome to the County Assembly of Mombasa. Thank you. Yes Hon. of  Tudor.  
       Hon. Siminyu : I am pleased to see the students from Tudor day which is located in the area 
where I represent. I am happy that they are here and I would like to take this opportunity to 
welcome them to witness the devolution and I hope that they will  learn a lot from us. Mr. 
Speaker I just wa nted to welcome them, thank you .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Prischillah Mumba.  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Prischillah  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi pia nimesimama hapa 
kukaribisha watot o ambao wamekuja hapa kutoka Tudor day. Nikiwa jirani yao pale Shimanzi 
ninas ikia ufahari kuwakaribisha katika N yumba hii yetu tukufu na wawe  na umakini wa 
kuangalia jinsi B unge linavyoendelea ndio na wao waweze kuwa n a ari ya siku moja waweze 
kuwa Wabunge  wa K aunti ya Mombasa ndio waweze kusoma kwa bidii. A hsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa Amir Thoya.  
       Hon. Thoya: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, yangu kwanza ni kupongeza walimu na 
wanafunzi wa Tudor day.  
(Interruption)  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Point of order Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. , what is it?  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. S peaker the Hon.  Member who is on the floor, his dress code is not in 
order ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Fadhili what is wrong with his dress code?  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker the Hon.  Member has not yet tu cked in his shirt, he is not an 
Hon.  Member by speaking in front of this Honorable  House and he is not being  an Honorable  
and he is not presenting himself as an Honorable M ember . Mr. Speaker Sir, In fact the Sergeant 
At A rms was supposed to restrict the Hon.  Member from entering this H ouse. Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Sergeant at arms  can you ascertain whether the 
Member is in order, whether his attire is in order.  
(Sergeant At Arms confirmed that the Member's dress code is in order)  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3        He is quit e in order? Okay Honorable  you can continue.  
(Laughter ) 
       Hon. Thoya: Ahsante san a Mheshimiwa Spika,  yangu ni kuwapongeza walimu na 
wanafunzi kwa kuweza kupata nafasi ya k uja kushuhudia vikao vyetu vya B unge  kwa sababu 
shule ya Tudor iko katika K aunti ya Mombasa na wanafunzi wengi wanatoka katika maeneo 
mbali mbali. Kwa hivyo itakuwa n i kama ni mfano mzuri na waweze kuhimiza pia shule zingine 
ziweze kufuata mfano kama huo. Kwa hiv yo yangu ni kushukuru wale walimu na wanafunzi 
ambao wamepata nafasi hii wawe ze kutumia nafasi kwa njia bora kwa sababu wanapokuja katika 
Bunge, waone vikao vi le ambavyo vinaendeshwa hata wao pia it awapatia ari katika masomo yao 
waone ya kwamba ugatuzi  ni kitu cha ukweli na katiba pia inafanya kazi. A hsante sana 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you, yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Patrick ? 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have a statemen t on the status of the Mombasa 
County Government and Tax W aiver Bill, 2015. Mr. Speaker it is long since this Bill was tabled 
in this House and Mombasa people are still yet to en joy the waiver following  that Bill . Mr. 
Speaker this Bill is very important  because the waiver that other C ounties are enjoying is one of 
the waiver accumulation of interest . Mr. Speaker it has made not possible to pay and the Bill has 
passed the First Rea ding. It is going to help us to collect taxes and also it will help Mombasa 
people to enjoy like any other C ounties . Mr. Speaker a s you understand so many C ounties have 
given waiver to their people ; this way this being of not being here in this House,  unco mmitted 
and up to date we do not know where about of this Bill. Mr. Speaker S ir and I would like to ask 
this Hon.  House to s peed up the process so that I know we have a new team, a new Majority 
Leader and you Mr. Speaker sir. I know yo u are capable of movi ng this H ouse faster, and th at is 
why we have come to this H ouse to try to find out the whereabout of this B ill because it is going 
to do go od to our people s o that we can we can collect more taxes.  Mr. Speaker sir I beg for your 
direction so that we can h ave this Bill passed so that we have the Mombasa people to enjoy 
waivers like any other Kenyans Mr. Speaker sir, Thank you.  
(Interruption)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Fadhili, what is it?  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Spe aker, c oncerning the same issue I understand that this 
Bill which has come in front of this Hon.  House for First R eading if I am wrong I stand to be 
corrected is a private Member B ill. Mr. Speaker, it is a Hon.  Member who I think is present in 
this House to eithe r inform this H ouse if it is the fund that is missing for this to proceed to public 
participation or  if there are any other obstacles , it is the M ember to either tell us because all in 
all this Bill is for the benefit of wananchi . It is for  the benefit of  our people Mr. Speaker , so the 
mover of this Bill is in this H ouse, it upon him to let the H ouse as the Hon.  Member has stated 
that he doesn’t know …. 
(Interruption ) 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4        Mr. Speaker I don’t want to be informed.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ): No, if a M ember is up listen to him . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : He's up on a point of information and i don't want to be informed . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Siminyu are you up on a point of 
information ? 
       Hon. Mwalimu : I don't wan t to be informed . 
       Hon. Simi nyu: I want to inform the House not him …  
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker the issue that has been brought , the Hon.  Member Fadhili this B ill was 
committed to the House and I don’t know how the M ember, who is the author of th is Bill or 
Motion . I know this Assembly has a mechanism to work Mr. Speaker S ir and I want to know the 
whereabouts , if it is about the fund we don't know about but we are asking about the status of the 
Bill.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes I understand. Yes Hon.  Fadhili.  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker I think the Hon.  House needs to know that this Bill is a private 
Member 's Bill, it did not generate from the executive , that is why I was saying the mover of this 
Bill, he intends....  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj what is it?  
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, Hon.  Fadh ili Mwalimu is misleading this 
House. Mr. Speaker there are several ways of bringing in the Bill and tablin g the Bill in this 
House and one other way which is also accepted by law is if the Bill was generated by the 
Committee, and we ca nnot have all the names of the C ommittee  Member’s vetted on this Bill.        
The only name tha t will appear on behalf of the C ommittee is the name of the C hair and that is 
what exactly is happening with this Bill Mr. Speaker. So Mr. Speaker I think we should 
understand that position before we can continue, thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I earlier said I stood to be corrected and up to now 
they have not yet corrected me. Mr. Speaker the Hon.  Member is the one to say if this Bill is his 
Bill, it is a private M ember 's Bill and I said he is the one  to tell us if he do es not have funds to 
take this Bill for public participation . Maybe he needs assistance from the Hon.  House Mr. 
Speaker,  the Hon.  Member is in this H ouse, he nee ds such a chance to inform the H ouse. 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah R ashid) : Okay Members,  it is ok everyone.  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker let us give the Hon.  Member a chance .  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5        Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Ok you have told  me that  you just finish your  
submission then it will be up to me to decide .  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Mwalimu : I was informing this Hon.  House Mr.  Speaker and  Mr. Speaker....  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj what is it?  
       Hon Faraj:  Mr. Speaker Hon.  Fadhili is attacking powers from yo u and I think it is right , he 
cannot order  you or direct you to give a  decision that  you yourself has the mandate to do so .        
Mr. Speaker,  what Hon.  Fadhili is trying to do is  to influence you to give a directive and I  do not 
think that is right. Than k you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Siminyu .  
       Hon. Siminyu: Mr. Speaker the mover of the Bill is in the H ouse but the Hon.   Member  
Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani is behaving like the lawyer  and he has a choice whet her to stand a nd  
debate or not.  Mr. Speaker let us give the Hon.  Member the chance if he doesn’t want to talk 
then it's ok but what I  am trying to say is that the A ssembly has  a mechanism of the way the 
Assembly is working  and if the A ssembly is right , if there is a p roblem because I am asking 
where is the Bill and what happened to it because Mombasa people are suffering . Mr. Speaker 
Sir, Mombasa people are not enjoying the waiver that they are supposed to enjoy like any other 
Kenyan , even if you look at the moment Nai robi they have given already a waiver . So it is the 
House to determine Mr. Speaker Sir  whether  the Majority L eader  or  anybody or you can direct 
the C ommittee in charge  so that we ca n know the where about of the  Bill. Thank you . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank  you Hon.  Patrick Siminyu.  Now 
Members if  I can recollect my thoughts properly  I think Hon.  Hatimy this  Bill has already be 
read the first time, has it? So did the Bill come  from the Finance C ommittee or it is a private 
Bill? 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker, this Bill came from the Public Finance 
Act... 
(Laughter ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Can you read it for us ?  
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy: Thank  you Mr. Speaker , 159 says that how a C ounty E xecutive 
Member of F inance to reduce or raise fees or charges . So Mr.  Speaker this section gives Finance 
Minister to waive provided the waiver d o have a legislation from this C ounty . So Mr.  Speaker 
this Waiver Bill has been authorized by an A ct of Parliament or C ounty legislation that’s why we 
do have this Waiver B ill. 
(Interruption)  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Point of order Mr.  Speaker .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili .  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6        Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker the Hon.  Member is mis leading this House. Mr.  Speaker the 
Hon.  Member said  that the  Bill originated from the  PFM A ct number 159  and in 159 it clearly 
states  that it is the County Executive M ember who can waive taxes and this B ill did not and I 
stand to be quot ed did not origi nate from the Executive M ember . Mr. Speaker it is a Private 
Member Bill, that’s why we were saying we just need to know the  position ,why hasn’t it gone 
for public participation ? That is  just the question that the H ouse needs to know because  it has 
come for the First R eading . Mr. Speaker, it is the H ouse to know from the M ember why it has 
not gone for public participation , we are not against the B ill,  we know that the B ill is of a benefit 
to  our people and I am  also  for the B ill despite that I am a bi t  hesitant with my.....  
(Interruption ) 
      Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : The procedure Bill is being done . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker am hesitant with my Chairman ; I believe he is my 
Chairman for  F inance  but we need proper proc edures to be followed. Mr. Speaker , Thank  you. 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy  I think this conversation is 
taking too long ; I just asked you one question and you  did not  give me the answer . I know where 
the powers of the Bill come from the Act as you have said but in this B ill who is the author  of the 
Bill; is it the  Committee of Finance or  a Private Member B ill, I know where the powers of the 
Bill comes from?  
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy: Mr. Speaker I do not understand Hon.  Fadhili, the Bill is very 
clear the author of the Bill is Mohamed Hatimy , Chairperson C ommittee of Finance and  Budget 
Appropriation , so what is the problem Mr. Speaker and  it is very clear . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay you  may sit down n ow. 
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:   Because Mr. Speaker  if we go through Standing order 116 which 
states that a Bill shall be signed by the M ember in charge of it and, it shall  be introduced by the 
First Reading in accordance to Standing Order 120, so what is the problem?  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay , now we want to answer Hon.  Simi nyu.        
This Bill was brought here it was read for the first time , after being read the Bill is su pposed to 
be  committed to the C ommittee , was it commit ted to the  Committee, was the Bill committed to 
a Committee?  
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Yes I can confirm Mr. Speaker Standing O rder 121 that the Bill 
was commited to the Finance C ommittee , but as we know Mr. Speaker the problem i s public 
participation in  this H ouse and even the number two reason why we have st ood still is that the 
Bill must be  ...(??).  The Bill standing paragraph one states that the County A ssembly  may 
involve to commit a Bill to a S elect committee established for that purpose and Number  three the 
Sectoral C ommittee to which a Bill is committed shall facilitate public participation , can be 
taken  to account the  views and recommen dation of the public when the C ommittee has 
accord ed it to the County A ssembly . So Mr. Speaker to date we are waiting for the C lerk to call 
for public participation of the Bill, then from there we can participate . I'm waiting for the C lerk's 
department  to tell us when they will call a public participation  so that we c an go and participate 
with our M embers Mr. Sp eaker. Thank you.  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7        Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu are you happy now ?  
       Hon. Siminyu: I am not happy Mr. Speaker Sir , yes I need specifics , people of Mombasa 
have waited for too long and  if we  have specifics nex t week or  a week  before I need a good 
answer . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you okay Hon.  Members I think let me 
lay this issue to rest , now C lerk can you arrange for this Bill to be taken to the public 
participation as soon as possi ble,  is that okay C lerk?  Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj ? 
       Hon. Faraj: Mr. Speaker  in the morning today we had  a ver y constructive meeting of  the 
Lands C ommittee  and Mr. Speaker...  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Point of order Mr . Speaker!  Mr. Speaker  it is against procedures  to even 
talk things that are still in  the C ommittee stage , to comment them to this H ouse. Mr. Speaker 
Hon.  Saad is trying to give inf ormation  that is still in the C ommittee which is against  
Committee procedures . Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay I hope you are not talking about what I 
have already ruled .  
       Hon. Faraj :  Allow me to sit Mr. Speaker .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay.  Yes Clerk .  
STATEMENT  
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy .  
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante sana kwa kunipatia fursa hii ya 
kuweza  kupeana hii taarifa.  Mheshimiwa Spika siku  mbili zilizopita ma afisa wetu waliokuwa 
wako katika nyadhifa za kushikilia  na hii leo nasimama mbele ya Nyumba hii, kuhimiza 
Nyumba h ii ikubaliane na tuweze kuleta Mswada ndani ya N yumba hii ili kuweza kusaidia wale 
wafanyi  kazi wote wale ambao wanafanya kazi na wako kwenye  nyadhifa za kushikilia  mpaka 
leo Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa S pika niliweza kuzungumza juzi kus ema Kifungu  27 cha 
Katiba  kuwa sheria ina msumeno , inakata mbele na nyuma . Kwa hivyo  kifungu  27 Mheshimiwa 
Spika, inasema kuwa , ‘Every person is equal before the law and has a right to equal protection 
and equal benefit of the law’ .  
       Mheshimiwa S pika kusema hivi twasema kuwa kusiwe kuwa wengine wanaangaliwa kwa 
jicho la huruma na wengine hawa angaliwi kwa jicho la huruma.        Watu wawe wako kwa 
kushikilia nyadhfa  kwa muda wa miezi sita pengine hata wengine wako kwa kushikilia nyadhfa  
mpaka kwa mwak a pia.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika sehemu ya  70 sheria ya Ugatuzi yaani 
County Government A ct iko wazi  juu ya mtu ambapo kuwa kuna kupandishwa cheo ama 
kushikilia nyadhfa . Mheshimiwa Spika naomba N yumba hii tukubaliane kwa kundi moja kuwa 
wote walioko kweny e kushikilia nyadhfa  na wao pia wakae ama wapatiwe ile nafasi wal iopokaa 
ama waambiwe waende zao.  Kwa sabab u mtu amekaa kazini Mheshimiwa Spika yeye hajui bidii 
yake iko namna gani, kwa hivyo naomba wanachama wa hii N yumba tukubaliane sote kuwa 
tufuate sheria hii vile inavyosema sehemu ya  70 na 71 kuwa yule ame  bandishwa cheo ama  awe 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 ameidhinishwa  kwenye ile nafasi  na yule amepelekwa kuwa kwa kushikilia nyadhfa  kama 
amefikisha miezi sita awe pia ame idhinishwa …  
                                                         (Applause ) 
       Ili N yumba hii nd io ijulikane inasimama na haki kwa kila mtu sio yule ni mfupi na yule ni 
mrefu, hio sheria ita tumika kivyengine.  Kwa hivyo naomba Mheshimiwa Spika tukubaliane hio 
taarifa  nimeleta kama itakubaliwa kuwa kama ni Mswada  ili tuweze kupitisha jambo hili. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika.  
                                                           (Applause ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you very much, but today is a Thursday 
and Hon.  that is a state ment ; we also have other statements that will be , you can bring it as a 
Motion ...  
                                                               (Applause ) 
       You can bring it as a M otion but not today ne xt week. You can bring it as a M otion next 
week, yes C lerk.  
STATEMENT  
       Hon. Mai muna Salim. Maimuna Salim, Yes C lerk. 
STATEMENT  
       Mumba Priscillah Hon. .. 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prisc hillah Mumba: Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipa fursa hii niweze 
kutoa taarifa ya hos pitali yetu ya Coast Genera l ambayo ni hosp itali ya mko a na ni hos pitali 
ambayo inategemewa na Kaunti hii yetu pamoja na K aunti jirani . Nimeweza kuwa maha li pale 
na nikapata tatizo ambalo lilinidhalilisha; ndi posa nikasema nije nikaweze kut oa hii taarifa ndio 
Mheshimiwa S pika tuweze  kuangalia ni jinsi gani ambayo kutaangaliwa pale upande wa Coast 
General  upande wa  dharura . Nikizungumza kuhusu pale Emergency  kuna kupokelewa kwa 
wagonjwa ambao ni wa hali mahututi, na wakati wanapopokelewa wale wagonjwa mtu 
anapoletwa kwenye emergency  huwa yuko  hali mbaya, na yuko hali ambayo anatakikana 
ahudumiwe kwa haraka iwezekanavyo.  Walakin  niliona taratibu ambayo mimi niliikosoa kwa 
upande wa huduma ya haraka kwa sababu unaambiwa mgonjwa anapoingia kama ni mgonjwa 
anayehitaji dawa ama anahitaji ma ji ya dawa fulani uende ukanunue ile dawa ili yule mgonjwa 
wako aweze kudungwa  kama ni kwa emergency  ya pumu ama nini . Lakini unapoenda pale 
kwenye kidirisha cha dawa  kuna kuwa na mhudumu ambaye ni mmoja  na unapanga foleni 
pamoja na watu ambao wametoka kuhu dumiwa na mada ktari katika ugonjwa wa kawaida.  
       Wakati wewe ukifika pale utaikuta foleni ambayo ina watu zaidi ya ishirini unapanga foleni  
nyuma ya wenzako  na wewe mgonjwa wako ni mahututi ambaye hawezi kungojea ule mda, na 
kuna yule ambaye anaona da ktari ambaye ugonjwa wake ni nafuu amekaa tu pale anaelekea 
kununua dawa …   
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9                                                            (Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Please, Hon.  this is a statement. Yes Hon.  
Chairman.  
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh :  Thank you Hon. Speaker , just a point of order . Is she  trying to 
explain because it’s an issue of emergency, the statement is talking about emergency treatment 
now she’s talking about the drugs and other diseases so can she clarify what ’s the emergency 
she’s taking about , she’s trying to beat t about the bush and I think she’s out of the point . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay, Hon. Priscillah Mumba.  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prisc hillah Mumba: Ahsante Mhes himiwa S pika, nafikiri  Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya Afya  atumie wa kati wake kunisikiza kwa makini . Ninapoelezea dharura 
inapokosekana, wakati ninapozungumzia kosa lile nililoliona, anielewe kwanza nimalize 
kuzungumza hii taarifa ndio anukuu sehemu zile muhimu ambazo zinahitajika kuh udumiwa 
katika emergency . Nikisema kupanga foleni na una mgonjwa ambaye anatakikana adungwe 
sindano ya dhadhura , ni mgonjwa yuko n a hali mahututi, na wagonjwa wengine wako kando 
ambao wame hudumiwa tu na madakitari wa kawaida mimi napan ga foleni wale wako mbele 
yangu.  Mimi nimeleta mgonjwa wangu kwa dharura saa hizi yule ananiambia hawezi kunipisha 
mpaka yeye kwanza apewe dawa za mgonjwa wake, na huyo anahitajika kudungwa sindano ama 
kutiwa maji kwa sababu amekuja yuko mahututi  ninaambiwa nunua hii dawa  ul ete nd io tudunge 
huyu mtu, na yule yuko pale yuko katika hali ya kuwa pumzi inamuishia, kitambo apange ile 
laini afike kwa yule ambaye anauza madawa unaaambiwa pia hununui dawa, unaandikiwa bei 
unaambiwa sasa nenda kwa kidirisha chengine uende ukalipe nd io uje. Sasa uchukue dawa, 
unaenda ule ni mda unapotea  na kuna mtu pale pumzi inaisha, u naenda kununua dawa katika 
kidir isha chengine ukirudi pale si kuwa ati utaingia tena moja kwa moja kwenda kuhudumiwa, ni 
upange tena foleni nyuma ili u ende ukapewe tena h io dawa. Kuna dharura gani hapo, na mtu 
anakata roho, h apo ndo mimi niliona..  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Akinyi.  
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Akinyi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, am on a Point of O rder quoting the (??)…     
       ‘No M ember making a statement at this Standing O rder shall speak for more than three 
minutes unless permission from you’ , and I have not seen you giving the permission and she had 
already completed her three minutes. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes two and a half minutes you have a half a 
minute to go . 
                                                     ( Laughter ) 
       Continue Hon.. . 
       Hon. (Mrs.)  Prisc hillah Mumba: Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunik inga 
inavyotakikana, na pia naomba ruhusa ikiwa dakika zangu tatu zime isha. Mheshimiwa S pika 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 bado ninasikia nina maneno ya kuongezea uniruhusu niongee dakika tano, niweze kueleza 
maanake kuna umuhimu wa kitu kinachoitwa dharura .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mswabah Rashid) : Sawa dakika tano.  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prisc hillah Mumba: Ahsante Mheshimi wa S pika, mimi ninaelezwa 
kudhalilika huku kwa sababu nimeweza kuona zaidi ya watu sita wakipoteza maisha mbele ya 
macho yangu,  na nilipokuwa niko mahali pale  niliku wa mimi mw enyewe nimepeleka mamangu 
mzazi  na nilijionea si kuwa ati nazungumza kitu niliambiwa, nilijionea vile watu walipopoteza 
maisha . Kwa mda wa dakika kumi tunapoteza watu 6  ambao watu wamekuja kuzungumza na 
hali mtu anakalishwa pale akingojewa matiba bu; kwa sababu mwengine anakuja huku, hawezi 
kupumua, tangu wanajaribu kusema mpaka anaishiwa pale  mtu wake ako kwenye foleni 
anangojea kwenda kununa dawa ya kudungwa . Na utaratibu u ko pale ni utaratibu  amba o 
unadhalilisha  kwa sababu hu wezi kwenda kwa kidi risha badala kununua dawa unaambiwa 
nishakuandikia malipo, sasa nenda katika kidirisha chengine uende ukalipe ndio urudi uje sasa 
upange tena foleni ufike pale sasa ndio ununue ile dawa. Mheshimiwa S pika hapo sijaona  
huduma ya dharura  yoyote , ninaona kuna tatizo, na ile Pharmacy  pale inatakikana ikiwezekana  
iongeze wafanyi  kazi kuwe kuna laini mbili, laini ya wanaohudumiwa wa  kawaida ndani ili 
waweze kupewa dawa na wale wanokuja kwa matibabu ya dharura yaani emergency  
wahudumiwe kwa njia ya dharura.  Na kwa hii taarifa yangu ikiwa itapatikana kunukuliwa 
ninayosema; kuna Kamati ambayo ninaona huyu M wenyekiti wa Afya  yuko hapa aliyekuwa 
anajaribu kujitetea akijaribu kupita kichochoro kuchafua ha elewi nazungumza nini aende na 
Kamati yake aka angalie hili tatizo a tuambie hili tatizo pale Coast General litakuwa ni la kweli 
ama ni la uongo.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Fatuma Mote . 
       Hon.  (Ms.)  Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika  
nimeweza kumsikiza Mheshimiwa P rischillah kwa makini lakini yatakikana afahamu kwamba 
Kaunti ya Mombasa ni K aunti ambayo tuko na … 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon. Fatuma Mote, are you contributing. This is 
a statement it should not be contributed to, so mainly unless you are standing for a Point of Order 
but if it’s not a Point of O rder, a statement today is not going to be contributed to because this is 
a very sensitive issue. I wa nt to commit this issue to the C omm ittee of H ealth t o go and 
investigate t he matter … 
                                                         (Applause ) 
       We will discuss the report when it can but at the moment we cannot discuss this report, so 
Chairman of H ealth can you take over this matte r, go to the Coast General H ospital and 
investigate the matter. Are you a M ember of the C ommittee?  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Prisc hillah Mumba: No. 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : But you will be incorpor ated for the time being 
in that C ommittee, Thank you.  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11                                                         (Applause ) 
       Yes C hairman.  
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : She has mentioned about her mother on that incident so  to me I 
think it will be a conflict of interest.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : No, it is not a  conflict of interest she  was there 
because her mother, M embers I have already made a ruling …  
(Applause)  
       So bring the report here within two weeks please.  
(Interruption)  
       Is that on the same matter because I have already closed that chapter?  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Auma : Hon. Speaker you have alre ady given the ruling but  I also had the same 
problem with that of Hon. Prisc hillah has.  So I think it is also important that am included with 
the same Committee since  the same problem that  have  is the sam e problem that touches  me . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : You are a  friend of the Committee and any other 
Member who is a friend of the C ommittee.  Yes Hon.  Saad?  
 
       Hon. Faraj:  Hon.  Speaker the reason we have Committees in this H ouse is  to report back 
what they have been able to see and each and every M ember would accompany ...the report 
would be coming back here for us to deliberate and discuss and for adoption , thank you.  
 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I should also remin d you that no one i s forbidden 
from attending any Committee whether you are a M ember or not , you might have some 
evidence. Yes  Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
       Hon.  Zainab Mumba.  Next?  
 
MOTION  
 
       Hon.  Omar?  
 
       Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ): Thank  you Mr. Speaker for giving me  this 
opportunity to table the M otion of creat ion of Mombasa County Employment B ureau Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Speaker S ir I beg to move the following M otion:  
 
(Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ) moved the Motion ) 
 
       THAT AWARE  that the County Government of Mombasa is committed to ensuring that its 
residents including  the youth get employment;  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12  
       FURTHER AWARE that there are numerous job opportunities that are available within and 
outside the County;  
 
       CONCERNED THAT most of our youth s are not able to access these  job opportunities 
because of lack of information on these job s opportunities Mr. Speaker Sir;  
 
       Mr. Speaker Sir I urge this Assembly to resolve that;  
 
       The County Govern ment of Mombasa to establis h a County Employment B ureau to make 
information available on job opportunities and facilitate job placements for the residents of 
Mombasa.  
 
       Thank you.  
 
       I beg Hon.  Mary Akinyi to second.  
 
(Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi bow ed) 
 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you, M embers I have to propose the 
question . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 
       Yes Omar Meti?  
 
       Chief Whip  (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim Omar ): Mheshimiwa Spika nasema tena ahsante na tena 
nashukuru wenzangu kwa kuniunga mkono  hoja hii kujadiliwa katika B unge . Mheshimiwa S pika 
naongea jambo hili pia leo hii kwa furaha kwa sab abu hata tukiangalia pale juu tunaona vijana 
wetu ambao ni wanafunzi am bao karibuni wat aweza kumaliza masomo yao ya kidato cha nne na 
watatoka huku nje dun iani kutafuta riziki . Mheshimiwa S pika tatizo kubwa katika K aunti yetu ya 
Mombasa imekuwa kukosa ajira na sio pia ati kwamba ajira zimekosa lakini vijana wetu 
wanakaa mtaani sio wote wanasoma magazeti ; vijana wetu wanakaa mitaani sio wote wako 
karibu na Mheshimiwa,  vijana wetu wanaokaa mitaani sio wote wanapata habari kuhusu kazi 
zinapotokea . Mheshimiwa Spika ndipo leo naomba B unge hili itafutwe sehemu amb ayo itakuwa 
itatengwa  ambao haw a vijana wanapomaliza masomo yao ile ni ya kidato cha nne , iwe ni ya 
chuo cha utaalamu ama chuo kikuu  waweze kujua ni mahali gani zile karatasi zao zinazoitwa CV 
wazipeleke pale katika ofisi ile, ikija taarifa  ya kwamba kwa takikana madereva katika hoteli 
fulani, huku kwa takikana wapishi mahali f ulani, huku kwatakikana account ant iwe rahisi wato to 
wetu kama wale ku weza kujua ni vipi utapata taarifa. .. 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Jabess what is it?  
 
       Hon.  Oduor:  Hon.  there is no quorum?  
 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speake r sir as the proce dures of the H ouse if the matter before the 
House is voting that is when we need quorum ….  
(Applause ) 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13        Mr. Speaker there is quorum in this H ouse.  
 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : We have to ask the Clerk?  Clerk can you 
ascer tain if there  is quorum in the H ouse.  
(Laughter ) 
(Loud consultation ) 
(Clerk confirmed quorum)  
(Applause ) 
       Continue  Hon.  Omar . 
 
       Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  Omar ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunilinda .        
Jambo hili nalileta katika B unge hili si kw a manufaa yangu lakini ni katika hali ya kujali vijana 
wetu walioko kule mitaani waweze kupata taarifa  yeyote waweze kujisaidia katika mitazamo yao 
ama ndoto zao za kimaisha . Mheshimiwa S pika imekuwa shida hasa kwa hawa ndugu zetu 
wakimaliza masomo hata kw enye  vyuo vya ufundi  wakitafuta sehemu ya kujifundishia kazi 
yaani attachment wanasema hawajui yeyote , mimi sijui nitaanza wapi  na sijui nitaenda wapi .        
Itakuwa ni muhimu sisi tutenge mahali ambapo sehemu yote Mombasa iwe ni wazee , iwe ni 
wamama wata pata habari,  iwe ni taarifa za ku omba kandarasi , makazi,  habari yeyote katika 
Kaunti . Kwa hio mimi naomba Wa heshimiwa wenzangu waniunge mkono na tuweze kutimi za 
hawa vijana wetu ambao wak o na ndoto lakini maisha yao ba do yana shauku . Kwa sab abu 
unajua kab la jambo hili lianze kuwa sawa Mheshimiwa Spika lazima tutafute K amati am bayo 
itaenda kule nje ikae na yale makampuni am bayo yako Mombasa na tufanye makubaliano yaani  
Memorandum of Understanding  (MOU ). Iwe zile kampuni am bazo ziko ndani ya Mombasa ziwe 
zina nafasi na kupeleka katika ile ya ofisi  ili kuwapa fursa vijana wetu wanaoishi katika 
Mombasa . Hivyo basi  naomba wenzangu wanuiunge mkono katika Mswada huu ili tuwek e 
maisha  yao pamoja na yetu ya Mombasa K aunti mbele.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Ra shid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick M uriuki?  
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker I fully support the Employment B ureau . As you 
know information is power and as per  last week we advertised as an A ssembly f or positions and 
if we have an E mployment  Bureau ; everyon e cannot afford newspapers Mr. Speaker Sir . As the 
Hon.  Member has brought it even f or jobs within and outside the C ounty and it will help our 
youth s to get information and job opportunities , both in the C ounty and the national level . It is a 
noble activit y which will make our youth s participate and get jobs in the C ounty ; as we know 
youth s do not have informati on on job opportunities in the C ounty . I would like to ask my fellow 
Members to fully support this so that the youth s have a center where our youth s are going to get 
information . Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Jimmy Odari?  
       Hon. Odari:  Thank you M r. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to expre ss my opinion 
in regard to the M otion by Hon.  Mohamed Omar Meti which is to establish an E mployme nt 
Bureau at the County Government . As we know youth unemployment and employment in 
general is a challenge in this country and therefore the idea  of establishing a youth or an 
Employment Bureau of the C ounty gover nment is very Honorable . Mr. Speaker Sir , I remember 
previously there used to be an Employment Bureau in the Labour Ministry or Labour offices 
throughout the C ountry ; one would go present his credentials , leave his information and all 
details and then come  to check on the employment or is notified of the vacancy somewhere .        
Therefore Hon.  Speaker I think it’s a good idea for  the C ounty to come forward and  establish 
such an office where by people who are not employed or have left school and looking for 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 employment can come there register themselves or give their details or particulars and in the 
event of availability of vacancies within the country and out of the country they can be notified . 
       Therefore we are trying  to solve this problem in this C ounty,  we as leaders and the 
government overall have been facing this problem and therefore we need to come forward with 
this initiative so that we can help eliminate or reduce this problem of unemployment amongst the 
youth.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Kibwana S waleh Baya . 
       Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker I wish t o stand before this Hon.  House 
supporting this ver y fruitful M otion. .. 
(Applause ) 
       That will see the youth s around this C ounty to get the right information at the right time .        
Hon.  Speaker job opportunit ies in this C ounty is an issue that is a time bomb ; most of the youth s 
that have graduated or are out of school have been looking for jobs every now and then a nd what 
we a re lacking in this C ounty is the right information . Once this B ureau is established , the 
graduates I mean here the skilled and unskilled youth s will be able now to have information and 
to apply for the jobs at the right time. Hon.  Speaker the issue of trib alism has made people not 
get the right informa tion so once we establish this B ureau wh ich will be a very transparent 
Bureau i hope we will be able to minimise the youth s that are walking around searching for jobs .       
Hon.  Members said clearly informati on is power ; once someone  misses information then it 
reduces his/her chances of applying for a job because even if he is skilled or he is qualified but 
he doesn't know where to get job he will remain jobless.  So i think we should see this happening 
becaus e it will help many young people and we know every year we produce one million youth s 
who do not find job s anywhere . Mr. Speaker  I think we should put resources and make sure that 
atleast we rea lise the establishment of thus B ureau as soon as possible, tha nk you . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Mheshimiwa Caroline . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika hata mimi ni mmoja wapo wanaosifu 
Mheshimiwa wa vijana  kwa kuleta mjadal a huu. Kusema kw eli amekuja na jambo lengine la 
maana sana, juzi hizi kazi zilizotangazwa kwa gazeti la S tar za Mombasa C ounty Assembly 
ambalo jambo kama hili tungekua kama ni Kaunti ya Mombasa wamechukua kila kijana  Kaunti 
ya Mombasa aweze kupata taarifa  kama hii . Kwa kweli informtaion is so good because without 
information nothing can be done in  the world so i just urge this M otion should be put into 
practise and it should come into reality … 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj what is it ? 
       Hon. Faraj:  Mheshimiwa Bwana Spika, kila  siku twakumbushana kwenye hii Nyumba 
kwamba ni N yumba ya sheria , ni makosa kulingana na sheria za nidhamu zetu kuchanganya 
lugha zaidi ya moja . Sheria ya N yumba hii iko wazi na inasema kuwa ikiwa umeamua kuongea 
Kiswahili basi hakikisha u meongea Kiswahili hadi mwisho wa maongezi yako na ikiwa 
umeamua kuonge a kwa lu gha ya Kingereza basi nidhamu yake inafwata kwa mfumo huo  huo.       
Bwana Spika hii ni N yumba ya sheria na ningependa utoe muongozo kulingana na ilivyo, 
ahsante sana . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Mheshimiwa Caroline . 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15        Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Hon. Speaker i just want to know which Standing O rder is that and the 
other second thing I was from Washington so sometimes I just confuse myself … 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon. Patrick what is it ? 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker it is so sad this is the fourth year … 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Are you on a point of order or what? On what?  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  On the House , concerning what Hon.  Caroline is tel ling us i want to 
give her the Standing Order.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  I will give you time but at the moment Hon . 
Muriuki is also on a Point of O rder.  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker this is almost the fourth year we have to be serious because we 
are handling matters that concerns the lives of Mombasa people,  thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Mheshimiwa Mary Akinyi . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akiny i: Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, i just wanted to remind Hon . Caroline that 
we are on Point of Order on Standing O rder 73 which states very well , “All proceedings of the 
County Assembly shall be conducted in Kiswahili, English or Kenyan Sign language ”, but no t 
mixing the language . If you are speaking in English you speak in English and if it is Kiswahili it 
should be Kiswahili , and  if you canno t do all then you can speak in S ign language . Thank you . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Caroline yo u have been given Standing 
Order 73 …   
(Laughter ) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Thank you M r. Speaker, sometimes i like to use two l anguages but now i 
will use one.  Mr. Speaker am happy for the youths if they are going to be aware on this i know 
they are going t o change, and you know information i s power as i said before i get information 
about jobs here and there and if we are going to have this Bureau I think its going to be a good 
work and well done . I’m saying well done to Hon.  Ahmed Ebrahim who has bro ught this, thank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii,  mimi nimesimama 
kupinga … 
(Laughter ) 
(Applause ) 
       Mjadala huu na hoja hii il iyoletwa mbele ya Bunge letu Mheshim iwa Spika ; kwanza tuelewe 
dunia yenyewe iko wapi ? Dunia ya sasa ilipofika sio dunia tena iliokua ile miaka ya babu zetu 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16 Bwana Spika ; wenyewe wanasema tunaishi miaka ya digitali, sioni haja ya sasa kufungua ofisi 
alafu kuzunguka kuambia  vijana walete stakabadhi zao wailete kwa ofisi , sijui ofisi hiyo iwe 
kubwa kiasi gani ya kuweza kupokea makaratasi ya  vijana wa Mo mbasa nzima … 
(Laughter ) 
       Kuileta katika ofisi moja  alafu vilevile lazima kutakua na upendeleo fulani . Mimi ambae 
nitakua katika ofisi ile kama kazi nz uri imetokea kijana wangu ni kuleta makaratasi tu yule 
ambae yuko pale kama kazi nzuri itatokea ataangalia yule mtu wak e ama yale makaratasi yote 
pale.. . 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Hon.  Speaker point of informatio n. 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Bwana Spika mimi sitaki kuelezwa …  
(Laughter ) 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Auma : I want to infrom the House . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Okay what is it ? 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma:  Mr. S peaker we  are talking about opening the B ureau even every person 
in organisation there is conflict so we should not confuse the Hon.  Member , that if you have the 
office now you cannot do your work . Mr. Speaker we are going to ope n the B ureau , the Hon.  has 
not talked about opening the office so can  we go directly to the point and inform the House what 
we are talking about not the office , Hon. Fadhili.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ningependa Mheshimiwa alietoka ku ongea 
kwan za aombe msamaha kwa N yumba hii maana amesema anaelezea N yumba mwisho 
anamaliza kwa  kutaja jina langu … 
(Laughter ) 
       Amekeuka ameniharibia wakati wnagu kwa kuni weka chini azungumzie N yumba na 
mwisho ananitaja jina langu . Mimi natak a asimame aombe N yumb a hii msamaha na mimi 
niweze kuendelea, kupitia  Kiti cha ko naomba aombe msamaha hii ni N yumba ya sheria .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Caroline you have misled the House so 
can you rectify yourself .  
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma:  Mr. Speake r i dont know what is wrong with Hon.  Fadhili, when i made 
my first statement i said the Hon.  House but at the moment i looked at Fadhili the last word i 
spoke was his name . So the word that was going around was the Hon.  House but the last word 
was Fadhili , i didn't say Fadhili on the statement , by the way am sorry Fadhili even though you 
are my friend . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Ok thank you very much .   
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17        Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika naona M heshimiwa amezungu ka lakini ilikua aomb e 
msamaha N yumba ; ni haki yetu sisi kama W aheshimiwa tuhakikishe vijana, kina mama 
wanapata zabuni ambazo zatolewa na Kaunti yetu . Kuna asilimia ambayo ilikua inatakiwa 
kuhakikisha wanapata ikiwa kweli twataka ku inua maisha ya vijana wetu M heshimiwa Spika,  
suala la ukosefu wa ajira M heshimiwa Spika laeleweka ni su ala tata , swala ambalo twa weza 
sema ni ugonjwa ambao uko dunia nzima ikiwa  tuna imani ya kuwa … 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. M eti what is it ? 
       Chief Wh ip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim ): I want to inform the House,  the is sue that we are 
talking about i s not only about information but its employment and even for our youth and 
residents who need to seek for attachment . I don't think Hon. S peaker  there is  in any compa ny 
that you can go and not find attachment opportunity , so the M ember is not in order . So Hon.  
Members should not talk other matters which are not in this matter .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker the Mover of the M otion is 
somehow introducing amendments through  the back door. Mr. Speaker if you look and you have  
gone through this M otion it has not state d what he is trying to say in this House and if he ha s any 
amendments he should come to this House here and say that he has ame ndments and want to 
amend this M otion to read differently , but the prayer is very clear and it does not indicate that all 
he has just said. Thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah  Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Fadhili . 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi narudia pale pale lengo liwe sisi kama viongozi 
kutafuta njia gani ambayo tunaweza tukakuza kipato ama tukakuza maisha ya vijana wetu ama 
tukakuza kipato ama maisha ya kina mama zetu n a wale wanaoishi na ulemavu Mheshimiwa 
Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sioni kama kufungua ofisi kama hizo zitasaidia chochote vijana 
wetu, tuelewe kwanza kuwa tutakapofungua ofisi kama hizi kwanza zitahitaji pia kuwe na watu 
waandikwe pale kazi ambao hatujai pitisha katika bajeti yetu . Mheshimiwa Spika , tutapangaje 
jambo ambalo halimo hatujalipangia ?  
(Applause ) 
       Leo tuseme tunapitisha hoja hii halafu Mheshimiwa Spika hoja ile tuliopitisha haina pahali 
popote itakapokwenda itakuwa tunachezea Nyumba yetu , ni aliyeleta hoja hii kwanza angekuwa 
ameketi na Kamati ya Fedha na Bajeti ili aweze...  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Caroline . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mr. Speaker any M otion that is brought to the House is just a p rayer, it 
is a prayer that the Hon.  Member is praying that if this can be done by the Executive . So Mr. 
Speaker Hon.  Fadhili is trying to mislead this House , he has he saying that this M otion should be 
taken to the Finance Committee so that they can delibe rate this before it is brought to the Hon.  
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 18 House.  Mr. Speaker it is not true many Members bri ng their M otion s to the Hon.  House and  you 
are the one to direct the M otion to be taken for more details. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswab ah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj . 
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker I think this M otion has financial implications and we are not 
passing a M otion here for fun , we are passing a M otion that will be implemented by the 
Executive . If we decide that this should b e pass ed then we should look at all areas , includin g the 
financial impact of that M otion if passed and Mr. Speaker at the moment as we speak we have 
not budgeted that to be able to accommodate particular office in our system. Thank you.  
       Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Let me put this to rest Members , I think M otion s 
are ideas; M otion s are just ideas and the y are not binded anywhere so a M otion does not bind ,        
If we pass a M otion here it has not bind ed anybody to that effect so this House is deliberating 
ideas … 
(Applause ) 
       A Bill is what is bind ing so you cannot make a Bill if it has not been b inding, so M otion s are 
ideas and any M ember is at liberty to bring the idea. Yes Hon.  Ahmed Omar (Meti), Hon.  Fadhili 
was on the floor … no Hon.  Fadhili can you continue …  
       Chief Whip (Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim ): Time is up . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Fadhili is given a special time because of 
his talking style … 
(Laughter ) 
(Interruption)  
       So he is given special time;  I can see two people are standing what is it? Hon.  Hatimy what 
is the problem?  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , Hon.  Fadhili is not happy with the words 
that you have used in saying that a M otion is just an idea . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mswabah Rashid) : These are ideas and they are not bind ing as a Bill 
is a law; M otion is not a law …  
(Applause ) 
       So we can get Bills out of M otions , I think Hon.  is on the right note .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I stand under Standing Or der Number 93 .    
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi napinga  kanuni ya Bunge nambari  93, mimi 
nilikuwa naendelea na hoja yangu  na Mheshimiwa aliyesimama lau ingekuwa amesimama na 
hoja nyengine tungemruhusu kanuni ya Bunge  yake. Lakini Mheshimiwa Sp ika wakati wan gu 
ulikuwa bado uko kwa sakafu na naendel ea kuchangia ikifika wakati wake tumruhusu alete 
Standing Order  hiyo 93 maan a najua ni ya kusimamisha kikao . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi bado 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 19 nimesimama kupinga hoja hii na naomba niwashawishi ndugu zangu we nzangu tuleteni hoja 
ambazo zitawajenga vijana...  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Hatimy you r Motion has not been 
seconded .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Hon.  Speaker I have not been given a chance .  
       Deputy Speak er (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  You need to request for a seconder . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Mr. Speaker i request Hon.  Mary to second the M otion . 
(Consultation ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Just one minute Order please !  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speak er am not going to second this Motion.  
(Laughter and Applause ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes the M otion has been defeated Hon. Fadhili 
continue.  Hon.  Fadhili can you continue , please Members order ! I had alr eady instructed Hon.  
Fadhili to continue please can you sit down. Yes Hon.  Fadhili you can continue .     
       Hon. Mwalimu : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , mimi kama nilivyosema nimesimama 
kupinga hoja hii lakini nimetangulia kusema hapo awali lau Mheshimiwa A hmed Omar ataketi 
na Kamati a angalie ule uzito wa jambo kama hili na kuliingiza swali kama hili itakuwa ni vizuri 
na ni lazima akae na Kamati Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi naleta hiyo Standing Order  93 na 
naomba Mheshimiwa Saad ani unge mkono…  
(Laughter ) 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Hatimy what is it?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika...  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker I need my M otion to be seconded .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I rise under Standing Order 28 . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  What does it say? Can you read for us ?  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read Standing order No.28) 
Adjournment of County Assembly; a Member may at any time, for reasons stated, seek leave to 
move , ''That this County Assembl y do now adjourn ". 
       Hon. Mwalimu : I second Mr. Speaker .  
(Laughter and a pplause ) 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 20        Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I rise up to second .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  It has already been seconded .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Members let me read the Standing Order 
28 (1) , 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) read Standing Order No. 28)  
         (1) A Member may at any time, for reasons stated, seek leave to move , ''That this C ounty 
Assembly do now adjourn.   
       (2) If the Speak er is of the opinion that such M otion for adjournment of the County 
Assembly is frivolous, vexatious, or an abuse of the proceedings of the County Assembly, the 
Speaker may forthwith put the question thereon or decline to propose it.  
       (3) T he debate on a M otion under this Standing Order shall be  confined to the matter of the 
Motion.  
       So Hon.  Hatimy you have not given us a reason why we do adjourn?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  The reason is that there's no quorum . 
(Laughter ) 
       Depu ty Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Clerk can you ascertain if there's no quorum?  
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
       Sergeant at Arms can you ring the quorum bell . 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Adjournment under Standing Order 28 .  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Caroline . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Auma : Mr. Speaker I just want to correct the House ; the first time Hon. Hatimy 
came up with a M otion and when Hon. Mary stood up the M otion was dropped and again he 
stood up and he  came again with another M otion and it was passed . I just want to correct him 
after the adjournment was dropped , at what time i s he supposed to bring another M otion? 
Because  the first one was dropped and this is the second one and it has been passed . 
(Serg eant at Arms rung the quorum bell)  
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Members, yes Hon. Saad.  
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker I think what we are doing is unprocedural . Mr. Speaker the 
Motion which was brought has already been seconded ; meani ng that you had also requested the 
reason as to why and you were given it is because of the quorum and now even before the Clerk 
started to count the Members who were in the Chief Whip went out to whip people which was 
unprocedural . Mr. Speaker , kindly rul e. 
July 21 , 2016                           COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                             76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 21        Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Members the Standing Order gives me and it 
says,  
       (2) If the Speak er is of the opinion that such M otion for adjournment of the County 
Assembly is frivolous, vexatious, or an abuse of the proceedings o f the County Assembly, the 
Speaker may forthwith put the question thereon or decline to propose it.  
       So I think we can continue .  
       Hon. Mwalimu:  There's no quorum Mr. Speaker . 
       Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Clerk can you ascerta in if there's quorum, 
Clerk ? 
(Consultation ) 
       Clerk , can you confirm if there's a quorum .  
(Clerk confirmed lack of quorum)  
 (Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Members of the County Assembly there's no quorum so this House stands adjourn ed until 
Tuesday ne xt week at 2: 30p.m.  
The House rose at 4: 12p.m. 
    
 
                                                                                      