September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday,  10th September , 2019  
The House met at 2:45p .m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
          The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Hon. Member you may be seated. Yes Clerk next 
Order?  
PAPER  
REPORT  OF THE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION  OF THE MOMBASA COUNTY INVESTMENTS 
AUTHORITY BILL, 2019  (BILL NO. 4) 
Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya, the Chair for Committee on Trade, Tourism and Investments 
please lay down the report.  
(Paper laid)  
 Yes Clerk next Orde r? 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF THE PUBL IC PARTICIPATION REP ORT OF THE MOMBASA C OUNTY INVESTMENTS 
AUTHORITY BILL , 2019  (BILL NO . 4) 
Yes again Hon. Kizito Opeya , Chairperson Committee on Trade, Tourism and 
Investments?  
Hon. Opeya: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Motion that this County Assembly adopts the 
Report on Public Participation of the Mombasa County Investments Authority Bill, 2019 (Bill 
No. 4) laid on the table on 10th September, 2019 by Hon. Kizito Okoth Opeya Chairperson 
Committee on Trade, Tourism an d Investments . 

September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  I now call upon the Majority Leader and a lso a  Member of the Committee of Trade Hon. 
Hamisi Mwidani to second the Motion . 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I arise to second the Motion .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani . Members I now 
propose a question that the Report on Public Participation of the Mombasa County Investments 
Authority Bill, 2019 be adopted .  
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 Yes Hon. O peya?  
Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I would urge the Members here to 
adopt this report which will also enable us to pass the Bill ; this rep ort came about after we did 
ask the members of the public on advert on 16th August, 2019 pa ge 4 for the recommendations to 
submit to us as memorandum s and they submitted , which the Committee passed through them on 
Wednesday September 4th and we have prepared the report.  
We therefore urge the Members to adopt this report so that we can be ab le to pass the Bill 
to enable the County to be able to get further investments because  as you see the investments that 
we get the internal collection s and the ones that we are getting f rom Nairobi are not enough and 
this Bill will enable us through the auth ority to be able to source funds to do more development 
in Mombasa and also to attract the investors to come to Mombasa . Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kizito Opeya. Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa?  
The Majority Leader  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker , as a Member of the 
Committee, the public were required to submit memorandum which they did and actually this 
will be the most important Bill to our Department because it will give chances to the investors to 
come to our County.  So Mr. Speaker I  really support this Motion because of a lot of what we can 
get from the Department , so I arise to support . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa. Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . First let me say thanks  to Allah for hav ing given 
me the chance  to… 
(Silence)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai:  Yes thank you Mr. Speaker to have given me this opportunity  to also air my 
views . I stand to support the Motion with the following reasons;  Mr. S peaker Sir his tory has 
shown itself and indeed  it is true that Mombasa County has grown compared to other Counties. 
Mombasa County has now so many hubs whe reby a lot of adverts and other…  
(Silence)  
September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 (Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Hon. Nzai you may just continue I was just clarifying 
something .  
Hon. Nzai:  This Bill is as good as anything else Mr. Speaker because  Mombasa has 
become a c entre of businesses and tourism…  
(Silence)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nzai ? 
Hon. Nzai:  No I wanted to get  the attention from the Speaker . 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry! Sorry! Yes now you are getting  the full attention, 
continue . 
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I was just  clarifyin g some procedures here with my Clerks, 
yes?  
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker to have given me  this opportunity  to air my views on 
this Bill. The Bill  has come at the  right time and it is good that it needs to be completed and be 
part of ou r document s; the Participation Bill  for Mombasa County Investment Authority has 
come at the right time and it will enable the public to actual ly venture into business in our 
Counties , also it will change through the public participation people will get the a wareness to 
know that Mombasa is no longer the County for Wakali Kwanza … 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kumtaarifu Mheshimiwa ya 
kwamba tunajadili hoja ya ripoti ya Kamati kuhusiana na Mswada hatujafikia kut athmini na 
kuchangia na Mswada wenyewe isipokuwa ni ripoti ya Kamati kuhusiana na Mswada wa 
uwekezaji wa Mwaka wa 2019. Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ripoti inahusu nini? Tunazungumza kuhusu ripoti unataka 
kumueleza Mheshimiwa N zai kuwa ripoti haihusu  mambo ya Bill ama hiyo ripoti inazungumz ia 
kuhusu nini?  
September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ripoti inazungumzia  maoni na mape ndekezo ambayo 
Kamati ilichukua…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No Just read the report , what is the title of the rep ort?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Report on Public Participation of the Mombasa County 
Investments Authority Bill, 2019; report on Public Participation…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Which is touching the Bill as well?   
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Yes. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So he has the right to talk about the Bill .  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Not the report . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  It is the report but at the end of the day we are talking about 
the Bill; the report on the Bill so I think that is what the Hon. Member was con tributing on or 
maybe  mimi ndio n imesikia makosa  or he was addressing as the Bill . He was not addressing the 
report , is that what you are saying?  So Hon. Member I think you got  what the Hon. Mwamwiri is 
saying , instead of addressing the Bill you should addre ss the Report on Public Participation of 
the Mombasa County Investment Authority Bill . 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. But I would like to inform my fellow Hon. Member 
that I do not  have the Report itself at hand , so if maybe he has a copy of it this is an answer from 
the Chair for Tourism and it does not have the contents of the Report. So if he has it, please I can 
know the details of that Report. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerks, do you have  copies  of the Report ? 
(The Table Clerks nodded ) 
 Have you issued the Members  the copies? Can you give Hon. Nzai a copy  of the Report. 
Yes Hon. Thoya?  
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I appreciate the fact that we have learned that  the 
Report is not with us here , but I wo nder why the Hon. Member from Kadzandani was going on 
air and he did  not have the Report . If it was not for Hon. Mwamwiri  I was saying Mr. Speaker I 
think the Hon. Member from Ka dzandani is trying to be smart but if he did not have the Report  
what was he supporting? Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Nzai? I think you have the Report with you now.  
September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. But I do not know whether I am reading the sam e 
line with my colleague or not . What I have at hand  here I think it is an answer from the Chair for 
Trade  but the heading states Report on Public Participation. Now the Report of Public 
Participation containing the details for Mombasa County Investment Authority Bill  is not these 
few lines Mr. Speaker Sir and if this is enough that the Chairman has collected from the public 
now the answers are here he has brought them then I do not think we are sailing in the same boat.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Amur?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker this is  the Report of the Committee in telling the 
House that we received the Memorandums, they were subjected to and the action for amendment 
has been accepted. And that is why it has been brought into this House for Members to know that 
the amendments that were  proposed are going to be incorporated in that Bill. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So and those amendments will come in the second reading, 
is that what you are saying?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai:  Then with that Mr. Speaker I can say thank you for the…  
(Laughter and Applause)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika hadi 
tuweze kufahamu jinsi Ripoti hii imeweza kuandikwa na tuweze kuongea ukweli jinsi Ripoti hii 
imeweza kuandikwa it is unprofessional  kabisa na  tuweze kuambiana ukweli. Kwa sababu 
haijaweza kuweka mahali observation and findings  wakati wa kufanya Public Participation , 
haijaweza kuweka vile vile recommendations  za Kamati  ambazo ziwe na headline  kabisa tuweze 
kuangalia. Lakini leo hii hata ukiangalia R ipoti hii haijawekwa sahihi na Wanakamati 
kuhakikisha kwamba Ripoti hii ni sahihi , ni Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni Mwenyekiti tu  peke 
yake.  
 Ripoti ina  sheria zake zinap okuja katika Bunge na ni vyema Wanachama ka tika Kamati 
hio waweze kufahamu ; haiwezekani kwamba kwa njia ilivyoweza kuandikwa hata leo hii 
unapopeleka Ripoti hii kwa wata alamu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti itakua ni aibu zaidi katika 
Bunge letu la Kaunti ya  Mombasa. Kwa hivyo ningependekeza kwanza Makarani  wetu waweze 
kuelekeza Kamati na kuweza kuwashauri vizuri kama wanavyostahili ili tuweze kupata Ripoti 
ambazo leo au kesho Kamati husik a... kwa mfano hivi majuzi tulikua na Sen eti hapa, 
kuhakikisha moja wapo ya Ripoti katika Bunge hili, tukipeleka Ripoti kama hii Mheshimiwa 
Spika kwanza utaweka kichwa chako wapi? Sisi tutaweka sura zetu wapi?  
 Kwa hivyo ni sisi haswa Waheshimiwa pamoja na Makarani  tafadhalini tuweze kuandika 
Ripoti kama inavyostahili, lakini kwa njia hii hatuendi sawa na tuweze kurekebisha ili Bunge 
lizidi kuenda mbele. Ahsante sana.  
September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nafikiri Ripoti haiwe kwi sahihi na Wanachama  wote, bali 
kumbukumbu  ndio huwekwa sahihi na Wanachama  wote lakini sio Ripoti , na nafikiri tukiangalia 
sheria hii ni kutueleza kuwa kwa sababu tuliweka kwenye Magazeti na kusema kuwa wale 
wananchi wenye mambo yeyote wali o nayo juu ya hii stakabadhi  walete maoni yao.  
Kwa hivyo mimi sioni ubaya wowote watu kuizungumzia hii kabla hatujavunja kwenda 
kwa Whole House  Mheshimiwa Spika. Bado tuko juu huku, tutakuja ijadili ikiwa tuko chini 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo leo kuwa imekuja kwa Second rea ding twaweza kama hivi sasa 
kuambiana na ikija Ripoti kusema ni nini imerekebishwa, ni hapo tena kukubaliana sisi kama 
tumekubali ama tumekataa  Mheshimiwa Spika. Nafikiri kuna sheria ya kufuatwa, kuna First 
reading , Second reading  na kuna Third reading . Naf ikiri tuko pahali ambapo tuko sawa sawa 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwa mujibu wa sheria. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ali Shomari?  
Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. 
Mimi pia nasema kwamba t uko sawa na tungepewa muda kidogo ili tuweze kuichambua 
chambua vizuri Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are in support of the Motion? Or just because Hon. 
Mohamed Hatimy has said it is right and also you are saying it is ri ght?  
Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari:  Hapana Mheshimiwa Spika sio kwa sababu hio, ni 
kwamba hii mada ni nzuri kwa hivyo tu meijadili tumeona kwamba inafaa . Ahsante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Ali Shomari. Yes Hon. Fa ith 
Mwende?  
Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker as much as I wish to support the 
Bill but then again I cannot discuss anything because the Report itself it does not have contents. 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Hon. Faith wha t did you say? Sorry I did not hear 
that. 
Hon. Mwende : I have said there is nothing I can share in the House or I can contribute in 
the House because the Report itself does not have contents. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Maimuna?  
Hon. Maimuna Salim : Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika. Mimi nimesimama kui unga 
mkono kwa sababu hii ni First reading  halafu tutaenda katika Whole House  ndio tuweze 
kuipitisha kama Bill. Kwa hivyo mimi nimesimama kui unga mkono tukae sote kama 
Waheshimiwa kwa Jumba hili tui chambue sisi katika Whole House  halafu ndio tuweze kuijadili 
tena Mheshimiwa Spika.  
September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Maimuna. Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh?  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker althoug h you have ambushed me 
because I was just going through the Report but when it comes to the Assembly for discussion 
about the Bill, then we will be able now to say a lot of things because we are talking about 
Memorandum that we have not seen them here. So how do you ex pect me to say yes or no when 
it is only the Committee that has brought this Report. So normally when it comes to a Report as 
an Assembly we just adopt the Report then it comes to the Bill we do it. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon. Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think I want to weigh into the same, that there 
must be an oversight on this report, because we just expected to have the findings, conclu sions or 
recommen dation by the Committee. This thing was subjected to the public and what did the 
public say? Because immediately after number eight we will go to number nine where we will 
discuss the Bill itself and I think it  is the document we were given previously, which means we  
will have missed  the contents of the briefs that we have here. So to me I feel like we need more 
information about what the public said  and the recommendation by the Committee, thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I must confess that am not conversant 
with what is happening here that  is one . Two Mr. Speaker am not conversant simply because as 
per what the Chairman tabled is that the Mombasa County Investment Bill , 2019 was brought to 
the House  on Tuesday 23rd July, 2019 and it has been a while that we are not conversant with  
the Bill or whatever was tabled on Tuesday 23rd July, hence it creates confusion  on what will you 
discuss and again on the last paragraph and I c an see the Chairman persuading the Hon ourable  
House to adopt the Report on Public Participation of Mombasa County.  
I also fail to understand how I will adopt the Report on Public Participation and yet I 
have no t read the very  report on Public Participation ! So how do I adop t a report that I have not 
seen, the report that I have not read? And get what the report says, it  is not even making sense 
Mr. Speaker . As the initial Member said, can it be professional Mr. Speaker? We should not just 
get shortcuts for us to a pprove  issues here, we will be held  accountable Mr. Speaker for having 
adopte d things that contradict this Hon ourable  House, I will therefore ask the Committee to 
come up with a clear document, if not today, tomorr ow or any day that you will r ule. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire . Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mhesh imiwa 
Spika mimi nimesimama si Mwanakamati kwa hii Kamati, lakini nimesimama kama Mwenyekiti 
wa Kamat i ya Liaison . Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba ama natoa pendekezo ku wa Bunge hili 
lingetoa nafasi iwape Wanakamati wa hii Kamati wakat i mwafaka ili warudi watengeze Ripoti 
hii iliyo mbele yetu . 
 
September 10, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 (Applause)  
 
 Wafanye marekebisho yanayohitajika Mheshimiwa Spika  ili ifike kiwango cha Ripoti 
ambazo zinastahiki kuingia ndani ya Bunge . Kwa hivyo naomba hoja yangu wenzangu Wabunge 
wakubaliane na hoja ambayo nim eileta, kupitia kiti chako ili Kamati irudi n yuma, iende ifanye 
marekebisho katika Ripoti. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili . Hon. Members I think  I will make 
this ruling under Standing order number one ; that I can read the mood of this House that 
Members are not happy with the Report  which has be en given and being given that this i s a very 
important issue and it  is a Bill. So I will ask the Committee on Trade and Investment  to go back 
and write a proper Report, which I think the Hon. Members will  be given a copy for the other 
Reports which came int o this House , you go back and write the Report and write the procedures 
which you took from the day one for this Bill and am sure there are amendments which the 
Committee or the Clerk of this County Assembly has received and he should put those 
amendment s in the Report and tell us where the things to be amended and w hat are the reasons 
you as the Committee, why are you recommending them to be amended  so that the Hon.  
Members can have and read the Report and know where we stand . 
So with those short remark s am going to tell the Chair who is here Hon. Kizito, please g o 
back and make sure you write a proper Report by today evening  so that by tomorrow morning 
the first business will come ba ck and continue back about the Report . So with those few remarks 
I would like the Clerks to give us the next order of the day.  
 
(Low consultations ) 
(Silence ) 
 
Yes, Clerk next order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Wednesday 11th Septemb er, 2019 at 
10:00 a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:18p.m.  