October 2 , 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 2nd October , 2018  
The House met at 2:43p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members, you  may have your seats, y es Clerk?  
PAPER  
DRAF T VALUATION ROLL  
Yes Hon . Hamis i Musa Mwidani . 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity  to lay the paper on draft  valuation roll.  
(Paper Laid ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes C lerk? 
NOTICE OF MOTION S 
CONSTRUCTI ON OF TWO DESALINATI ON PLANTS WITHIN THE  COUNTY  
Yes Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani ? 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker  let me take this opp ortunity to 
give the notice of M otion , construction of two desalination plants wit hin the County of 
Mombasa t hank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Silence ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Can you read the notice of M otion Hon .  Hamis i Musa 
Mwidani?  
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg t o give notice of 
the following M otion . 
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) moved)  
 

October 2 , 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 THAT AWARE  that the County g overnment of Mombasa is charged with the 
responsibility of policy formulation, implementation, administration, operation and 
maintenance  for all matters pertinent t o the provision of clean water and t he 
administration  of the appurtenant regime under the fourth sch edule of the 
Constitution  of Kenya , 2010;  
FURTHER AWARE THAT the issue of  the provision of water in the C oast region 
has historically been a contentious  issue and that the County of Mombasa has been 
experiencing an acute water shortage for in excess of 30 years;  
NOTING THAT this issue hinders the sustainable development of the C ounty and 
city of Mombasa considering the pivotal role water plays in the health and 
development of any economy;  
FURTHER NOTING THAT this matter can be properly visited and handled through 
the provision of water by water desalination of sea water ; 
CONCERNED THAT the general populace acutely affected by the non availability 
of clean consumable water for consumption and development of industry  are 
dwelling in compromising, unhealthy and unsustainable condition s; 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
The County g overnment of Mombasa through the Department of water and natural 
resource s be allowed to source for a bank guarantee to suppo rt the financing and 
construction of two  (2) plants in the County of Mombasa as well as borrow any 
funds required in order to alleviate peren nial water shortage within the C ounty.  
Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi  Musa Mwidani, yes Clerk.  
MISUSE OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT VEH ICLES  
Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy please give the notice of Motion.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker I beg to give notice 
of the following M otion.  
THAT AWARE  that there is a standing of conduct that prohibit a public officer or 
employee from using any government property for other than official purposes;  
FURTHER AWARE  THAT  use of government  - owned or  leased vehicle is 
restricted to official purposes and never be used for private purpo se such a personal 
business, errands and leisure;  
NOTING THAT  it is the responsibility of the Chief Officer to ensure that the 
government vehicles are properly used;  
 
CONCERNED  THAT  some County government vehicle s are being spotted in  odd 
hours in awkward places such as bars;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that: 
October 2 , 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 1. The County government creates a special unit within I nspectorate, tasked with the 
mandate of monito ring the use of all the County g overnment vehicle s. 
 
2. The County g overnment to ensure th at no government vehicle is on the road, 
especially outside office hours (8:00a .m-5:00p .m) unless on official use or car rying 
out an emergency by the officer in charge of the station.  
 
3. The County g overnment to ensure that all government vehicles are brande d with the 
name of the respective County department so as to ease identification as well as curb 
misuse of such vehicles.  
 
4. The County g overnment sensitizes County officers or members of the public to report 
in detail to the Chief Officer any government veh icles suspected of being engaged in 
unauthorized private use.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to request your Chair to give leave to amend this notice to include 
that it is , noting that it is . 
No. 2 the pa ragraph concerning that County g overnment vehicles are bei ng spotted , to 
delete in and add at odd hours, delete at and include in. Mr. Speaker I request to delete where 
the.... Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And the time, you do not want to amend the t ime, 5:00 
p.m. is it ok, from 8:00a.m. – 5:00p.m,  it is fine ? 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : It is fine . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I thought  it was from 8:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
 
(Background noise)  
It was going round the way, the other way round . Ok, so I am sure people will be 
leaving the cars in the offi ce because if the y are leaving their office at 5: 00p.m. or 6:00p.m , 
anyway permission granted you can amend Hon. Hatimy, yes Clerk?  
PROMOTION OF SPORTS I N MOMBASA COUNTY  
Yes, Hon. Athman  Mwam wiri. 
Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante  Mheshimiwa  Spika,  naomba  kutoa ilani ya 
kukuza  masuala  ya michezo  ndani  ya Kaunti  yetu ya Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa  Spika  naomba  
kutoa  ilani ya hoja ifuatayo;  ya kwamba  serikali  ya ugatuzi  iko na dhamana  na majukumu  ya 
kusimamia  masuala  ya michezo  na utamaduni  na shughuli  pamoja  na vifaa  chini ya sehemu  
ya pili  ya ibara ya nne ya  Katiba  ya Kenya….  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili ? 
Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker from the 
order pa per that we have the notice of M otion by Hon. Athman  Mwamiri is written in 
English…  
October 2 , 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 (Applause)  
…unless Mr. Speaker he wants to cha nge the notice of M otion to read in Kiswahili, I 
think he could have asked those who are preparing the order paper to write it in Kiswahili . 
Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Fadhili, yes Hon. Mwamwiri. It’s okay 
you can give Hon. Nzai to read for you if you can’t read in English.  
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika ilani ni ya kwang u na najivunia 
ufahamu wa lugha; naiweza kwa sababu lugha yenyewe,  lugha ya kwanza ni lugha ya 
Kiswahili alafu lu gha ya pili inayofuata ni ya Kii ngereza na Bunge limeruhusu kutumia lugha 
mbili , lakini  lugha ya kwanza katika Jamhuri ya Kenya ni lugha ya Kiswahili lugha ya pili ni 
ya kuomba na mimi sijivunii cha kuomba naj ivunia cha kwangu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Kwa hivyo unaomba tena uongee kwa …  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Kwa Lugha ya mama; lugha ya Kiswahili.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Kwa lugha ya Kiswahili , lakini Hon. Mwamwir i naona 
sasa kuna maneno mengine utayazungumza Kiswahili ambayo hayatolingana na vile 
yalivyoandikwa kizungu. Kwa hivyo hatutakuwa na umuhimu wa sisi kufuatana na Order 
Paper , kwa hivyo itakuwa pia vigumu kutafsiri maneno hayo.  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshi miwa Spika usiwe na shaka juu yangu ufahamu na 
ufasaha niko nao.  
(Applause ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire? I thought you want to…  
Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker since we do not have any 
restriction from our Standing orders and s ince also the Hon. Member never forced to whoever 
typed to type it in English I would wish you to permit him use the language he understand 
most. Thank you.  
(Applause)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes I think it is fine Hon. Mwamwiri as far as whatever 
your addressing the House is within the Standing orders and within the Order paper. So you 
can continue.  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa Spika naomba 
kutoa ilani ya kukuza kwa vipaji vya michezo ndani ya Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa. 
Mheshi miwa Spika naomba kutoa ilani ya Hoja ifuatayo;  
October 2 , 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     76 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of t he Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Tukitambua kuwa seri kali ya Kaunti ama serikali ya g atuzi iko na dhamana na 
majukumu ya kusimamia maswala ya michezo na shughuli za utam aduni pamoja na 
vifaa chini ya ibara ya pili katika ratiba ya nne ya Kat iba yetu ya Jamhuri  ya Kenya.  
Mheshimiwa Spika tukizingatia ya kwamba, Mombasa inafahamika kuwa ni 
nyumbani kwa vipaji hususan maswala ya michezo na vipaji hivi ni nyenzo za kukuza 
uchumi, hali ya maisha na utamaduni katika jamii yetu.  
Ikibainisha michezo ina majukumu makubwa katika kupunguza maswala ya utovu wa 
usalama na maswala yanayovunja jamii hususan miongoni mwa vijana katika gatuzi 
letu la Mombasa.  
Wasiwasi Mheshimiwa Spika Kaunti yetu tunafahamu ama ninafahamu huenda iwe 
na uwezo mahsusi  ama uwezo unaostahiki kuweza kufadhili na kuwezesha vijana 
kukuza vipaji vyao na kutekeleza majukumu haya ya vipaji kama inavyostahiki.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ni naomba Bunge hili tuafikiane ya kwamba Kaunti 
yetu ama gatuzi letu la Mombasa kuendeleza kukuza vipa ji hivi kwa ;  
1. K ujenga tata ya vipaji na michezo a lmaarufu wanaita Complex  kwa Kiswahili 
tunafahamu tata.  
2. Namba ya pili Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia kwa ushirikiano baina ya kampuni 
binafsi na serikali yetu ya gatuzi iweze kufadhili timu changa mashinani  zinazoshiriki 
katika ligi za kimataifa ama ligi ya  kitaifa kwa kuwa inawakilisha K aunti yetu 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri.  Karani ? 
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon.  Members this House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 3rd October , 2018 at 
9:00a.m.    
The House rose at 3:02p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 