September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday , 11th September , 2019  
The House met at 11:22a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Member you may be seated. Yes Clerk  next Order?  
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF REPORT O N PUBLIC PARTICIPATI ON ON MOMBASA COUNTY  INVESTMENTS 
AUTHORITY BILL , 2019  
Yes Hon . Kizito Opeya . 
Hon. Opeya: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Motion that this House adopts the Report on 
Public  Participation on Mombas a County I nvestments Authority B ill 2019 , Bill Number 4 laid 
on the T able on 1 0th September , 2019.  I call upon Leader of M ajority Hon. Hamis i Mwidani to 
second.  
The Leader of M ajority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I arise to sec ond the M otion.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani.  Hon. Members I 
now propose the question that the R eport on Public P articipation on the Mombasa County 
Investment  Authority  Bill, 2019 be adopted . 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
Yes Hon . Kizito Opeya . 
Hon. Opeya: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think before this Ho use everyone has a copy of 
the Report, I would urge all the M embers to support this R eport so that it can enable us go 
through  the process  of passing this Mombasa County Investments Authority Bill. If you read 
through the B ill and am sure you have read through it, there are a lot of benefits which will 
benefit the C ounty . 

September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 2 The benefits of this Bill  will t rickle right down to our W ards, therefore I would urge all 
the M embers to support the Report . Thank you.  
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon Kizito Opeya, Yes Hon. Hamis i Musa .  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante Bwana Spika. Mimi nimeunga 
mkono hii Bill kwa sababu ni kitu tulikuw a tumekosa katika K aunti yetu  kuwa na Public 
Participation  ya The Momba sa County Investments Authority B ill, ambayo hii Bill itaelekeza 
sana kwa watu wa biashara na wanaweza kuele keza mambo ya biashara Mombasa hii .  
Kwa hivyo mimi ningeomba kwa sauti moja t uweze kupitisha Bill tuweze kun ufaika , ni 
moja katika jukumu ambalo pi a ilikuwa hatuja litekeleza kama Kaunti ya Mombasa hivyo basi  
Bwana Spika nawasihi na ku waomba Wabunge wenzangu kwamba tuipitishe hii Bill kwa 
manufaa ya Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa. A hsante Bwana S pika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamis i Musa . Yes Hon. Rose Mary 
Mukavi . 
Hon. Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me the opportunity . I support the B ill 
accordingly, Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Yes Hon. Kitula . 
The Chief Whip (Hon.  Kitula ): Ahsante Bwana Spika . Kwanza nikupatie  pongezi kwa 
jinsi hatua yako u lichukua katika kikao cha jana Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti kwa  kuwa R ipoti 
iliandikwa ndivyo sivyo lakini kongole kwa kuwa Spika shujaa kuweza ku hakikisha Ripoti 
imerudi kwa K amati iandikwe ipasavyo, vile  vile ningependa kuipa kong ole K amati kwa sababu 
leo hii Ripoti imeingia kwa Bunge R ipoti inastahili kabisa kulingana  na sheria japokuwa kuna 
makosa kadhaa ambayo yanaweza kur ekebishika .  
Ningependa K amati iweze  kuwa na marekebisho yafuatayo M heshimiwa Mwenyekiti  
kwamba R ipoti kama hii inapokuja katika B unge ni lazima kila Ripoti iweze ku wekwa sahihi na 
kila Mwanachama katika K amati hiyo . Hiyo ni kwa sababu gani Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti, 
ikiletwa R ipoti hapa tutajuaje kama ni  Karani  wa Bunge na Mwenyekiti wameenda mahali 
wakaandika Ripo ti wakaleta katika B unge hili bila Wanachama  kujua . Kwa hivyo wakitia sahihi 
kwamba Wanachama  wote wameweza kukubaliana na Ripoti ile Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy you are standing on point of ...? 
Hon. Mohammed Hatimy:  Nataka kumwambia kwamba asome 180 sub section  2 
inasema nini  ya Kanuni za Bunge . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : 180 S ub section 2 , Reports of S elect Committees ;    
The rep ort of a Select C ommittee having been adopted by the majority of the Mem bers 
shall be signed by the Chairperson on behalf of the C ommittee .  
Thank you Hon. Hatimy.  Yes Hon . Charles , please continue.  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 3 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ni muhimu kuweza 
kufahamika h icho ni kizungu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti katika Ka nuni za B unge, lakini tuna 
uhak ika gani kwamba hii imekubalika na W anakamati ?  
Ni wao kuweza kuweka sahihi na k ama hii inaleta mjadala katika B unge hili tuweze 
kuleta mtu mwenye ufahamu zaidi lazima  kila R ipoti iweze ku wekwa sahihi ili Wanachama  
waweze kuw a wameridhika na yaliyopo katika R ipoti, hiyo ndio nilikuwa narekebisha.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Charles  I think in this House we are guided by the 
Standing O rders not unless we a mend the Standing O rders, if that is your suggestio n, Yes Hon. 
Samba . 
Hon. Samba:  I would like to tell the House that provided we have the minutes it has 
ascertained that the M embers unanimously agreed, that is the main purpose of us having the 
minut es written.  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Kha tri): So Hon. Charles  maybe we can think of  amend ing the 
Standing O rders and make sure that M embers sign , if that is what you are saying.  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti naomba niwe wazi.. . 
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kuk uambia juu ya watu ku tia 
sahihi;  angalia  Kanuni za Bunge  177 sub section  4 inasemaje, ikiwa Wanachama wamekubaliana 
na Ripoti hakuna haja ya kuleta hiyo…  
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Procedure i n Select Committees 177 (4) ; 
A vote on  a question is not unanimous ; the names of the M embers voting for and against 
the question and those abstaining from voting respectively shall be recorded in the 
minutes .  
Yes Hon . Charles . 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa M weny ekiti naomba niwe wazi kwa hili;  
nimeanza kusema kwanza naunga R ipoti lakini ba adhi ya mwenendo kwanza v ile vile natetea 
Kiti chako Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti  swala kama hili la W anachama kutia sahihi kwanza itakuja 
baadae k wamba Ripoti inayot oka kwa Kamati fulani lakini R ipoti ile Wanachama hawajaridhia 
itatumiwa sababu kama hiyo ya leo kwamba R ipoti iko sawa kwa sababu Wanachama  wote 
hawajaridhia . Majina yalioko pale ni M wenyekiti ana yetoa sahihi,  itakuwa ni  ni sawa vile  vile 
leo hii Karani w a Kamati  na M wenyekiti wakienda mahali  wajadiliane waelewane M wenyekiti 
atie sahihi , hiyo itakuwa ni sawa kuingia katika B unge.  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nalinda K iti 
chako kwamba ni heri kila Mwanachama  anapoletewa R ipoti aweze kuweka sahihi kwamba 
ameridhika  na hiyo ripoti . 
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 4 Sijapinga Ripoti lakini kulinda K iti chako na hadhi ya B unge hili kwamba ni vizuri kila 
Mwanachama katika K amati aweze kutia sahihi ili kwamba ameridhia na K amati hiyo, hiyo ndio 
wazo langu M heshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Charles Kitula . Yes Hon . Renson Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana M wenyekiti . Nafikiri kwa sababu  Kanuni za Bunge  
zimetufunga lakini inakuwa ni vyema kwamba tuangalie siku za usoni  kile anachojaribu 
kuzungumza Mheshimiwa Kitula tusikichukulie hiv i hivi kwamba kuna uwezekano siku zengine 
unakuta M wenyekiti anaamua kufanya kazi bila kuhusisha Wanachama japokuwa Kanuni za 
Bunge  zinasema hiv yo lakini pia tuko na nafasi ya kuhakikisha kwamba tunarekebisha .  
Kwa hivyo ni mambo am bayo pengine sik u za uso ni yaangali we hapo ndio anajaribu 
kutetea Mwenyekiti ama K arani wake wanaweza kwenda kaa wakaandika cooked report  
wakaleta hapa B ungeni lakini hayo ni mambo ya usoni sio ya sa a hii kwa sa a hii tutaenda vile 
Kanuni za Bunge z inasema.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khat ri): Thank you Hon . Renson Thoya, Yes Hon. Leila . 
Hon. Nyache: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii . Pia mimi 
naunga mkono hii Bill kwa sababu Mheshimiwa S pika tukipata wa wekezaji wa  kutosha na 
kufanya biashara hapa kwetu K aunti ya Mombas a italeta natija na K aunti yetu itaweza kusonga 
mbele.  
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Charles .  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa ningependa confirmation  ya M heshimiwa 
aliyesimama kwamba sa a hizi tunajadili R ipoti ya Public P articipation  bado hatujaenda Second 
Reading  tuko kwa R ipoti ya Public P articipation . Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Yes Hon. Leila . 
Hon. Nyache: Ahsante M heshimiwa Kitula kwa kunitoa taka  masikio mimi pia naunga 
mkono Ripoti hii M heshimiwa Spik a. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ali Shariff . 
Hon. Ali Omar Shariff: Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika. Nimesimama pia kumuu nga 
mkono M heshimiwa mwenzangu Leila Nyache .  
(Laughter ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry? Hon. Ali Sheriff unamuunga mkono M heshimiwa 
Leila kuhusu nini?  
Hon. Ali Omar Shariff: Kuhusu kuunga mkono R ipoti hii . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay thank you Hon. Shariff.  Yes Hon . Mwamwiri . 
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 5 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika . Niungane na W aheshimiwa 
wenzangu kumpa kongole M wenyekiti wa K amati husika na Wanachama wake japo tukiende lea 
mbele ni bora na ni muhimu K amati zetu kutekeleza majukumu parwanja ama wazi  wazi , 
tukiangalia katika kifungu cha tatu katika observations  and findings  tunapata ya kwamba baada 
ya tangazo lao kwa gazeti w alipokea kumbukumbu nne pekee .  
Mombasa ina G atuzi ndogo sita na kata ndogo 30 kwa kupokea kumbukumbu hii 
unaweza kadir ia kila kumbukumbu ilikuwa ina Wanachama wangapi walio weka sa a hii ipe 
takriban kumi ama ishirini, kwa nne hawajafika hat a wananchi mia m oja k atika G atuzi letu ni 
mwafaka n a ni bora zoezi hili la kuchuku a maoni  kwa wananchi liwe linatekelezeka mashinani 
ili wananchi waweze kupata fursa ya kuchangia moja kwa moja  kulikoni njama hizi za kuchuku a 
kumbukumbu mara nyingi zina  hujumu haki na maku sudio ya ugatuzi katika utende  kazi wetu . 
Tukiend elea mbele ni jukumu letu kama B unge tuhakikishe tunach ukua maoni kule mashinani 
moja kwa moja. A hsante Mheshimiwa S pika. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Y es, Hon . Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to also air my views. 
Mr. Speaker S ir, as far a s I would like to support this Report, I have at hand of the R eport with 
me and I would wish or rather suggest on the amendment that few issues be looked upon. I f you 
go to clause ten and eleven. .. 
(Low consultation)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili, I think maybe you wanted to say 
something to the Hon. Member as a point of information?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I just wa nted to inform 
the Hon. Member th at we are still discussing the Report from the Committee on Trade, Tourism 
and Investment and in the R eport Mr. Speake r there are no clauses in this Report.  
So it is as if he  is introducing other b usinesses that are not in  this R eport, thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : But I think the question which I put on this to adopt, so he 
has the right to  decide whether to agree or disagree, so maybe he  is not agreeing with those 
amendments , is that what you are sayi ng? You are not agreeing with the report?  
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. O kay I want first to accept the correction from my 
colleagues , actually I do appreciate the R eport which came from the Committee, I thought...  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khat ri): So the Hon. Member is telling that just touch on the R eport 
so you do  not go to the Bill.  
Hon. Nzai:  I thought we had reached that s tage, but well I have seen the R eport and I 
really welcome it am waiting for the time to discuss it, thank you.  
The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Yes, Hon. Mohamed Moha med?  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 6 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nimeisoma 
hii Ripoti na nataka kuwaambia N yumba hii kuwa safari imeanza na inaonekana kuwa safari ni 
ndefu kwa sababu hiki kitabu twaona ni kikubwa sana.  
Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia Kanuni za Bunge  126(2)(3)(4) utakuta kuwa hakuna 
marekebisho yeyote  amba yo yanafanywa;  kwa hivyo kwa sababu hii itachukua mda mrefu 
kwenda through hii Bill. Mheshimiwa Spika  naomba tupitishe kwa sauti mo ja sote hii karatasi 
iliyowekwa juu ya M eza leo, ili tuweze kuendelea na hii kazi ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Hatimy but that comes on the S econd 
Reading?  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Tunazungumza neno R ipoti, yaani Motion  iwe fupi ili tupa te 
wakati kwenda kwenye Bill Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, but even if you read the title of ... under  Standing O rder 
126, it  is very clear , it is in Procedures in Committee of the W hole County Assembly on a Bill,  
so we are not there. T hank you.  Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker mine is to inform the Members and the House, tha t 
once it was committed to the Gazette and the Memorandum, even if it i s only one person who 
wrote, it  is representing the Mombasa County we shou ld be very clear when we are doing such 
things even if only one person appears on behalf of Mombasa County, it is taken as representing 
as Mombasa County . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, but Hon. Amur, the Hon. Member, he was just 
suggesting that it  is good we go to the grass root and there is no harm on that, maybe what we can 
do is make sure that in our budget or in our next budget ..., because the proble m we have is the 
issue of funds  so we make sure we keep a lot of money for Public  Participation in the grass root 
that was his suggestion and even yourself you agree. People from your area am sure they are not 
aware of this issue, so it   is good that we go to the grassroot , that was the suggestion from the 
Hon. Member.  
Hon. Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker with all due respect I accept what you are sayi ng but 
again when we are doing this Public Participation, it  is demoralising we are doing participation 
we hire places, everything and the turn out sometim es is not acceptable. S o why should we b e 
doing something we had agreed on Sub -Counties Mr. Speaker,  the same people who are coming 
from the Sub -Counties can represent, when we go down am not denying them the right to 
participate but again those people who will intend to come and participate th ey do  not appear, I 
have seen it personally when we have been doing it in Tononoka several times only low turn outs 
that comes Mr. Speaker thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I just wanted to inform the Member who was on 
the floor trying to purport that the process of Public Participation on the grass root le vel that has 
not been done well.  I would like to inform him that what has made this process not to take place 
well Mr. Speaker is becau se of the preparation and that availability of funds and there is no way 
you can prepare such a process when we  have not been given enough information and how you 
prepare it Mr. Speaker.  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 7 For example if you are told today, you are given information today th at tomorrow, you 
are supposed to be doing Public Participation and then maybe you go on hiring all those things 
which are supposed to enable the process Mr. Speaker definitely the turn up will be very low, but 
if it is putting the law and we  will be having  enough funds and people are informed in advance 
am very sure that mobilization will take place at good time and people will come and definitely 
the process will be successful, thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kumta arifu Mheshimiwa wa Mji 
wa Kale, labda kwa sababu anatoka Mji wa Kale  pia mwenyewe anakaa ni wa kale. Ibara 174 ya 
Katiba inazungumzia objective of devolution , makusudio ya kuumbwa wa serikali G atuzi, kwa 
umri alio nao na nam uona ana mi wani bado ana fursa ya kupitia K atiba na kusoma asome, 
asipotoshe Bunge hili kusema ya kwamba hakuna sababu ya kufanya elimu nasaha ama Public 
Participation  mashinani.  
 Hali kadhalika Mheshimiwa Spika Bunge hili awamu ya kwanza, wal itumia pesa ny ingi 
kupitisha she ria inayoitwa ‘Mombasa County Public Participation Bill’  ambayo ndani yake ibara 
ya 9 inasema ni lazima Public Participation  ifanyike , tena  kwa usimamizi wa Sub-County 
Administrators  na Ward A dministrators  kwa maeneo yao, sio kwa memorand um, sio kwa 
chumba cha Mikutano , sio kwa Tononoka H all. 
 Mheshimiwa Spika imefikia wakati kuwa sisi tuwache historia katika nyumba hili ya 
kwamba tumetekeleza na ustahiki kwa mujibu wa kanuni na sharia. Public Participation ni 
lazima yeye atake asitake tum ewaridhia kwa hili ya Memorandum  lakini hii ha ijafikia makusudio 
ya serikali G atuzi na kwenda  wako, Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kauli hizi tutaanza kupingana na 
ripoti ambazo hazikutekeleza majukumu sahihi na kupeana fursa kwa wananchi kuwachangia 
wanayoyatak a kw a utekelezaji wa serikali. Lengo la Devolution  ni wananchi kufanya m aamuzi 
ni nini wanakitaka, kwa Memorandum  wametuambia tumekubali ... 
 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa labda hamuelewani, huyu 
Mheshimiwa Amur anase ma ya kwamba tukifanya Public Participation  kule mashinani, 
wananchi hawatokei ndio nasema sasa naf ikiri jambo la muhimu ni wananchi waelimishwe 
wajue civic education  wajue ni manufaa gani watapata kwa Public Participation , I think that is 
the most issue kwa hivyo haina haja muanze kurushiana . Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
Hon. Thoya:  Nafikiri Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti najivunia umri wa Mheshimiwa Amur 
na naona hio ndio inafanya kidogo ujaribu kuingia kwa mawazo yake, lakini ukweli 
hakuma anisha hivyo sisi tulivyo sema hii ni sawa lakini siku za usoni tungependa mambo f ulani 
yafuatwe na tuna analyse  tunataka hii kitu, hata kama haitaenda kwa kila Wodi , ifanywe katika 
hizi Sub-County  sita, watu waitwe pale watu kujitokeza kutojitokeza ni vile sisi tunavyo panga, 
lakini  kama tuna hio kasumba ya jadi ni lazima tutoke hapa Treasury Square, kama tunaheshimu 
Gatuzi everything must go to the Ward level  hio ndio tunalilia . Lakini kulingana na Ripoti 
tumesema kuna hapa na pale lakini tunaridhia lakini siku za usoni tungependa k uona hivi na 
naona hilo si wazo baya tusirudi tena pale pale kuhak ikisha kwamba tunateseka  hapa Treasury 
Square, watu wangu wanataka kujua hii kitu na naf ikiri hawana habari nayo ni wangapi 
wanasoma magazeti jamani? Ni wangapi wanasoma magazeti na umaskini  huo? Munayasoma 
nyinyi hapa hapa Treasury Square.  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 8 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya . Again I think all of you 
Members are reading in the same line, it  is because you do  not want to understand each other or 
what, because the main issue is the civic education, wananchi waelimishwe na wajue ya kwam ba 
watu wakienda mashinani pia kukaa katika Public Participation  hayo matakwa yao pia nayo  
yatachukuliwa, isiwe ni kukaa tu watu wakae wapige gumzo matakio yasichukuliwe, so I think 
it's high time Hon. Members for  wananchi waelimishwe wajue faida ya  Public Participation . Yes 
Hon. Nyiro?  
Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nimeridhia na mawazo ya wenzangu na 
sitaki nizue bugdha  kwa sababu ni jambo ambalo linaleta natija katika Ka unti ya kwamba 
mambo haya yaendel ee. Japo kwa walakini yangu ni kwamba nina wasiwasi kama wa nanchi 
wangu wa Bamburi wanajua  lakini kwa sababu kuna wachache vile Mheshimiwa Amur alisema 
walisha participate  wakawakilisha watu wangu wa Bamburi na Bill hii ita leta natija . Mimi 
naunga mkono  Ripoti hii na kwenda mb ele kama wenzangu walivyosema  Kamati tusikae katika 
vyumba vya Bunge hili na kuita wananchi waje hapa kwa sababu tuna maofisi na wananchi 
wako kule mashinani ni vizuri tuwafikie watakuwa pi a nao wanaona kwamba wanahusishwa na 
serikali ya ugatuzi, kwa hivyo naunga mkono na marekebisho yafanywe kule mbele na twende 
mashinani ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon. Ramla?  
Hon. Ramla Said : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naung a mkono ripoti ya Public 
Participation . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ramla . Yes Hon. Mwaka Z ahoro? 
Hon. Mwaka Zahoro:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti naunga mkono Ripoti 
iliyoletwa mbele yetu na Kamati ya Biashara . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khat ri): Thank you Hon. Mwaka . Yes, Hon. Junior Wambua?  
Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Naunga mkono hii Hoja na sema kuwa 
ni muhimu kwamba kuel imisha ili watu wangu wa chaani waweze pia kuijua kabla ya kuipitisha 
ahsante sana Mheshimiwa.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Feddis?  
Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Hata mimi na unga mkono Ripoti hii ya 
Kamati ya Biashara  asilimia 99. Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Salim Kalume?  
Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nikiwa  Mwanachama  wa Kamati 
ya Biashara  nimesimama kuunga mkono na naomba Jumba hili pia Waheshimiwa wenzangu 
wauunge mkono Mswada  huu uweze kupita na yale mapendekezo yenu pia tumeyasikia tutaweza 
kuyarekebisha baadae. Ah sante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Salim Kalume. Hon. Kizito Opeya please 
reply.  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 9 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. First of all I would like to thank my colleagues for 
their contributions during this debate. As the Chairman I have pi cked up one or two issues from 
my colleagues and I would w ant to tell you that the other three  Bills that we are working on that 
we are going to bring to this House and I promise you that the issues here would not come about 
when those three  Bills come up. So than k you very much.  
(Applause)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kizito Opeya. Hon. Members I now put the 
question that the report on the Public Participation of the Mombasa County Investement 
Authority Bill  be adopted . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes Clerk?  
BILL  
 
FIRST READING  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY I NVESTMENTS AUTHORITY  BILL, 2019  (BILLS NO .4) 
 
(The Bill was read for the First Time)  
 
Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya please move the Bill?  
Hon. Opey a: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Bill – That the Mombasa Investments Authority 
Bill, 2019 (Bills No.4)  be now read a second time. I would like to kindly ask my Vice Chairman, 
Hon. Khamis Khamis Salim to second.  
Hon. Ahmed Salim:  I second.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ahmed Khamis. Hon. Members I now 
propose a question that the Mombasa County Investments Authority Bill, 2019 (Bill No.4) be 
now read a second time . 
(Question proposed  and agreed to ) 
 Yes Hon. Kizito O peya?  
Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think before us we have the Mombasa County 
Investments Authority Bill , everyone has gone through it and I think this is the Bill which if you 
read it, a lot of the things that are inside the Bill will have to pass through the authority of the 
Assembly from the Members to what to how the authority is going to run.  
So we are going to be big stakeholders in this because everything they do has to pass 
through here, if you read it here from the Members who are go ing to be put as the Chairman and 
how they are going to work if they have to borrow money or to do anything.  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 
10 Therefore  the Assembly will be a big partner in this, a big stakeholder. So do not think 
that you will be left out that we are passing something and then it is going to be run somewhere 
else. So what I will urge is that to look at it carefully and pass it for the interest of the residents 
of Mombasa. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I think we are now heading 
for a Second Reading and then I think we will go to the Committee of the Whole House. I will 
contribute later Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You can still contribute . Yes Hon. Nzai I think now you can 
contr ibute on the Bill.  
Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. But I am not very sure whether it is the stage to 
discuss. Mr. Speaker Sir I thought according to Order No.  9 the Chairman just read the topic, the 
head and then we go to the next item then we debate. And that was why I was hesitating to start 
and then…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nzai. Clerk, Hon. Members I think if you 
have anything now we can now debate on the Bill. Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker  since the amendments were captured I have nothing 
to put in Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimeweza kusimama kuweza 
kuunga mkono Hoja hii na mimi  nilitumai labda mtu wa kwanza kusimama kuunga mkono Hoj a 
hii angekua Mheshimiwa Feddis  kwa sababu anatoka katika Gatuzi la Mwakirunge ambalo lina 
ardhi kubwa kabisa ambayo kwa miaka mingi imeweza kuwa bila hata kufanywa maendeleo 
yeyote katika eneo lake Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Lakini kupitia Bill hii siku ya leo, endapo 
tutapitisha katika Bunge letu itakuwa mara ya kwanza kuweza kupatia fursa ya wa wekezaji kuja 
katika Kaunti yetu kuweza kuangalia sehemu ambayo wanaweza kufanya biashara kadha wa 
kadha Mheshi miwa Mwenyekiti.  
 Tukiangalia Section 4 ya hii Bill Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  imeweza kupatia nguvu 
kwamba , the Authority shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession, which can sue and 
be sued and with a common seal and shall, in its corporate name, be  capable of:  
 (a) Taking, purchasing or otherwise acquiring, holding charging or disposing of 
property;  
(b) Borrowing money;  
(c) Making investments;  
(d) Entering into contracts;  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 
11 (e) Doing or performing all other acts or things for the proper performance of its 
functions . and th is act which may lawfully be done or performed by a body corporate.  
 Kwa hivyo ni fursa sisi wananchi wa Mombasa Kaunti Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa 
sababu sana pesa tunazopata kwa Serikali ya Kitaifa hazitutoshi . Lakini kuna wawekezaji ambao 
wako tayari, lakini wawekezaji hawa bila sheria ni vigumu w ao kuwaleta katika Kaunti yetu , 
kupitia siku hii, endapo tutaunda sheria hii itakuwa wao wana amani na wana haki kwamba pesa 
zao zitakuwa ziko salama. Lakini vile vile mapendekezo yangu  katika Bill hii, kipengele hiki 
Mheshimiwa kwa sababu sisi tutapitisha sheria hii, laki ni sheria hii itakua maishani M heshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti , itakua maishani katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa.  
 Kwa hivyo ningependekeza Section 4  hiki kipengele a,b,c,d viweze kupitishwa na Bunge 
la Kaunti la Mombasa kuhakikisha kwamba approval  imeweza kufanyiwa na Bunge la Kaunti  ya 
Mombasa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ahsante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula. Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for the opportunity awarded. Mr. Speaker I 
would like to applaud this particular Bill and I am in full support of it. And I would like to say 
that we just recently experience d some stalem ate which really affected our Counties, is sues of 
the bulk that sho uld be disbursed to the County government s whereby the two top Houses, the 
Senate and the National Assembly were fighting over on the cake that should come to the County 
government Mr. Speaker , and you see that one has really affect ed the running an d the activities 
of the County government.  
Now today, we look at this Bill it also make s some connections  on that, that Mr. Speaker 
the investment laws are now clear in our County and people will be empowered now to invest, 
people also wil l be empowered to borrow some funds whi ch can also help. Because even what 
we get Mr. Speaker is not enough actually to run our County , and  by we provid ing this one to me 
I think that is a very good improvement to us. Thank  you, I support the Bill.  
The Sp eaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim Omondi. Yes Hon. Juma Bo y? 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I had a few observations, I am 
looking at the amendments Mr. Speaker ; it has about 42 Clauses and the Mother Bill also has 
around t he same, 43 Clauses if I am not wrong. So in my little experience I am of the opinion 
that an amendment should be a correction, or a small alteration to a Bill so that to improve it , but 
where there are major corrections, I think the best way is probably you..., Mr. Speaker I am 
hearing some consultations…  
(Background consultations)  
 But what I was trying to put across is where there are minor corrections it is when we opt 
for an amendment , but where there are corrections that are major and they affect the subst ance 
and the whole intention of the Bill, I think the best procedure was to repeal the Mother Bill and 
then now bring about this new Investments and Corporation Act. Because essentially I think all 
the Clauses have touched on amendment and I think an amend ment should be brief correction or 
an alteration of the Mother Bill so that to put in a better form , It should not been an alteration of 
a substantial part of a Bill. So that is one observation….  
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 
12 (Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But on the same no te, are we guided by the Standing 
Orders? Because I think this House is guided by the Standing Orders. Is there anything from the 
Standing Orders saying that if they will be amendments more than whatever you are thinking 
you should go back and, you see we are in this House guided by the Standing Orders and when 
the Standing Orders is saying amendment, I do not think when you say amendment we are given 
a certain portion to amend? So…  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Amriya Juma : Mr. Speaker I stand guided, but when y ou are looking at the legal 
drafting principles and rules of legal drafting. It is not about the rules it says, it is about 
procedure in drafting. Yes those are the…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But have you gone through the amendments? What i f maybe 
the amendments have something to small to be amended but they are still in the same Clauses 
which they are here? Maybe they are some words which were missing there?  
Hon. Amriya Ju ma: Yes…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So all these a mendments are they new amendments? Or they 
are things which are already in this Bill that has to be maybe amendments with some small 
letters? Have you gone through the amendment?  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Amriya Juma:  Yes I have gone through the Mother Bill jus t briefly plus the 
amendments and I have seen that the amendments touch  on almost all Clauses because we have 
43 Clauses as the Mother Bill and also 43 amendments on the Amendment Bill. So…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are saying in short in t he New Bill we will have 86 
Clauses, is that what you are saying?  
Hon. Amriya Juma:  No, I am not saying that Mr. Speaker. I am saying that we  have  43 
Clauses for the proposed amendments and also in the Mother Bill we have the same. So 
essentially it means that all the  Clauses in the Moth er Bill  need alteration. So in my experience I 
have seen that where there is a substantial alteration in a Bill the proposed or the better procedure 
is normally you repeal the Act and then now you form the new Act . 
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 
13 Rather tha n having amendments of all the clauses you can do another Act because it  is 
almost that all these clauses have a defect that was first my observation.  And the second 
observation…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I would like to inform the Member  she is talking about 
the amendments and is trying to purport that these amendments are affecting the mother Bill . Mr. 
Speaker Sir but to me as I observed as much as these clauses are very many I do  not think i t 
entirely affect s the Bill , the only thing i have   seen here is that most of these amendments are 
touching ; that is like words for example you look like clause number 9 , am just giving an 
example that clause 9 of the Bill be amended deleting the word authority  and inse rting the word 
corporation  so you find that this amendment  does not actually affect the mother Bill…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon…  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Omondi: …and then number two Mr. Speaker as you said this House is guided b y 
the rules and the Standing Order . Mr. Speaker Sir, now maybe the Member should tell us if there  
is a Standing Order that does not allow us to take these any further…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim . Hon. Amriya I think that  is why I 
asked you have you gone thro ugh the Bill and the amendments ? It seems like you have not gone 
through it because according to my small knowledge that I have gone through the Bill, I can see 
most of the amendments are on the word authority  to corporation  every where the word 
authority  appears to be replaced by the word corporation , so that  is why I asked you are you 
saying that amendments will have 86 instead of 43…  
Hon. Amriya Juma : Yes. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Moha med, are you on a point o f Information?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nimezungumza na mwenzangu Mheshimiwa Amriya na 
tumekubaliana kuwa hapa hakuna  marekebisho  yeyote kwa sababu hii ni ripoti ya public 
participation , hii Bill imekuja ukisoma  soma hii na usome na hii zimeo ana pamoja vile vile 
zimeand ikwa hapa zita replace  zile zilizoko hapa ndio iende ikawe sheria  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Kwa hivyo nataka tukubaliane kuwa hii Bill ni moja hakuna marekebisho  yeyo te hayo ni maoni 
kutoka kwa public participation  ambayo sisi tumetumwa na hili Bunge kwenda kuona wanan chi 
watupatie maoni yao. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Member ar e you on a point of information ? Hon. 
Amriya is still on the floor, I hope you are in a point of information Hon. Renson . 
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 
14 Are you on a point of information ? So let the Hon. Member because  she is still on the 
floor , so Hon. Amriya Boy please continue . 
Hon. Amriya Juma : Mr. Speaker I stand guided but from the information that has been 
vanished on my end it appears that the Bill has gone t hrough pre public participation ; it has not 
yet gone through the House for it to have an amendments so that has come to my knowledge.  But 
on my second point Mr. Speaker the first one was alive to the fact that if all the clauses had an 
amendment then it  is better if the Act has passed we repe aled it but am told that the Act was not 
passed which it still  is at the pre publication stage which is well noted Mr. Speaker.   
My second observation was with the regard to public participation report on their 
comment of replacing authority  with the corporation, are we at that stage? Can I talk about it or 
we are not yet there? Because in my opinion an authority is a governing body that has 
administrative power to look after a certain administrative function  but when we are talking 
about a co rporation  it is a fo rm of company that has legal capacity  and can be sued, can sue, can 
hire, can fire and it can attract shareholding and it can borrow . So am a bit reserv ed to go that 
direction of co rporation because again it has its merits and demerits ; it might end up in cou rt 
being sued  because if we go the way of co rporation it means it  is type of a company because an 
authority is an administrative body that oversight over administrative power but co rporation is a 
form of company in my opinion . So that was my observation agai n, but I stand guided.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Amriya. Yes Hon. Renson Juma?  
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Mimi naunga mkono na kile kitu ningependa 
kusema ni kuwa makini zaidi manake wengi wa wawekezaji wameweza kuja na tunawaona 
tunasikitika kwamba Jumba hili linatakikana kuweka sheria ya kuweza watu wetu kupata 
manufaa . Naomba ikiwa wawekezaji watakuja hususan ni sehemu zile ambazo ziko wazi vile 
nimetajiwa Mwakirunge ni lazima tujue kuna ardhi na kuna watu ambao wanakalia hizo a rdhi, ni 
lazima mambo yote yawe wazi jinsi gani wale watu watakuwa compensated , watapata manufaa 
gani ama ajira, mambo yote hayo yawe wazi na ni faida  gani Kaunti hii ya Mombasa itaweza 
kupata kwa sababu nilikuwa nikijadiliana na mwenzangu hapa kutoka Likon i nikisema ile  
madini ya Titanium  inatoka Kwale lakini inakuja kupakiwa hapa Likoni Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa inapata nini mbali na leseni ama kile kibali cha kufanya ile biashara.   
Kwa hivyo haya mambo yetu lazima yawe wazi kwa sababu wawekezaji watakuja laki ni 
isije wakaja tukabaki vile vile ambavyo tuko ama tukarudi nyuma na hawa wawekezaji. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Juma Renson. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri? Yes 
Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho? I thought you were standing to say something. Yes Hon. Mwamw iri 
continue   
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  nilikuwa 
nikipitia makashablasha niliyo nayo , the amended  version  na original version ; Mheshimiwa 
Spika katika Clause  4 tumeelezewa majukumu ya corporation hii ama taasisi hii i nayoundwa, 
sehemu ya 4 ya pili ndogo (a) inasema borrowing money . 
Mheshimiwa Spika katika m asuala ya taasisi ama serikali Gatuzi kuomba pesa kuna 
taratibu na hapa ukifika sehemu ya tatu inasema the entire shareholding of the co rporation shall 
be owned by t he County government  lakini  nguvu za taasisi ama serikali Gatuzi kuomba pesa 
lazima ipate approval  kutoka kwa Bunge na mkopo uwe lazima udhaminiwe na serikali kuu . 
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 
15  Lakini hapa kiupeo wangu sijaliona hilo likiangaziwa kwa hivyo huenda tukawa nje kwa 
ufahamu w angu katika zoezi zima la taasisi zetu kuomba pesa na idhini ya Bunge na pasi na 
serikali kuu kukubali kuwa mdhamini wa zoezi lile.  Kadhalika Mheshimiwa Spika katika 
sehemu ya 6 (d) kwenye original version  inasema four professionals appointed through a 
competitive process by the Mombasa County Public Service Board in consultation with the 
Executive Committee Member and the Governor  ambalo hii ndilo mwelekezo na mwafaka katika 
zoezi nzima la kuteua wafanyi  kazi katika taasisi zozote zilizoko chini ya serikali  Gatuzi lakini 
katika marekebisho yao Mheshimiwa Spika  sehemu hiyo ya sita wameondoa wanne  wakasema 
six professionals appointed through a competitive process by the Executive Committee Member 
and the Governor . 
Mheshimiwa Spika kiufahamu wangu hili halipo nguvu za kuajiri zipo kwa County 
Government Public Service Board  na haziko kwa Waziri  hiyo ni kulimbukizia mamlaka na 
madaraka ya kuiendesha taasisi hii kama chombo chake  binafsi lakini tungebakia kwenye 
original version  ambayo ndio mwelekezo wakikanuni ya kwam ba competitive process  lazima 
ipitie kwa Kaunti Service Board  ambapo kuna utangazaji wa nafasi zile, kuna watu kupeleka 
maombi na watu kutahiniwa na kuhakikiwa na mwisho kabisa watu kuajiriwa na kusukumwa 
ama kutumwa kwa sehemu za kutekeleza majukumu. Kwa hivyo katika hii amendment  kimimi 
naona imehujumu kanuni za uajiri. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Yes Hon. Nzai?  
Hon. Nzai: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Now i have got all reasons to smile as far as I had 
wish ed to support this Bill , I have two reasons as to why I feel this Bill must go through . When 
we look  on our documents page 16 ther e is a topic or rather a headline Investment Management ; 
when  you come to invest management Article 32 you will find out that this B ill will make our 
County to create their own source of revenue which means the local collection migh t double 
itself in the near future . 
Also on page 17 part 3 (3) this document contain issues of sources of investment capital 
in our County ; Mr. Speaker we have  so many jobless groups and by creating a source of 
investment capital it means most youth s can  come up with businesses which will ease the 
cong estion of jobless youth in our Wards, this means by passing this Bill we are going to reduce 
the idleness for our you th in our areas. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nzai. Yes Hon. Moses Aran?  
Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity 
(Inaudible/Technical hitch) ... 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Opeya please reply .  
Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to congratulate my fellow Members for 
supporting this Bill, this Bill will provide legal framework on the investments which will be done 
in the Mombasa County and this will definitely improve the County of Mombasa . Thank you 
very much.   
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kizito Opeya. Hon. Members I now put the 
question that the Mombasa County Investment Authority Bill, 2019 be now read a second time . 
September 1 1, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           77 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansar d Editor Page 
16 (Question p ut and agreed to)  
 Yes Clerk?  
(The Bill was read for the Second time ) 
Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Pursuant 
to Standing Order 27 (2) House of Meeting Mr. Speaker  the morning sitting ends at 12 :30p.m ; on 
that note under Standing Order 27 (6) I move the Motion that I interrupt so that we can resume in 
the afternoon session and commence to the Committee of the Whole House. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker and I ask  Hon. Amur to second.  
(Hon. Murfad Amur  secon ded) 
ADJOURNMENT  
Thank you Hon. Members I now put a question that  the House be adjourned until 
2:30p.m . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
The House rose at 12:24p.m.  
 
   
   
           
        
 
          
 
 
 
 