October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 3rd October , 2018  
The House met at 2:41p.m. 
 
(The Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members and students we may be seated . Yes 
Clerk?  
COMM UNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon. Members I wish to bring to the attention of this Hon orable  Assembly we have 
class five pupils from Qubaa Muslim School.  I recognize the presence of the delegation 
which consists of:  
1. Abdallah Yunus Abdallah  
2. Abdallah Anwa r 
3. Abdilhakim Abdullah  
4. Abdulhamid Nahid  
5. Abdulrahman Abdulwahid Abdul  
6. Abdulrahman Moham ed 
7. Abud Moha med Ali  
8. Adam Abdulrahman Hajj  
9. Ahmed Abdallah Ahmed  
10. Ahmed Moh amed Ahmed  
11. Ahmed Nassir Subeya  
12. Ahmed Said Ahmed  
13. Ajmal Karama  
14. Ali Abubakar Kadhey  
15. Ayub Abdulkadir  
16. Fawaz Ali Abdallah  
17. Fawaz Fahad Farid  
18. Hamud Gadaf Moh amed 
19. Hamza Khalid  
20. Ibrahim Yassir Said  
21. Ilyas Abdulhakim  
22. Ilyas Awil  
23. Issah Gure Mohamed  

October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 24. Jabir Mehboob  
25. Kamal Aweso  
26. Mohame d Abdulkarim Yusuf  
27. Omar Faiz  
28. Ridhwan Abdinasib Shirre  
29. Said Abdikadir Said  
30. Salim Amer Salim  
31. Suheib Moha med 
32. Suheyb Mahmud  
33. Torah Moham ed Shee  
34. Yaseen Abdul Jaffer  
35. Zubeir Sadiq Sugal  
36.  Aisha Muhidin  
37. Amina Omar  
38. A mne Mohame d  
39. Bushra Moh amed Noor  
40. Fatma Omar Mahmood  
41. Faiza Khalid Hadi  
42. Haifa Mohame d Swaleh  
43. Ilham Mbarak  
44. Kauthar Moh amed Awadh  
45. Kawakib Ali Mohame d  
46. Laraib Ahmad Moh amed 
47.  Maliha Moh amed Swaleh  
48. Maryam Faruk  
49. Maryam Gu re Harun  
50. Maryam Omer Abdi  
51. Marwa Abdulrahim  
52. Marwa Abdulrahim  
53. Marwa Adan Jelle  
54. Moza Naim  
55. Nabriya Hemed  
56. Nasra Abdulswamad  
57. Nura Jamal  
58. Rabbab Ibrahim  
59. Rania Fahad  
60. Rayyan Ibrahim  
61. Rayyan Mohame d Ali  
62. Rawi Bishar Guha  
63. Sofi a Mohame d Ahmed  
64. Swalha Ali Shahib  
65. Shayma Mohame d 
66. Warda Ali Moh amed 
67. Z ainab Ishaq  
68. Aisha Mbarak  
 
TEACHERS  
1. Mr. Hesborn  
2. Mr. Fedrick  
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 3. MD. Thuweiba  
4. Mr. Kimeu  
   
(Applause)  
 
On behalf of the Honorable  House I welcome yo u to the County Assembly .  Karibuni . 
(Applause)  
Yes Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika nimesimama pia mimi kuchukua fursa kuwakaribisha watoto wa shule ya Qubaa  na 
vile vile ningepen da kujulisha Nyumba hii kuwa Mwakilishi wa eneo la Majengo/Mwembe 
Tayari pia yuko katika Bunge hili tungeomba kupitia kiti chako naye pia apate fursa ya 
kuwakaribisha watoto wale ndani ya Bunge hili. Ahsante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili, Deputy Speaker . Yes Hon. 
Ahmed Khamis i you can welcome the pupils of Qubaa wh o happen  to come from your area.  
Hon. Ahmed Khamis i: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika , karibuni sana Qubaa Muslim 
School hapa ndio sisi Wabunge twawawakilisha  kwa hivyo mwakaribi shwa na sio leo pekee 
yake, mwakaribishwa siku yeyote nyinyi ndio mtakuwa viongozi wa kesho Mungu akipenda 
kwa hivyo karibuni sana na baada ya hapa tutapata nafasi ya kuwazungusha , karibuni.  
(Applause)  
Yes Clerk?  
NOTICE OF MOTIONS   
YOUTH , WOMEN AND PEOPLE  WITH DISABILITIES (PWD S) EMPOWERMENT AND WEALTH 
CREATION  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I stand in for Hon. Athman 
Mwamwiri  and here with me is a letter requesting for the same and signed by the s aid 
Member of this House. Mr. Speaker I beg to give a notice of Motion  of the following Motion ; 
(Hon. Bwire moved the Notice of Motion ) 
THAT AWARE THAT  Mombasa C ounty has been grappling with high rate of 
unemployment rate among the youth s, women and PWDs d ue to few job 
opportunities and opaque tendering process hence minimum wealth expansion;  
FURTHER AWARE THAT  unemployment and lack of wealth creation 
mechanisms increases the level of poverty among youth s, women, and PWDs ; 
CONCERNED  the youth s, women  and PW Ds within the County are not fully 
empowered;  
I therefore urge this assembly to RESOLVE  that: 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 1. The County g overnment to adhere to the Public Procurement Oversight Authority Act 
ensure that 30  per cent of tenders are awarded to special interest ;  
2. The County government to provide grants to agro business and the blue economy to 
youth, women and PWDs initiatives e.g. supporting fishermen and construction of 
open and closed markets Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker I seek leave of this House to debate this notice of Moti on as a Motion  and I 
stand to be guided though that is my prayer, thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire I think you are granted to move it as 
a Motion  so you can go ahead and move it as a Motion . 
THAT AWARE  that Mombasa C ounty has been  grappling with high rate of 
unemployment rate among the youth s, women and PWDs due to few job 
opportunities and opaque tendering process hence minimum wealth expansion;  
FURTHER AWARE  Mr. Speaker that unemployment and lack of wealth creation 
mechanisms inc reases the level of poverty among youth s, women, and PWDs ; 
CONCERNED that Youths, Women and PWDs within the County are not fully 
empowered;  
Mr. Speaker I therefore urge this Assembly  to RESOLVE  that: 
1. The County g overnment to adhere to the Public Procure ment Oversight Authority Act 
ensure that 30  per cent  of tenders are awarded to special interest ;  
2. The County g overnment to provide grants to agro business and the blue economy to 
youth, women and PWDs initiatives e.g. supporting fishermen and constructi on of open 
and closed markets Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker ; 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, who is to second you.  
Hon. Bwire:  I call upon Hon. Ramla to second . 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ramla can you second the Motion . 
(Hon. (Ms.) Ramla b owed t o second the Motion ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Hon. M embers I now propose the question 
that the Motion  on youth s, women and people with disability empowerment and wealth 
creation by Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri be considered by this House in the same terms as 
move d? 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
(Applause ) 
Yes Hon. Bwire you can … 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker the issue raised here is an issue of 
heavy weight. Mr. Speaker we all understand the challenges faced by youth s, women and 
PWDs but the se people as stated are not empowered effectively by the County government .  
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 We have seen so many troubles and problems that th ese people undergo and that is 
why Mr. Speaker through this House I pray that as the representatives of the said group s we 
resolved as I have clearly put it so that we can create an avenue where the women, youth s and 
PWDs can be full y empowered so that we avoid these  unnecessary problems and troubles that 
face our brothers and sisters out there. Mr. Speaker I would wish t his House to debate this 
Motion  with a lot of soberne ss minding that we represent the se people , the special groups that 
have been mentioned here they look after this Honorable House and it is only this Honorable 
House that will help them through passing su ch like Motion s and also getting proper 
implementation of the same. Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire . Hon. Members we can debate 
the Motion  and contribute anything on the Motion . Hon. Fadhili the Deputy S peaker you can 
contribute on the Motion . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalim u):  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika. 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama nitasema niko kati sipingi na s iungi ila tu 
Mheshim iwa Spika ni kweli serikali ya K aunti ... 
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Renson Th oya, are you standing on a point of 
information?  
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker  you will  guide me but I think we need clear people here ; 
either somebody is opposing or proposing we have never had somebody who is between s o 
we want the S tanding order to  guide us , those people who are watermelon s what are they 
called according to the Standing orders? Thank you . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  I think the Standing order is not clear , so you can either 
oppose or propose the question so the issue of watermelon I  have not seen it in the Standing 
Order.  
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker for protecting me , 
because Mr. Speaker…  
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Renson Thoya?  
Hon. Thoya :  Mr. Speaker I think the speaker who is o n air is enjoying something 
that you have not said ; it is very clear he is saying thank you for protecting,  I have said this 
House needs cl arity either you are supporting the Motion  or you are opposing the Motion  but 
he is saying you have protected him. He  is in between  he is not supporting or opposing,  huyu 
ni mtu wa aina gani Bwana Spika , I want you to guide us.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Thoya . Hon. Fadhil i can you make it 
clear to the House are you opposing this Motion  or you are support ing the Motion ? 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalim u): Bwana Spika kama nilivyotangulia awali na  
kusema kuwa niko katikati lakini naenda na kauli yako ulipo fungua hoja hii na kusema kuwa 
Waheshimiwa wako wazi kuendelea kujadili na mimi naendelea kujadili ni Mh eshimi wa 
angek uwa na subra asikize yale a mbayo nitakayo yasema mbele ya N yumba hii . 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Alafu yeye mwenyewe awe ni  mwenye kutafakari na aamue mimi nimepinga ama 
nimeunga mkono . Mheshimiwa Spika nimeanza na kusema kuwa serikali ya Kaunti ya 
Mombasa...  
(Interrup tion) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili I think there is a point of order again or 
point of correction. Yes Hon. Samba.  
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I thi nk it is in order for the Hon. M ember who 
is contributing to state his position where h e stands ; if he is in between he better not discuss 
anything because we have to know whether he is opposing or proposing! Thank you Mr. 
Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And Hon. Samba if I can ask you are giving your point 
of information under which Standing order?  
Hon. Samba:  I was not giving under any …i was informing the House that this House 
is a House of rules and procedures ... 
(Interruption ) 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But whenever a M ember is allowed to debate…  
(Interruption ) 
Hon. Samba:  No Hon. Spe aker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : We are debating the Motion  here!  
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker allow me to state this House you have to either to be in 
opposing side or proposing side ; you can never  be in between whether we have S tanding 
orders supporting tha t or not that i s the procedure of this House . Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Samba may be I stand to be corrected can you 
show me where in the Standing order s is saying that you have to be opposing the Motion  or 
proposing the Motion .  
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker in fac t whenever we have issues that M embers do not 
agree through your wisdom you need to come in . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
Hon. Samba:  This is the time where we need your wisdom, you are in that seat 
because you are wise  and when it comes to decision that is contradictory Hon. Speaker you 
need to come in between. Our concern is not even bigger issue , our issue is he either should 
be opposing or proposing thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But you see that w ill come when I put the question ; he 
may either say yes or no or he can go to vote. So for now he does  not have to state  for now he 
does not have to state whether he is either opposing or proposing he can just give his point 
and his views and we continue. I think that one will come when we are putting the question 
again. Yes, Hon. Thoya, let us listen to Hon. Thoya . 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 (Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Mheshimiwa Spika wanatumia w akati wangu 
ambao ni haki yangu … 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Let us listen to Hon. Thoya . 
Hon. Thoya : Mheshimiwa Spika ninajua ni haki  na ana haki lakini haki yake iangalie 
iko upande gani, k itu ambacho tunasema na ni vizuri kwamba mbali na kuwa tuko na 
Waheshimiwa hapa leo ni siku kubwa tuko na wanafunzi na ni lazima wakitoka hapa wawe 
wametoka na masomo ya kuweza kuenda kujiendeleza kule na hata kule kwao leo wanatoka 
na Katiba mpya kwamba inawezekana kwamba mtu kwamba anapinga na mwengine anaunga 
mkono na mwengine yuko kati kati. Kwa hivyo ikiwa leo Jumb a hili linaleta mila na desturi 
mpya tuambiwe hapa kwa sababu mtu akisimama anasema ninapinga ama ninauunga mkono 
na Bwana Spika kama utalikubali hilo leo, tuanze leo na wale wanafunzi wakienda kule 
wajue kwamba kuna ku propose  na kuna ku oppose  na kuwa ka tikati inajitokeza wazi  Bwana 
Spika. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy can you contribute on this matter?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I think it is  a practice 
of the Parliament it is not written anywhere that  you have to say yes or no, but is the practice 
of the Parliament that when you come up with a Motion  you either say yes or no. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But for now we are not practising for that it will come 
later after debating the Motion . For now everyone is putting his input whether you are 
opposing, you do not have even to say I am opposing you can just say whatever...  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : I think Mr. Speaker there is one thing that if you are not 
supporting or  opposing then  you substantiate … 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry ? 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : You abstain Mr. Speaker, it is the practice from you read 
Erskine May you see that it is the practice of the Parliament that when you want to debate or 
you want anythi ng, you have to come out clear whether you are supporting or you are not 
supporting.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon. Fahad Kassim . 
Hon. Fahad Kassim : Ahsante sana ningependa kukaribisha wanafunzi wa Qubaa 
Primary School akiweko mtoto wangu wa kwanza R ania Fahad ... 
(Applause)  
Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama kumjulisha mwenzangu ya kuwa why debating  wakati 
tunajadili  ni ima uunge ama upinge, haiwezekani kuwa wewe utasimama useme hauungi ama 
haupingi , that is you are nowhere to be seen . Kwa hiyo tafadhali…  
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 (Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  I think you are out of orde r by saying that, can you read 
Standing order No. 50? Do you have Standing Order?  
Hon.  Fahad Kassim : Yes. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Show me that statement that you are bringing in this 
House, show me where it is written. You know we are guided by the Standing Order s here.  
Hon. Fahad Kassim : I accept Mr. Speaker but…  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You can read, read it very clear ly. 
Hon. Fahad  Kassim : ‘Manner of debating Motion s. When a Motion  has been moved 
and if necessary seconded the Speaker shall propose the question thereon in the same terms 
as the Motion  and debate may take place upon that question ’. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sub section 2?  
Hon. Fahad  Kassim : Sub section 2 states that, ‘The conclusion of the debate the 
Speaker shall put the question despite paragraph 2 t he Speaker on the request of a M ember 
defer the putting of the question to the following day in which case the Speaker shall bear or 
nominate at which the question shall be put ’. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But it is stating very clear ly unless we do not understand 
what the meaning of debate is . 
Hon. Fa had Kassim : Debating Mheshimiwa Spika ni aidha uunge ama upinge, 
huwezi kusimama ukasema mimi siko huku wala huku sasa tuna  debate  nini?  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, but let him conclude whatever he wants to say, he 
doesn’t have to say he is opposing or proposing he can start his debate only . 
Hon. Fahad  Kassim : Naam  anaweza kuongea Mheshimiwa Spika but asiseme mimi 
siungi w ala sipingi yeye aseme yale maoni yake al io nayo lakini asiseme siko huku wala 
huku atakuwa anatatiza hili Bunge….  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Fadhili you may just remove that statement of 
yours…  
(Applause)  
…and just debate so  that M embe rs will understand why you stand either opposing or 
proposing the question . 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu tuna wageni 
wetu na watoto wetu katika Nyumba yetu tena tunafurahi sana watoto  wetu wa kwanza . Mimi 
nasimama kwa kupa ta nguvu  kwa kutoka kwa watoto wetu kuwa nasimama kupinga hoja hii 
Mheshimiwa Spika na ningeomba Waheshimiwa wanipatie wakati wangu wasikize pia kwa 
nini napinga hoja hii maana naona wamelazimisha wataka wasikie niko upande gani . 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 Mheshimiwa Spika nina iman i tena nina imani kubwa tumefanya lobbying  ya kisawa 
sawa hapa ndani tuko wengi ambao twapinga hoja hii. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi napinga kwa 
sababu maombi ya pili ambayo yal ikuwa yanaombwa katika hoja hii;  kwanza kabisa ilikua 
tungeomba aliyeleta hoja hii at angaze msimamo wake na mapenzi yake kwa sababu aliyeleta 
hoja hii  ni kijana amesimama akiomba tul ete vijana na kusahau kuwa ndani ya Bunge hili 
hata wazee pia tupo ambao pia twastahiki haya mengi na mazuri ambayo ameyaweka katika 
hoja yake hii. Mheshimiwa Spika tunaelewa ndani ya Katiba yetu unapopitisha miaka 35 
wewe huhesabiki tena kama kijana;  hapa katika hoja hii imetaja kina mama, kina mama 
ambao hasa wamepita miaka 35 lakini wamebebwa ndani ya hoja hii lakini sis i ambao 
tumepita miaka 35 hatui ngii mahali popote katika hoja hii itakuwa nawakosea wale wengi 
watu wa Port Reitz ambao walinichagua na ambao wamepita miaka hii ambayo iko ndani ya 
hoja hii . Mheshimiwa Spika ndio maana na mimi nimesimama ili niombe wenzangu wale 
ambao kina baba ambao tumepita m iaka hii tuweze kupinga hii hoja ili irudi iende 
ikatengezwe inapokuja hata mimi ama wale ambao tuko na miaka kama mimi tuweze 
kuangaliwa na Serikali ya Kaunti maana hatuna uhakika kama hata sisi…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon. Thoya ? 
Hon. Thoya : Bwana Spika leo naona niko na huy u Bwana vizuri kwa sababu 
napendelea sana ambae ameweza kuleta hoja hii anazungumzia mambo ya vijana na yeye 
anapinga akileta hoja juu ya hoja ni vizuri kwa sababu yeye ni mzee na umri umepita 
akaandike hoja yak e ailete hapa ya wazee peke yake hii hoja imeletwa ni ya vijana…  
(Applause)  
Na mimi nasema mila na desturi ya hapa kama hoja imeletwa huwezi jenga hoja ndani 
ya hoja, kwa hivyo kama ni kizungu nasema he is out order  Bwana Spika nisaidie.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon. Bwire ? 
Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker. You see Mr. Speaker in our current 
Constitution the only special groups we have are th ree; one is that talks of youth s, women 
and people living with disabilit ies so I cannot create another group that is out  of the 
Constitution and bring it here to please whoever is above that age. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon. Fadhili you may continue . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Mheshimiwa Spika haijasema ni lazima iwe 
group  iko ndani ya Katiba yetu ile tunazungumzia ni hii hoja ambayo iko hapa mbele yetu na 
vile vile usawa wa watu wetu tunaona kuwa kama upande wa kina mama hakuna kitengo 
ambacho kimewagonga upande wa miaka lakini upande wetu kuna upande ambao unatuzuia 
na unatu nyima majukumu ama mazuri kama haya yako mbele yetu ndio maana naomba 
alietengeza hoja hii arudi jikoni aende aitengeze vizuri ili na  sisi tuwe ni  wenye kufaidika 
katika hoja hii. Wananchi wetu wa Mombasa, wananchi wangu wa Port Reitz Mheshimiwa 
Spika nao pia wafurahie matunda ya Serikali yetu ya Kaunti ya Mombasa. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Hon. Hatimy ? 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa kama namsaidia rafiki yangu Mheshimiwa 
Fadhili wa  kutoka Port Reitz nafikiri twakuju a Port R eitz ni kina nani walioko huko.. . 
(Applause and Laughter)  
Mheshimiwa ... 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Hatimy I think you are out of order, I did not 
understand that statement, can you came out clearly . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker with due respect please protect 
me and let the Hon . Member  withdraw the statement because … 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Just make  it clear first of all you can start and tell us Port 
Reitz which kind of people are there that you are referring to Hon. Fadhili the Deputy 
Speaker .   
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika twajua Port Reitz  kuna watu wenye 
akili nyingi ni watu mahodari, ni watu wenye kujua kila kitu. Mheshimiwa Spika nataka 
kumsaidia Mheshimiwa Fadhili anasema hii hoja ireg eshwe na mimi pia namsaidia  kusema 
kweli hii hoja iregeshwe kwa sababu hii tayari ni sheria iko kwenye Act. Sheria inazungumza 
vizuri sana kuwa wakati hawa  watu wa procurement wanatoa hata ukiangalia waki fanya 
matangazo  utaona vitu tayari huwa vimewekwa hi vi ni vya vijana , hivi ni vya walemavu  na 
hivi ni vya kina mama . Kwa hivyo tayari hii sheria iko imeundwa na serikali kuu , hivyo basi  
na mimi namsaidia kwa kusema kweli sheria  ni bora aende akaitengeneze vizuri ya kusema 
kuwa wale watu waangaliwe ili haki  ifanyike kuwa ile  asilimia  30 inatumika kisawa sawa, 
ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Nzai.  
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mwanzo nachukua nafasi hii 
kuwakaribisha watoto wetu w a shule ya mwenzangu ya Qub aa, k aribuni  sana. Mimi ndio 
Mheshimiwa wa Kadzandani sehemu ya Bamburi huko  eneo Bunge la  Nyali. Mheshimiwa 
Spika mimi n imesimama kuunga mkono hii hoja  naiunga mkono sio kwamba sijui serikali 
kuu ilipitisha hii asilimia 30  lakini kwa Kau nti hususan hapa k wetu ilikuwa haijabainika wazi 
hivyo basi ikiwa Mheshimiwa Spika naom ba…. 
(Interruption)  
(The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just continue remember that your time  is 
limited Hon. Nzai.  
 
Hon. Nzai:  Mheshimiwa Spika vituo vya ndugu zetu walio jaa na ulemavu vimejaa 
kule kwangu na Kaunti yetu haijabainisha vizuri usaidizi wao utakuwa namna gani ; ikiwa ni 
hivi juzi tu walifanya kuzolewa zolewa katika barabara zetu na w akaenda pelekwa mahali 
ambapo hata hapajulikani.  
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 Ina maana kam a sheria hii imepitishwa vizuri  ndugu  zetu hawa wangekuwa 
wametengewa mahali pazuri na kungekuwa hakuna hii patashika ya hapa na pale, hivyo basi 
mimi aliyeleta hoja hii namuunga mkono mia kwa m ia ili ilete nafasi nzuri ya  kuweza 
kuwaweka hawa wenzetu vizuri wanao ishi na ulemavu . Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Nyiro.  
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, f irst of all I need to be guided, I wonder 
whether the Ho n. Speaker  is properly dressed, may be you can observe him and then tell the 
House if  he is properly  dressed  before I continue.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Nyiro,  who is not properly dressed?  
Hon. Nyiro:  Hon. Hatimy.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Serjeant-At-Arms... 
(Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy tried to tuck -in his shirt ) 
No you are not suppose d to dress in this House, just go out get properly dressed and 
then come back.  
(Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy exited  the chamber  briefly and re -entered ) 
Hon. Nyiro:  I may continue now?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes you may continue.  
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, am happy that the norms of this House are 
being followed properly . Mr. Speaker…  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ogutu, are you up on  a point of 
order?  
Hon. Ogutu:  Point of Information!  
Hon. Nyiro:  I do not want to be informed Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : He does not want to be informed. Okay 
proceed Hon. Nyiro.  
Hon. Nyiro:  I just want to proceed and finish quickly be cause I’ll take just a few 
minutes. Mr. Speaker , I stand to oppose strongly this Motion . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : There is a point of order.  Okay which point 
of order?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  (Off microphone) … or declare your interest Mr. Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy the person who had interest 
was Deputy Speaker but at the moment am the Chair and the  Speaker of this H onorable  
House so you may proceed Hon. Nyiro.  
Hon. Nyiro:  Than k you Mr. Speaker, t hank you for staying ther e, let me start again 
by saying that I strongly oppose this Motion . 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 First we cannot  be making regulations upon regulations. There is already a regulation 
in existence of the 30  per cent reservation s so if there is a problem may be the bearer….  
(Interruptio n) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya, ar e you up on a point of order 
or? 
Hon. Nyiro:  I do not want to be informed, am on the floor.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay let him proceed, okay inform  the 
House.  
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I think the speaker who is on air is so suspici ous but I was 
not targeting him;  this is typical ly for you Mr. Speaker whom you ha ve been on air opposing 
the sam e Motion . I understand that you ha ve moved to that seat but already you had showed 
us from the w ord go so I just have a feeling…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya , you are out of order the S peaker 
is not voting on this issue, proceed Hon. Nyiro , am not voting.  
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker ., Hon. Thoya today looks very trouble some but 
we will handle him just the same way. Mr. Speaker as I was saying we already have a 
regulation that 30  per cent  of the tenders in  every government and private institution must be 
reserved to the special people that is the youth s, women and PWDs so  may be if there is a 
problem with the i mplementation of this thing may be the mover could tell this House to may 
be fast track the implementation of this existing regulation but if we are here again  to enforce 
the County government to implement a n already existing  regulation then I think it will be 
what Hon. Naliaka said in the morning ...! S econdly.. . 
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : There is a point of information?  
Hon. Nyiro:  Are you informing me Hon. Speaker?  
Hon.  Bwire:   Mr. Speaker I understand we went to different school s, we’ve been 
under the management of different teachers and we also have different capaci ty of grasping 
the information. Mr. Speaker I think the Motion  is very clear we understand… where is the 
other mic rophone?  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Inform the House, what do you want to 
inform the House because I understand we already debated on  this issue.  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I just want to inform the House 
that I understand there is that Act an d now ther e is that laxity of the County g overnment to 
adhere to the said Act and that is why am here with this Motion  to persuade this Hon orable 
House to remind the County g overnment to adhere to the said Act so that the three mentioned 
special group s can benefit from the said A ct, they should understand that. T hank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank  you, yes Hon. Nyiro p roceed.  
Hon. Nyiro:  Okay am also aware that we went to different schools but again we are 
telling the mover of th is Motion  you need to change the prayer because whenever 
advertisement s are made the reservation s are always there…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Thoya why are you up?  
Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri asubuhi tulikuwa katika Bu nge hili na 
katika mazungumzo yake ametoa reference  ya Mheshimiwa Naliaka asubuhi amesimama 
akasema u nless hili Jumba watu hawajielewi ; Jumba hili limemsukuma mpaka aka omba 
msamaha na aka ondoa,  yeye pia anasimama hiyo hiyo, kutoa reference  hiyo hiyo ya 
kutukana Waheshimiwa hapa,  ndio maana nimesimama. Mheshimiwa  Spika ninaomba 
umsukume aombe msamaha na aondoe hayo matamshi.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Okay Hon. Nyiro withdraw your statement.  
Hon. Nyiro:  I withdraw Hon. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed.  
Hon. Nyiro:   I apologise , happy? So like I was sayin g if  there is anything County 
government is not implementing we have an implementation Committee in this Assembly ; 
kindly can we approach the Implementation Committee so that it c an fast -track the 
implementation of this regulation. S econdly the bearer of this Motion  said the County 
government should provide for grants, but let me inform this House that we have money 
reserved for the youth s, money for women and money for the PWDs ; now which money  do 
you want for the County  g overnment to set aside again ? Again we have the youth 
department, we have the C ommittee Chaired by Hon. Moses Aran  he chairs the youth  
Committee , we can liaise  with the C ommittee and see whether we have money fo r the youths 
from that department. T his government has departments and whenever we have s uch issues 
can we approach the department first then if we do not get answers from there then we can 
come back here so that we can push this House to maybe formulate r egulations that are going 
to empower th ose that are not in existence . From my point of informatio n is that we already 
have money  set aside by the government , the Y outh Enterprise Fund it is there, there is 
money through the Women Enterprise F und and I also  understand that there is money for the 
PWDs , why can't we go to these agencies and get this money because right now our C ounty 
as we all know unless we don't come from t his County if you come from this C ounty you 
know that we have a very big b urden wherea s most of our monies go to pay recurrent 
expenditure . Where can we get other mon ies again to set aside for these youth s, women and 
PWDs ? Let us go for the money that is provided by the government of Kenya  so that we can 
get this money and use it to empower  our people , let us inform our people that there is money 
so that we don't come here to force the government to set aside money that will be available . I 
beg to oppose strongly Mr. S peaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon Ramla.  
Hon. (Ms.) Said:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kupewa hii nafasi na 
naunga mkono hii hoja kwa sababu imekuja kama ukumbusho kwa hi li Bunge kuwa kuna 
sheria  kama hii ya vijana, kina  mama na walemavu . 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14 Kitu ambacho ningesisitiza ni kuw e na utekelezaji wa hii  sheria  haifanyi 
inavyotakika na na kama pesa ziko basi kuzifu atiliza ina mambo mengi mpaka hawa vijana na 
walemavu na  wamama wanashindwa kutengeneza  na pia kazi ni chache walemavu hawapati 
kazi, wamama vijana kuna malalamishi sana. K wa hivyo naunga mkono kwa hii hoja  ili 
itukumbushe kutumia hima , ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Yes Chief Whip. 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika ni wazi dhahiri sha hiri lazima tuweze 
kuweka maneno mengine wazi , Mh eshimiwa kuna h oja zengine zinapoing ia katika B unge 
hili inatoa picha mbaya kule mashinani ni kana kwamba hii hoja hii endapo itapita siku ya leo 
tutakuwa tunatoa picha kule mashinani kuwa jambo hili lil ikuwa lifanyike katika K aunti yetu 
ya Mombasa . Kwa hivyo Wabunge wenzangu  tuweze kuwa na makini haswa na hoja kama 
hizi; jambo la kwanza kipengele n amba moja kama ninavyolihimiza B unge hili ni kwamba 
asilimia 30 na ni dhahiri sha hiri mambo haya yanafanyika katika serikali yetu ya Mombasa 
ikiwa tayari lile jengo la Inspectorate  walipatiwa kina mama kuweza kulikarabati mpaka 
kwenye imeweza kufikia Mheshimiwa . Vilevile Tononoka  hall waliopatiwa zabuni  ile 
Mheshimiwa  Spika ilikuwa ni watu wanaishi na ulemavu , vilevile Inspectorate  vijana 
wanaweza kukabili trafiki  katika jimbo letu , ni vijana ambao ni wa Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa 
ofisi ya G avana ni vijana waliweza kupatiwa  zabuni hiyo mikutano ya serikali ya K aunti yetu 
ya Mombasa wana supply  hema  na maua na kupamba katika mikutano hii ni kina mama . 
Kwa hivyo hoja kama hizi lazima ziweze kuwa na muanga zio mzuri na una mhusika mkuu 
ambae ameweza kuleta hoja hii katika Bunge hili lazima kwanza aweze kufanya uchunguzi 
kama jambo hili latendeka au la la sivyo linapokwenda mas hinani inaleta picha mbaya kwa 
Nyumba yetu kana kwamba jambo hili halifany wi katika  serikali yetu ya Mombasa.  
(Applause ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Mheshimiwa Samba.  
Hon. Samba: Thank you Mr. Speaker the prayer s of the Motion  I beg to oppose  and 
Hon. Speaker if yo u look at the prayers that the C ounty government to adhere to the public 
Procurement Oversight Authority Act to ensure  the 30  per cent  for the special interest groups 
and number two  the C ounty government to provide grants. Y esterday Mr. Speaker I 
happened to visit the department of youth s, gender and sports I was fo llowing up about the 
issue of th is money Hon. Speaker  and I found  out that there were some of the revolving funds 
that w ere supposed to be out by now  but when I was doing follow up I found that they cannot 
give out any money as at now because there are so many people who got privilege to get th is 
support cash and they have  not paid the back . The laws say that at least 50  per cent  should be 
recovered as at now there are at 14  per cent and so through that Hon. Speaker it shows that 
there are those people who are aware of the same and there are those people who are 
applying . Secondly Hon. Speaker about the 30  per cent  youths so many youths we need i n 
our C ounty , yes there is laxity because some of the people are using the identification  details 
of these youths to acquire limited companies so that at least  when they win these tenders they 
win them in the name of the youth s and actually they are not youth s who are benefiting . I 
wish to request  the mover that he should at least  change the prayers maybe if we can co me up 
with a t ask force that is going to over see whether those benefiting from the tenders are they 
actually youth s or are those who are benefiting behind the youths because when devolution 
came it came with a lot of goodies and  Hon. Speaker most of the yo uths are c rying outside 
there because there  is unemployment . 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15 When the C ommittee of Experts came up with the issue of devolution they considered 
about the issue of 30  per cent so that at least if you cannot get employment but at least in 
business wise y ou c an plan your life well so my  request to the mover of the Motion  the 
Motion  itself is in good faith and for the best interest o f the C ounty but at least he should 
change the prayer request so that at least we may also pass it because it doesn't affect only the 
mover of the Motion  but it affects us all, thank you Hon . Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon Thoya.  
Hon. Thoya: Ahsante Bwana Spika naona sasa n i wakati wangu wa kuchachawiza 
Mswada ulioko hapa ; hata hivyo nafikiri  kifo cha M swada huu  kilikuwa isiingie hapa kwa hii 
Nyumba ilikuwa ni katika ile K amati ya Ho use Business kwa sababu huu ni M swada ambao 
umeingia lakini ilikuwa uchujwe kutoka mwanzo kwa sababu najua kuna kitu inaitwa 
revolving fund   kuna hiyo mambo ambayo imetajwa na Mhe shimi wa Kitula pale na tuko na 
Kamati husika hapa ya vijana ambapo mambo kama haya ni lazima kama hayatendeki 
tuambiwe kama Jumba tuko na K amati ya utekelezaji ambayo ni Implementation C ommittee  
na leo tunabahatika kuwa tuna watoto wanasoma lakini itakuwa sio v izuri tulazimishe 
Miswada kwa sababu tuonekane kwamba tuko kazini , kama hakuna isemekane hakuna lakini 
Mswada huu hatutaki ufe hapa hapa ni kuwa ugongelewe misumari katika kaburi lake kuto ka 
kwa Kamati ya House Business.  Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu) : Hon. Ogutu before the mover responds on 
his Motion . 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa hii nafasi mimi ningependa 
kuomba mover aweze ku toa huu Mswada  maanake ni Mswada  mmoja mzuri sana..  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  There is a point of order.  
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker as we all know the dress code of this House and we know 
for a member to be here he must be in way that is acceptable by the regulations of this House, 
Hon. Ogutu is not properly dressed  up. 
Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon. Ogutu if you know that you are not 
properly dressed please just follow the way.  
(Hon. Ogutu exited plenary)  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  The mover of the Motion  you may respond.  
Hon. Bwire : Mr. Speaker I brought this Motion  in good faith and I have heard the 
concerns from the fellow Hon . Members and I beg to seek leave of this Hon orable  House to 
allow me do some amendments on the same and hopefully next week I will be able to bring  
it back. Thank  you. 
 The Deputy  Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :   So next week you are bringing amendments 
or...? 
 Hon. Bwire : Hon. Speaker I will bring a very amended and comprehensive Motion . 
October 3 , 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     78 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16  The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : So Hon. Members when he brings the 
amendments you will also be allowed to debate on the amendments and now that he has 
asked that we do  not put a question we shall not put a question until next week as he has 
asked from this Hon orable  House. Yes C lerk. 
MOTION  
 Yes Hon Moham ed H atimy.  
 Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, I wish to give a notice to 
withdraw the notice under Standing O rder 48.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Was it a Motion  or a notice of Motion ? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  It was a Motion . So I seek leave.  
 The Deput y Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  So up to  when do you want to bring back the 
Motion ? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Next week Wednesday.  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  It will be discussed in the next House 
Business Committee, Yes Clerk.  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members  there being no other business the House is adjourned until tomorrow 
Thursday the 4th October at 2:30 p.m. 
The House rose at  3:43p.m. 