September 1 7, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday , 17th September , 2019  
The House met at 10:25a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
  PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated.  Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
STATEMENTS  
STATUS OF PUNGUZA MZ IGO BILL  
 
 Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I seek to know 
from the Chairperson Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs on the status of Punguza Mzigo 
Bill as communicated by the Speaker on 31st July, 2019 during the 69th Sitting. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Are you the Vice Chair or you are a Member?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Am  not the Chair and neither  the Vice Chair is in the 
House but...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay you are a Member?  

September 1 7, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Hon. Bwire: I happen to be a Member of the Committee .   
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Please respond . 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker we are aware that the Bill was c ommitted to this House but we are 
yet to communicate back to the House as the Justice Committee ; we therefore ask for time for us 
to meet and deliberate on the same, I wish to ask this House to allow us to respond back next 
week. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Bwire just be aware that there  is a deadline for that 
Bill which I think is 90 days so...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Am aware and the 90 days we still have time Mr. Speaker that  is why I have 
asked for at least one week I k now we still have time.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : How much  time do you want ?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Next week Mr. Speaker we will be able to respond .   
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You said you still have time, so how much time do you have ?  
 
Hon. Rap hael Bwire:  We have more than one month Mr. Speaker as far as am concerned.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay thank you Hon. Bwire . Yes Hon. Charles?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ahsante sana lakini tuweze 
kufahamu kwamba si si kama Wabunge katika Bunge hili kwanza kama Kamati wanastahili 
kuweza kutupangia sisi kwenda kuweza kusoma mahali kupitia Bill hii maana hatuifahamu 
kabisa lakini mzigo huu tukiwaachia Kamati pek e yake waweze kupitisha itakuwa ndiv yo sivyo 
maan a watakuja hapa wanaofahamu ni Wanakamati pek e yake, je sisi Bunge nzima litakuwa 
halina ufahamu.  
Kwa hivyo tungesihi Kamati hiyo iweze kupanga siku tuweze kwenda kusoma sote tuweze 
kujua nini kiko ndani ya Bill hiyo na kipi ambacho ni kiba ya na kipi ambacho ni kizuri ili tuweze 
kuhakikisha kila mmoja ana ufahamu na Bill hiyo. Ahsante.  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk, next Order?  
 
STATUS OF THE ANNUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (ADP)  AND FINANCE BILL 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I seek to know 
from the Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and  Appropriations on when the Annual 
Development Plan (ADP) would be tabled in this House considering that it is past the deadline of 
1st September, 2019 and the Finance Bill which is supposed to be passed by this House by 30th 
September, 2019.  Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
September 1 7, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed, Chairman for 
Committee on Finance?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika ni kweli 
kuwa ADP haijaletwa kwenye hii Nyumba na pia naona Finance Bill  lakini naf ikiri mwanzo 
kabla sijajibu nataka Mheshimiwa aende akatengeze Statement  yake tena sawa sawa ndio 
airegeshe ndani ya hii Nyumba. Kwa sababu Finance Bill  sio tarehe 30 Septemba sheria inasema 
ni 90 days after approving the A ppropri ations Bill . Appropriation Bill  ilikuwa approved  na 
Nyumba hii tarehe 20, kwa hivyo tarehe 20 ndio yatakikana iwe imekuja ndani ya Nyumba hii…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Maybe you can clarify more so that the Members can 
understa nd Hon. Hatimy, tarehe  20 ya? 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Tarehe 20/0 6/2019 ndio ilipita ile Appropriation . Kwa hivyo 
itakuwa ni tarehe 20/09/2019 mwezi huu ndio itakuwa imefika siku tisini  kwa sababu sheria 
inasema 90 days after approving the A ppropriation Bill . Kwa hivyo ilikuwa namuomba mwanzo 
aende akaitengeze halafu warudi ndio niweze kumjibu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Not unless Hon. Charles maybe you tell us where did you 
get these deadlines, if you can clarify.  
The Chie f Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwanza ningemruhusu aweze 
kujibu Taarifa  ya kwanza, halafu a lete majibu ya Taarifa  ya pili pia nitaweza kumjibu. Kwanza 
ajibu ya kwanza ADP halafu pale anapojibu  Taarifa  ya pili nitaweza kumjib u kutokana na  sheria 
ya PFM . Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So the first Statement Hon. Charles, the one you are saying 
the deadline of 1st September it  is under PFM Act?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti iko ndani ya sheria ya PFM 
126 (3).  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : PFM Act 126?  
(Interruption)  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Yes, 126 (3) . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mohamed?  
September 1 7, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  126 inazungumzia kitu gani Mheshimiwa Spika? Sijui 
atuambie . 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Wacha nimsom ee Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. PFM Act 
126 (3) County government to prepare Development Plan, Sub Section (3) inasema, the County 
Executive Committee Member responsible for planning shall not later than  1st September in each 
year submit the Development Plan to the County Assembly for its approval and send a copy to 
the Commission on Revenue Allocation and the National Treasury . (4) The County Executive 
Committee Member responsible for planning shall publ ish and publicize the Annual Plan within 
seven  days after it s submission to the County Assembly.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula. Yes Hon. Mohamed 
Mohamed Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika imesema , shall table the Plan, not ADP 
but it is CIDP .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mohamed Hatimy, so you are saying it is not the 
ADP?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Sisi twazungumza kuwa ni Plan,  haikuzungumza ADP. Kwa 
sababu ADP inatokamana na CIDP, ni kweli kuwa ni tare he moja Septemba inatakikana iwe 
imeletwa lakini haikuzungumza habari ya ADP imesema Plan . Sasa Plan  ni ipi, ni CIDP ama ni 
ADP? Ambayo CIDP ishakuwa  tabled  na ni  lazima iregeshwe tena ndio wat uambie wametoa 
pale kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Spika kuna long term  na short term , lakini ile short term  
inapambana  na long term  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles . 
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  Mheshimiwa wa Kamati ya 
Fedha anapot osha Bunge hili kabisa tena sana. Kwanza ni  sharti aweze  kukubali kwamba Waziri  
wa Fedha amekiuka Katiba na sheria  ya PFM hiyo lazima aikubali, alafu anapoto sha Bunge hili 
kusema kwamba CIDP  au A DP. CIDP Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni mapendekezo ya miaka 
mitano ndani ya serikali ya Kaunti ya Mombasa , ADP kulingana na sh eria ambayo ni Annual 
Development Plan  ambayo kila 1st September ni lazima iweze kuja katika Bunge, 2018 /2019 -
2019/2020 haikuwa publici zed katika Bunge hili, 2019/2020 pia haikuletwa katika Bunge hili 
Mheshimiwa Mwe nyekiti . 
Kwa hivyo hili ni dha hiri sha hiri ya kwamba Waziri  wa Idara ya Fedha amekiuka Katiba 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, lakini asiseme hapa kwamba CIDP ama ADP. CIDP tuli ileta kitambo 
ni ya miaka mitano, lakini kila mwaka ni sharti kabla mwezi wa tarehe 1st Septem ba iwe 
imeletwa katika Bunge hili ahsante sana . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles . Yes are you on a point of 
information or you just want to ? 
 
Hon. Mwende:  It’s just a point of information . 
September 1 7, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay. 
 
Hon. Mwende:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I think the Chairperson of Finance 
is misleading the House , because even when you search the Annual Development Plan when it is 
supposed to be submitted in the  County Assembly in Google,  it will tell yo u it is not later than 1st 
September . So maybe you can come up clearly because  the Members who are here now are very 
sharp and they know their timing deadline s not like before . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, are you on a point of information Hon. Mwamwiri? I 
hope you are not going to ..., because she was saying  the same thing which the Hon. Charles is 
saying. You  are goi ng again to say the same things?  Okay continue.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante . Sioni sababu ya Mhe shimiwa 
Mwenyekiti wa mas uala ya F edha na Ba jeti ku panic katika  hili, kwa sababu kanuni imesema sio 
zaidi ama sio baada ya tarehe moja mwezi wa tisa na tukiangalia gazeti la leo ya Standard , 
serikali Gatuzi y a Mombasa limetangaza kuokota kwa maoni ya Public  Finance t arehe 25 mwezi 
huu. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Point of information.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti labda Mheshimiwa hayuko 
katika Bung e hili, twaongelea kuhusu ADP na hatujaingia katika Fin ance Bill bado ni ADP, 
Finance Bill ni Taarifa  ya pili ahsante.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Moham ed Moha med?  
 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa naomba Nyumba hii inipatie nafasi kuuliza 
Executive wa F inance kwa nini mpaka leo hawajale ta hii stakabadhi  inayoulizwa? Ni patiwe mda 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Hatimy lakini unakubaliana na maoni  ya Mheshimiwa 
Charles Kitula?  
 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Maoni  gani?  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Kuwa 1st Septemb a. 
 
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:   Nimekubaliana nayo kuhusu 1st Septemb a! 
 
(Laughter ) 
September 1 7, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy . Yes, Hon. Charles Kitula I think 
you had two issu es, so Hon. Hatimy said he  will come back by tomorrow.  
 
Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Yes tomorrow . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Clerk next order?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON HEALTH HON . KIBWANA SWALEH ON  
HEALTH CONCERNS  
 
Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh , Chairman Committee on Health? Please give us the response.  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . I was enjoying the conversation 
between the Chief W hip and the Finance Chair ! Anyway Hon. Speaker , I just seek  for more time 
because we wrote a l etter requesting for a Statement from  the Department of Health  before we 
went for the recess but when we resume d the  Assembly we have not received the reply or the  
response , so after the Assembly  I will have a meeting with my Committee and foll ow up on this . 
So I plead with the Members to be patien t and i f possible they can give me up  to next week so 
that I can come with that report Hon. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Charles, please fast track the issue by next 
week we get  the respon se. Yes?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh: Althou gh Hon. Speaker I’m not Charles , am Hon. Kibwana.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Sorry Hon. Swalleh Baya Kibwana, yes Hon. Ibrahim, are 
you on a point of information or you just want to speak.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker if am granted opportunity.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir, am not in disagreement with the Chair of Health but Mr. 
Speaker Sir I just stood to emphasize on that issue because it’s now the thi rd time that this issue 
is coming and time it’s all the time being asked for, to being extended and Mr. Speaker Sir the 
state of this particular dispensary is very pathetic that is how I can describe it.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  And therefore Mr. Speaker Sir actually the urgent measures should be 
taken so that, that particular dispensary is renovated Mr. Speaker sir, I’ll be waiting for that 
answer next week.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, I think Hon. Kibwana you  have heard that from 
your colleague . Yes Clerk next order ? 
 
September 1 7, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report ca n be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE OF EDUCATION  HON. OMONDI ON ECD 
ISSUES  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi please give us the response.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker Sir again for giving me the op portunity. Mr. 
Speaker Sir this issue was raised by the Member Kipevu Ward, and this issue as I speak now 
already the contractors are on the site and they have already started they are doing their work and 
the Member is also present she can con firm that or not . Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Ibrahim, Yes Clerk next order ? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned un til Tuesday 17th September, 2019 at 
2:30p .m. 
 
The Hose rose at 10:40 a.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 