October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 4th October,  2018  
The House met at 2:38p.m. 
 
(The Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  we may be seated. Y es Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
DEMOL ITION OF TEMPORARY S TRUCTURES BY THE COUNTY INSPECTORATE IN TUDOR  
 
Yes Leader of Majority Party , Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani please give the statement.  
 
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker  Sir. Let me take  this 
opportunity to invite my c olleague Hon. Juma  Renson  Thoya to lay the report. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker I have the statement towards the response , the 
statement that was requested by the MCA, Tudor and I wish to lay it before the Clerk.  
 
(Report laid ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Juma  Renson  Thoya. I think Hon. Juma  
Renson you have to read the statement.  
 
Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker for your indulgence. Mr. Speaker I would like 
to give this statement in response to request for the sa me by Hon. Tobias Samba MCA Tudor 
Ward at the 63rd sitting of the House on 7th August , 2018 regarding the demolition of 
temporary structures by the County Inspectorate in Tudor Ward.  Mr. Speaker s ir after the 
direction of the Speaker of the day that the Co mmittee of Justice and Legal Affairs and 
Committee on Labour and Social Welfare to look into the matter the two Committees 
immediately resolved to conduct site visit in Tudor and Changamwe Wards on 8th August , 
2018 for a fact finding mission. Mr. Speaker sir the following locations were visited by 
Members  and indeed it was noted that the demolition had taken place by the County 
Inspectorate ; 
 

October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 1. Tudor stage  
2. Tudor primary  
3. Changamwe corner  
4. Changamwe volleyball ground  
Mr. Speaker Sir, following the information g athered during the site visit the joint 
Committee saw the need to summon the County Executive Committee M ember of 
Devolution Mr.  Seth Odongo together with the Director of Ins pectorate Mr. Ibrahim 
Mohamed in  a bid to interrogate the reasons behind the demol ition in Tudor and Changamwe 
Ward.  Mr. Speaker Sir after a meeting with the Executive Committee Member and the 
Director of Inspectorate the following were the findings by the joint Committees on reasons 
for the demolition.  
1. There was a cholera outbreak with in th e two W ards spreading at a high rate and 
needed to be contained.  
2. That the food vendors operating kio sks and hotels in the demolished  structures lack 
required health permits and documentation.  
3. That the temporary structures were constructed on road rese rves and therefore 
illegally built  contrary to the Mombasa County Roads Act , 2016.  
Mr. Speaker sir, the resolution arrived was in the foreseeable future in case such an 
exercise by the County government was to be conducted  communication should be first mee t 
area MCA so as to avoid misunderstanding bet ween the people and the County g overnment 
of Mombasa.  Mr. Speaker Sir I would also want to inform this House a lot is happening in the 
Directorate of Inspectorate and maybe some of the issues that have been rai sed by Members  
here very soon are going to be sorted out. I just believe that in fact we have new leadership, 
we have a new Director  there  acting and  numbe r two is also acting. So it is in a bid  to address 
some of the issues that are being sorted out by Members  of this Honorable  House. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson  Juma  Thoya. Yes Hon. Bwire . 
 
Hon. Bwire : Mr. Speaker I stand on a point of information.  I would wish just to inform 
my Chairman that we as Members  we ought to have copies before so that we go through as 
he reads but even as I speak I have forgotten what he  has read  Mr. Speaker. So I would wish 
because it has been now a tradition and we once addressed it here. Thank Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Clerks next  time when a M ember has a statement you should 
get the  statement and make sure every M ember has a copy of the statement so that they can 
read. Yes Hon. Juma  Renson  Thoya . 
 
Hon. Thoya: Yes I appreciate the fact but also I want to insist that Members  of the said 
Committee s should avail  themselves  because I think the Hon.  Member is a M ember of 
Labour Committee and we call ed a Committee meeting he could be having this information 
before this Honourable  House. So as much as this is the exercise of the Clerks I w ould like if 
you are called for meetings please avail  yourself so that you own this st atement. It is very sad 
that a M ember of that Committee stands  here and says he does not have the report and just 
because you do not attend those called sessions. Thank y ou. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire I think…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 Hon. Bwire: Mr. Speaker with due respect, I said that all the Hon.  Members  of this 
House ought to have these  copies ; whether I am a Committee M ember or not a Committee 
Member the copy  should be within this plenary that is the fact…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Bwire I can recall that you said that very clear  that 
even you yourself you do not understand what he was reading, so it means you do not even 
know about that report…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Bwire : I said I h ave forgotten what he has read.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So it means that … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Bwire : It has been a very comprehensive and a very long statement … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Kh atri): It is very sad for a Member who is a M ember of that 
Committee and you are just saying right now you even do not know and you have already 
forgotten what he was saying. I think you should have that thing in your knowledge because 
you are Member of th at Committee. Y ou should know Hon. Bwire. Yes Hon. Samba ? 
 
Hon.  Samba : Yes Mr. Speaker let me, maybe  because  Hon. Bwire is a Member of the 
said Committees but it is our right to have the copies it has been the habit of this House that it 
is only Hon.  Membe r who is giving out reports who is the only person who has the report 
written on paper but it is our right to have the documents , like for me…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : How is it your right Hon. Samba, can you show me where in 
the Standing order it is saying that a M ember whe n he is replying to a statement  show me .. 
 
Hon.  Samba : If you give me time I will show you, but meanwhile it has  been a practice 
Hon. Speaker f or me the Hon.  Member who requested for that st atement, I do not have my 
copy, maybe I would appreciate…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Let us start with this Hon.  Member, when you brought your 
statement did you write a copy and give it to all other Members ? 
 
Hon.  Samba : No! No! No ! But I brought the statement;  it is the responsibility of…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Did you request that you want your response to be in 
writing?  
 
Hon. Samba : Maybe you assist us, what is required  of us ? 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Clerks can we go to the Standing Order , what is it saying on  
statement ? 
 
(Consultation s) 
 
…Can you give it to Hon. Samba to read for us the Stan ding order on statement, you 
have your Standing Order, just go  Standing Order No.  40? 
 
Hon. Samba : Should I go through 40 and 41 all?  
 
The Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : Just read it is all regarding statement issue . 
 
Hon. Samba : Ok, Members  general statement 40 (1) . 
 
(Hon. Samba read)  
 
Notwithstanding  Standing Order 27 (hours of meeting ), the Speaker shall interrupt  
the Business o f the County every Tuesday at 6 :00p.m. to facilitate Members  to make 
general statement of topic al concerned ’. 
 I have not seen anything relating to whatever we are discussing.   
(2) ‘A Member who  wishes to seek leave to raise a  matter under this Standing Order 
shall before 3 :00p.m on the  day of the statement is to be made hand  to the Speaker a 
written  notification of the matter, but  the Speaker  shall refuse to allow the request 
unless satisfied that the matter may properly be discussed in the County Assembly ...’  
of which I adhered to tha t I wro te to the Clerk and I even sign ed.  
(3) No M ember  making a statement  under this Standing O rder shall speak for more 
than three times unless with permission of the Speaker .  
It is very much irrelevant I do not see how they are related. 41 … 
 
(Interrup tion)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : I think if you go to 41 (2) (a) . 
  
Hon. Samba : But he said from 40. Ok.  
 
(Hon. Samba continued)  
 
 41 (1) Not withstanding S tanding order 37 (sequence of proceeding ), there shall be 
time to be designated statement hour ever y Thurs day commencing not later than 3: 00 
p.m. 
2. (a) A M ember of the County Assembly Business Committee designated by the 
Committee shall every Thursday or on the last sitting day for not more than ten 
minutes present and lay on the table statement inform ing the County  Assembly of the 
Business coming before the County Assembly following week, that is for the Leader of 
Majority who is suppose to be doing that . 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 (b) The Leader of Majority Party or the Minority Party as the case maybe or the 
designee s may make  a statement relating to their responsibilities in the County 
Assembly or the activities  of the Committee.  
 
Last maybe that is where we are goin g to get that point but we pray...,  
 (c) A Member may request for a statement from the Committee Chairperson rel ating 
to the matter s under the mandate of the C ommittee and the Speaker shall either 
appoint a day for the statement or direct  that the statement be issued on the same day.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Member as you can see it is very clear so you 
cannot say it is Hon. Renson Juma Thoya ’s fault that he did bring the reply by giving the 
copies to other Members , it is not clear, there's no way it has said that . 
 
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker even in the Standing o rder there's no way written that any 
Member s hould have his copy of Standing Order but we have our copie s, it is not written 
anywhere.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : How did that question arise ? 
 
Hon. Samba:  No, it has been a practise of the House maybe if you are l aying paper 
how genuin e are you going to satisfy ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Which h ouse are you talking about?  
 
Hon. Samba:  August House, Hon. House.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes so because am the one who requested for the statement Mr.  
Speaker I think it will be very fair if I have my copy because most of the response s maybe he 
has read the issue of cholera outbreak i have never heard any issue to do with cholera 
outbreak in my W ard as far as i am concern ed. N umber two those people whos e structures 
were demolished have license s and they pay , that is why I brought that issue here so I find it 
very unfair if maybe the report I have to acknowledge that they took their tim e they went 
there almost three C ommittees but I request for...  
 
(Inter ruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Member you are requesting now for that 
Statement ? 
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So then you can request don't say the Hon. Member di d 
not do the needful by bringing the copy of the report . 
 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Hon. Samba:  I did not say that . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : This is a Hon ourable  House, Hon. Bwire said that.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker thank you.  Mr. Speaker you have just given a good 
directive to the Clerks to make sure that if there i s a very  comprehensive statement or a 
response that is coming they should have copies for all Members  not only the Chairman so 
we are not complaining Chairman.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Then the Hon. Member is starting to complain about the 
same issue again.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  So they should put considerations. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : We are going to use Standing Order Number one now, 
Standing Order 1.  
(1) In all cases where matters are not expressly provided for the Speaker to decide . 
So am  deciding Hon. Members  anyone who brings a s tatement and any Member 
needs the s tatem ent will be replied by written s tatement so he can requ est that when he is 
giving his s tatement because there are other s tatements maybe the other Members  do not need 
to be  written the y are  happy to just hear it verbal ly. Yes Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kujuza 
Nyumba hii ya kwamba Mheshimiwa anapoleta taarifa  ndani ya Bunge hili iwapo 
Mwenyekiti mhusika yuko na jibu w akati ule ule anaweza kujibu na hailazimu kuwa lazima 
awe na karatasi kuonyesha uthibiti wa majibu yake lau ikiletwa majibu yake na watu 
hawakuridhika ndio pale tutaitisha tupate ripoti ambayo itakuja kujadiliwa ndani ya Bunge 
hili lakini sasa hivi Mheshim iwa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Leba amejibu masuala yale 
ambayo yalikuwa yameulizwa na Mheshimiwa kutoka Tudor na sijaona kama amekeuka 
sheria zozote za Bunge za kutokupeana nakala zile kwa waheshimiwa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika na  kutilia 
nguvu maneno aliyozungumza Mheshimiwa Fadhili kuwa tuna kitu; chombo hichi 
tunachokitumia cha Hansard  ikiwa Mheshimiwa yeyote anahitaji kitu chochote anaweza 
kwenda kwa Hansard  kwenda kuuliza na kama alivyosema k uwa jawabu unaweza kupeana 
pale pale ama mtu akauliza wakati akapewa akaja akajibu si lazima iwe  katika maandishi  
Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Member. Y es Hon. Thoya ca n you 
move on.  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Nawashukuru kwa kuweza kutoa hizo changizo . 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 Hata hivyo ikiwa labda Mheshimiwa aliyeomba taarifa hii angetaka kupata ufahamu 
zaidi anaweza kuwasiliana na ile ripoti  kwa undani; iko hii ni taarifa  ambayo iko kitu 
ambacho tumekisem a ni kwamba zoezi lile halikufanywa manake remark  yetu ya mwisho 
tulisema kwamba itakuwa ni vyema kama chochote kinafanyika lazima MCA wa pale aweze 
kufahamishwa kikamilifu nafikiri hiyo ndio  taarifa  ya mwisho na inasikitisha ya kwamba 
MCA wa pale habari z ote hana ya kuhusu ugonjwa wa kipindu pindu . Hapo ndio makosa  
yalikoseka zaidi ya yote Inspectorate  kazi yao ni ku  enforce  lakini kulikuwa na vitengo vy ote 
vya Kaunti ya  Mombasa ; ya ardhi  ilikuwa pale, ya biashara  wote walikuwa pale isipokuwa 
mara nyingi w atu wa Inspectorate  wa Kaunti wanashikwa kwa sababu huwa wao ndio 
waonekana lakini ni idara zote za afya ya mambo ya barabara walikuwa pale. Kwa hivyo 
tumesema Mheshimiwa Tobias Samba wakati ujao unastahili kuhusishwa kikamilifu ndio 
wewe mwenyewe uweze ha ta kutetea watu wako hayo mambo ya permit , mambo ya nini 
uyajue na mapema. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Thoya, yes Clerk?  
 
Yes the Chairperson Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing ? 
 
(Silence)  
 
Do we have the Deputy or any other M ember to reply  to that? Yes Hon. Abrari the 
Deputy Chair?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kamati ya Ardhi ilikuwa 
tayari ish apanga mipango kabambe ya kuwa W aheshimiwa wote watapelekwa Induction  na 
Waziri kwenda kuelezewa hali halisi pa le wamefikia pa  kuvunja nyumba hizi. K wa hivyo ni 
mambo tu yalitokea ikaahirishwa lakini InshaAllah  wiki ijayo wataenda kujuzwa yote 
mambo kamili na ripoti wataipata.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Benard?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika naf ikiri hilo jibu ilikuwa ni muhimu sana manake 
kuna vitendo ambavyo vinaendelea  kule mashinani kuhusiana na mambo ya nyumba,  kwa 
hivyo ningekuwa muhimu pengine Naibu  Mwenyekiti  asimamishe yale maneno ambayo 
yanaendelea kule chini ili tungoje twende mafundis ho na iletwe karibu iwe hata ni kesho kwa 
sababu yale maneno ambayo yanafanyika kule si ma zuri; watu wamepewa notisi watoke kwa 
manyumba kwa mwezi mmoja , mtihani unaanza mwezi ujao , wengine wanakaa na familia 
kubwa  hivyo basi  hili si jambo ambalo lafaa liv utwe watupeleke  mafundisho  kesho waseme 
zile notisi ziwekwe chini ili a ngalau  wale watu wetu pia wajihisi kama W akenya wengine. 
Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you, Hon. Abrari I think you have noted that . 
 
Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ndio maana nimewa elezea kuwa  mafundisho  ilikuwa 
imepangwa twende lakini ikaahirishwa kwa sababu zisizo  epukika, wiki ijayo sote 
tutakwenda kujuzwa hali halisi ya mipango ilivyopangwa.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Abrari, yes Hon. Benard?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimi wa Spika mimi ... (Off mic) . 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Namuomba ndugu yangu Ogutu napenda kumueleza 
kwamba msemo unaosema , There are no orders without prayers  hapa hii ili kuja ni mimi 
niliomba Kamati kut ajulish wa Waheshimiwa ni jambo gani linaendelea juu ya mijengo na 
yale mambo yanayoendelea . Kwa hiyo Mheshimiwa Spika nimepata jawabu kutok a kwa 
Mheshimiwa na nimeridhika hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Ogutu kama ana jambo lolote aje 
aombe hapa ndio apewe lakini sio kusema kuwa  taarifa  iende ikazuiwe mambo 
yanayoendelea kule chini. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy, yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba... (Off mic) . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk?  
 
CENSUS CONDUCTED BY C OUNTY G OVERNMENT ON PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES (PWD S) 
 
Yes Hon. Ramla?  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Said : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee on Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs whether he is aware of the census 
conducted by the County  government of Mombasa on People with Disabilities (PWDs) and 
when the report/information acquired during this exercise be made available for public 
consumption. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. I think Hon. Aran is  not around , yes Hon. 
Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker we are aware of the census conducted and I would 
request the Hon. Member to give us one week for the report because the census were just 
concluded last month. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Ramla you will be r eply in one weeks' time, 
thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTAT ION OF MOTIONS SINCE  INCEPTION OF SECOND ASSEMBLY  
 
Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee on Implementation whether he is aw are of the Motion passed in this House since 
inception of the Second Assembly and what is the status of thei r Implementation by the 
County g overnment. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy . Yes Hon. David Kalume, 
Chairperson Committe e on Implementation do you have immediate response?  
 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9   Hon.  Kalume:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, ningependa kuonge a kidogo kuhusiana 
na sw ala la Mheshimiwa Hatimy . Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sasa tuko na habari kidogo 
ambayo haijakamilika kisawa sawa kwa hivyo tu naomba mimi kama Mwenyekiti na K amati 
yangu tunaomba utupatie siku 21 ili tuweze kukusanya ripoti yote.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So you are requesting for three weeks.  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Yes 21  days. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kuna kitu inaitwa Motion tracker , 
haihitaji au haikuchukui hata d akika tano kwenda kuangalia Motion tra cker ukajua hoja ngapi  
zimepitishwa, taarifa  ngapi zimepitishwa na status  ya ile Motion  iko wapi, nastaajabu sana 
kusikia wanatak a siku 21, sijui wanataka kwenda mafundisho  tungoje mw ende  mafundisho  
ndio uje utujibu au ni vipi?  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Member, Hon. David K alume I will give you two 
weeks  then you can…  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatr i): Yes. 
 
Hon. Kalume : Niko hapa na Wanachama  wangu.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : It is fin e Hon. K alume you were asking for  three weeks 
so am giving you two  weeks.  
 
Hon.  Kalume:   Naomba unipatie nafasi kidogo kuongea.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
Hon.  Kalume:  Kwa kusema kweli Motion  zilizopitishwa na Bunge hili ni nyingi,  na 
tunahitaji m uda, hatuwezi kwenda tu tupate habari za uwongo, tunataka habari za kisawa 
sawa tukileta kwa Bunge hili W aheshimiwa wapate habari za kisawa sawa za  uhakika, kwa 
hivyo ni lazima tuwasiliane  na vitengo husika . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya.  
 
Hon. Kalume:  Na pia vile vile ni lazima tufanye site visit  katika hi vi vitengo  ili 
tujue.. . 
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya.  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiw a nafikiri Kamati ya Utekelezaji ni K amati ambayo 
haijajul ikana . 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 Pengine ni kitengo  gani unaweza ukaomba uende mafundisho ama ufanye nini, kwa 
hivyo ni lazima m jue kwamba leo nimesikia kizungu kimoja kinaitwa Motion tracker , tuna 
soma hivyo nafikiri hata M wenyekiti wangu nen o hilo amelijua leo . Kwa hivyo haya ni 
baadhi ya mambo na kama akikuamb ia hivyo Mheshimiwa Hatimy,  mwelewe na uzuri nyinyi 
mumekuwa hapa kwa vipindi viwili ama vitatu habari hizo mko nazo, mtuwie radhi 
tuhakikishe kwanza kwamba tutajarib u kama mtaangalia ni hizo wiki tatu ama mtapunguza 
lakini isije tukaleta vitu ambavyo hapa mtakuja tucheka hapa.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Thoya, okay Hon. Hatimy I think if you 
look at your statement very clear ly we are not only  asking f or how many Motions have been 
passed here, again and what is the status of th e implementation by the County g overnment so 
I think we need to give them more time, we cannot  send someone to do that job in one day ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
Yes Hon. Bwire.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I think whenever you make a 
prayer or rather a request,  you always give direction and in this  case you have already give n 
direction of two weeks.  I see no need for us to revise it, three weeks Mr. Speaker these are the 
issues that we have the department s with us here and there are things that can even take one 
week so two weeks with me Mr. Speaker as you have already give the directives are enough.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes the direction is two weeks.  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Not three weeks.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : No, I said two weeks, he was asking for three weeks but 
I said two weeks but Hon. Hatimy was sayi ng these things can be done in one  day so I was 
telling Hon. Hatimy it is not possible to do these things in one day,  yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika naheshimu uamuzi w ako ul iotoa lakini 
kama mwenzangu hapa amesema kuwa Motion tracker  ni kitabu ambacho kimewekwa  hoja 
zote tarehe  yake na yule mtu aliye leta hiyo Motion  na kuonyesha  kuwa hii Motion  imefika 
wapi, huna  haja ya  kufanya  utafiti  wala kuenda mafundisho  wala kufanya nini Mheshimiwa 
Spika  ni kitabu ambacho kiko kuna Motion tracker , kuna Bill tracker  ambayo in aonyesha 
status  ya kila hoja lakini mimi ninaheshimu Mheshimiwa vile umesema sina la  kusema 
lakini...  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Hatimy can you finish your prayer or he did  not 
ask for the M otion only so do you mean the M otion trac ker is supposed to know if the M otion 
will be implemented or not? That’s what we are asking. Yes Hon. S amba ? 
 
Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker when this plot of doing implementation reque st was 
hatched I was there and H on. Speaker I would also like to remind Hon. Hatimy if it is  about 
just requiring how many M otion s do we have, that one  we can do it even a single da y. I am 
speaking as a M ember of Implementation Committee but here comes a case, I want to gi ve 
you one example, there is a M otion here we passed that was relocating the power or was 
directing the County administration leadership from the office of the Gove rnor to the 
department of devolution and public servic e, until now they are  under the Governor’s office .  
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 These things you cannot  do within a day,  we need to call for the department for 
devolution to ascertain  where exactly did…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speak er (Hon. Khatri) : But I think Hon. Members  I have  already  given  the 
directive …yes? 
 
Hon. Thoya:  I think th ere is no room  for lies this  House, sometimes we need to get 
the nitty gritty from the said Committee . I think there were issues with the Director of 
Administration and am here to tell that those issues were addressed and there was handshake 
and things are going on very well so the status is, the situation is that the administration is 
under the department.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members  I thi nk we need to go for another 
induction  it seems like Members  do not know what we are doing here...   
 
(Applause)  
 
....it seems like Members  do no t know their role s; you know in this Assembly because 
we are discussing one issue one  time and another we have a lready given a ruling again 
another  Member stand s to ask again about the same issue, so H on. Members  please just try to 
understand you know. Y es Hon. Nzai.  
 
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii, mimi naongea kama 
mmoja wa Wanakamati wa  Utekelezaji . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members  I do no t know which language now we 
should start talking in this House. .. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker I now stand as a M ember of Speaker’s panel and as far as 
am concerned, that when the d irectives are given by the Chair, that makes the end of the 
debate, so I think we should move to another statement.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Let’s move on Clerk please.  
 
BLOCKED SEWAGE IN WAYANI AIRPORT WARD  
 
Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi I think he is not i n the House, yes Hon. Fadhili.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I stan d 
on behalf of my brother Hon. O mondi. Mr. Speaker s ir I seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee on Environment, Waste management and Energy if he is aware of t he blocked 
sewage in Wayani Air port W ard which poses serious health  risk to resident s, and what action 
will County g overnment take to remedy the situation.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you I think Hon. Pri schilla Mumba is around, yes 
we have Hon. Leila … do you have the answer now or you need some time.  
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12  
Hon.  (Ms.)  Nyache:  Tunaomba wakati tuende tukakae.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So I am giving you one week. Yes Clerk?  
 
POOR STATE OF BOMU CATHOLIC ROAD  
 
Hon.  Ibrahim is not around . Yes Hon.  Fadhili.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): First and foremost I want to declare that I am 
a Member  of Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works Committee, on  behalf of my 
colleague, I seek to know from the C hairperson Committee on Transport Infras tructure and 
Public Works if he is aware of the poor state of Bomu Catholic Road which has 
inconvenienced both motorists and pedestrians and what plans does the county government 
have to remedy the situation.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : I think Hon.  Prisc hilla Mumba is around, yes 
Honorable? Do you have that answer right now?  
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  I think I need time because I do not have the time.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : One day or one week?  
 
Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba: No, no, I think last week I had a line  up of these  road works 
problems everywhere and there is a ruling here that I’ll be given almost a month so that I can 
complete all the work within the County which has problem in road works and I would  urge 
this Assembly t hat whatever was needed in any W ard and I still urge that they bring it on my 
table so that I can address all the issues to the Transport Committee so that we can resolve all 
the issues at once and we resolve to bring the result while I bring the others in one month’s  
time.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Priscilla  I will give you two weeks to 
bring the report. Yes Clerk.  
 
POOR STATE OF MOMBASA MUNICIPAL STA DIUM  
 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) left the Chair ) 
(The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) took the C hair)  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ali Shari ff. 
Hon. Ali Omar Shariff: Thank you Mr. Speaker s ir. I need to know from the 
Chairman Committee on Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs on whether he is aware 
of the poor state of Mombasa Municipal Stadium and if the cou nty government has any plans 
to remedy the situation Mr. Speaker Sir I need a written statement.   
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I can see the leader of majority is up . 
 
Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand here on behalf 
of the government ; well it's a very good statement but it has been overtaken by events 
because on Tuesday we had already advertised the tender for that stadium to be taken care of .  
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13 So am trying to ale rt my fellow M ember that he should not be worried the 
government has already taken steps to the issue which has been mentioned, thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you the Leader of M ajority for 
bringing to the attention of this Hous e on the status of the Mombasa M unicipal stadium . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
What is it Hon . Ali Shariff?  
 
Hon. Ali Omar Shariff:  Mr. Speaker sir I need a written statement.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay the Leader of M ajority will liaise with 
the Chairperson Committee  on Youth, Gender and S ports to brin g you the advertiseme nts that 
have been made by the C ounty government plus the written response  as you have  requested, 
but am sure as the Leader of M ajority has stated the issue has been by passed by events, yes 
Hon. Tobias.  
 
Hon.  Samba: Mr. Speaker I thin k the question was directed to our  department but it 
is good the Leader of M ajority stood for the government but his request has been answered , 
that as the C ommittee we are aware and as the Leader of M ajority has said there are plans 
that are going on that  is only  a statement that he requested now he is adding for another one.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think I have already ruled on that , the 
Leader has responded on y our behalf and I have said the C ommittee to liaise with the Leader 
of M ajority to bring back a written response so that the Hon. Member may take the written  
response back to his Tononoka W ard and the Hon. Members  will be well informed from the 
request. In a week's time we will need the written statement in this Hon ourable  House.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 What  is it Hon Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya: Mr. Speaker it is very sad that very important proceedings are 
happening in Tononoka and the area MCA is not informed , it is high time that we try to 
bridge this gap because those are the issues that the a rea MCA himself he can be proud of so 
I want to bring to you r attention that some of these C ounty projects we are yearning for them 
please Mr. Speaker thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Renson Thoya  what 
you have brought to this  attention has been discussed in the Liaison Committee and we have 
also requested the C hairs to look for the quarterly reports and through the quarterly reports 
the House will be well informed of each and every event that is taking place in this County 
government of Mombasa . Yes C lerk, yes Hon . Ogutu what is it?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu: I rise on S tanding order 41(2)  c... 
  
(Silence ) 
 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Before you give the content s of the 
statement just give us the heading of the statement, what is it  that you want to state?  
 
RELOCATION NOTICE TO TENANTS OF CHANGAMWE OLD ESTATE  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speak er I seek a statement from the C ommittee of Lands, 
Housing and Planning concerning a notice which was issued to the tenants of Changamwe 
old estates . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay proceed.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I seek statement from the Chairperson 
Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing concerning the notice which was given to the 
tenants of Changamwe  old estate.  Mr. Speake r in their response they should take care of the 
following; the  time in which the project was likely to start , the relocation plan, the relocation 
package and four, the involvement of public in the project , that is public participation Mr. 
Speaker . Thank you.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Hon. Abrari  the Vice C hair Committee 
On Lands and Housing.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika naomba m uda wa 
wiki moja tutampa ripoti yake kamili.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu: The matter is urgent and it n eeds to be addressed with that agency 
Mr. S peaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Ogutu you must also be aware that 
we are not sitting on Fridays and Mondays so as per our sitting arrangement the Hon . 
Member has requested for one week time of wh ich am sure he will be in a position to respond 
on whatever that you have raised and am sure the residents of Changamwe  will still be in 
Changamwe  estate they won't be evicted in a week's tim e so we will wait for the Hon. 
Member to respond to this Hon ourab le House not unless if you are sitting tomorrow I could 
have requested him due to its urgency to bring the statement or the response tomorrow.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker am obliged.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  What is it Hon . Hatim y? 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mr. Speaker I rise under 44(5).  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Okay read the S tanding order 44(5).  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni kuhusu juu ya chama  ambayo 
inapatiwa ikiwa  kuna kitu chochote lakini sio M swada n i taarifa kuwakumbusha 
Waheshimiwa . 
October 4, 2018                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  
 Kwa hivyo unapokuwa unapata M swada kutoka kwa chama  unaipatia kipao 
mbele ili ipate kus ikizwa Mheshimiwa  na ni jambo ambalo liko kwa  Kanuni za Bunge  
ambayo nilikuwa nataka kama umenipatia ruhusa nieleze ni kuhusu jambo  gani.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy not unless you have a 
Motion sponsored by the party then we will allow you to proceed but if it's just a statement.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Statement under 41 , 2 (c). 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): On the sam e note Hon. Hatimy 41(2) c 
the S peaker may allot a day for you to bring your statement so as a Speaker you will bring 
your statement on Thursday next week.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Having there no other business the House stands adjourned until Tue sday the 9th 
of October at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at  3:33p.m.  
 
  
 
 
 