July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 27th July, 2016  
The House met at 2: 44p.m. 
(Deputy Speaker ( Hon. Mswabah Rashid) in the Chair)  
(PRAYERS)  
 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Members you may s it down. Yes C lerk. 
NOTICE  OF MOTIO N 
       Hon.  Hatimy.  
       Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I would like to give a 
Notice of Motion  on the construction of  a prayer place in the County A ssembly.  
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy  moved  the Notice of Motion ) 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF A  PRAYER PLACE IN THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
        THAT AWARE that the County A ssembly has a designated place for prayer for Muslims 
since the year 2012;  
       FURTHER AWARE that the existing prayer rooms are small and cannot hold the ever 
increasing number of  faithful working in the building and coming to p ray; 
       NOTING THAT countrywide it has been a standard requirement to provide a place of 
worship for prayers for Muslims in public institutions;  
       CONCERNED THAT failure to expand the praying space of prayer for Muslims will 
occasion unnecessary hardships and distress;  
       I urge Mr.  Speaker this House to resolve THAT:  
1. The County A ssembly to provide  a larger space for prayer for M embers of the Muslim 
faith given the nature of the worship which de mands that they pray even during working 
hours to avoid distraction from work.  
       I beg to move Mr. Speaker Sir.  Thank you M r. Speaker.  
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  I seek lea ve Hon. Speaker. I request the H ouse to grant me 
permission, thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you, we shall come to  that while at 
business number eight .  Yes Clerk.  
(Interruption)  
        Yes Hon. Mwadziwe what is it?  
       Hon. Mwinga : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Sp eaker is  the Hon. Wangudi is order  to put on 
sun glasses?  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Mheshimiwa Wangudi.   
       Hon.  Wangudi:  Mr. Speaker I think Hon. Enock  cannot see very well.  
       Deputy Sp eaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :   Okay, it’s okay now, Clerk?  
STATEMENT  
       Hon. H amisi Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. S peaker with due 
respect I have to repl y what has been passed to this H ouse but because of  the time, I would hand 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 over the letter which I had already communicated with the Kenya Ports Authority .  I think it will 
be in o rder if you read it you as the C hair Mr. Speaker, thank you.  
       Hon. M walimu : Point of order Mr. Speaker ! 
       Deputy Spe aker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Fadhili what is it?   
       Hon. M walimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I think that  I am the one who brought 
the S tatement and Mr. Speaker what I had requested I did not request for a letter I requested the 
Leader  of M ajority to come and clarify before Honorable M embers . It was the responsibility of 
the Leader of M ajority today as it has passed two weeks it was on the 14th of this month when I 
read this S tatement and we wa nted to know as the H ouse, what or how are we benefiting from 
the Kenya Ports Authority . Mr. Speaker I also put some examples in this Honorable H ouse that 
they are schools that were built by Kenya Po rts Authority in other counties. So I think the Hon. 
Member that is what is  expected, the Leader of Majority is trying to escape from what the H ouse 
had requested and bringing in front of us a letter Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker we had not requested 
for a letter we had requested for a report, thank you.  
(Applause ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think it’s my  time now to 
reply to what the M ember has said and I don’t know why he is leav ing the House.  In fact even if 
you count 14 days they are not yet over, and th at’s why am trying to prove to this H ouse that the 
time that was suggested here I had taken some acti on, that’s why I have asked the C hair to rea d 
the action which I have taken  because whatever the R eport we need in this H ouse we should 
communicate with th e other party.  This is why I was saying this letter should be read, after it has 
been read then it would be known how f ar have I gone with those steps.  So Mr. Speaker my 
request I would like the Chair to read the letter, after  it has been read  I think the  Members  will 
know how the step s I have taken, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : So M embers this is a letter acknowledging, this 
letter is acknowledged, just a minute, the letter I have here  is from the … County Assembly and 
is going to the Managing D irector of the Kenya Ports Authority so it’s just an acknowledgment, 
that Hon. Khamisi Mwidani for this County A ssembly has written to the Managing Director 
demanding to know the same.  So I think  we are yet to get  a response that’s what we are saying, 
so it means you have taken a step, but you are waiting for response, so how long do you need us 
to, you want me to read for them..    
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): I think Mr. Speaker …..  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Sarah Nyamvula what is it ? 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker allow me to just give a …, 
following what was happening just not to assist the Leader of Majority because he is the Leader 
of Majority he might have more information but just looking at what has been happening in 
Mombasa and the company in general towards the issue of KPA for the last two weeks.  I can 
imagine that letter maybe I first want to take this opportun ity to congratulat e Catherine M turi  for 
the appointment as the M anaging Director of KPA, now Mr. Speaker being the first woman to 
get this position , being a woman from this C ounty , from this region I take that opportunit y to 
congratulate  her.  That not withstanding, Mr. Spe aker I think at KPA it has been a very busy time 
so I can see the Leader of M ajority waiting for two ways because the two weeks which we will 
be maybe waiting for reply was the time of the process of recruiting the MD of KPA . So I 
suppose a nd am not apolog izing for being … nor am I defending am just sharing what has been 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 happening, general information , general knowledge, that there was a process maybe that’s why 
we are late maybe, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Interruption)  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rash id):  Yes Hon. Patrick Siminyu what is it?  
       Hon. Simi nyu: Mr. Speaker I don’t want to con cur with the H onorable  precious lady that 
whatever… Mr. Speaker I believe KPA is an administration and the administration will work 
whether a position is occupie d or not. Mr. Speaker I also stand here jus t to have a direction from 
the C hair because Mr. Sp eaker the H on. Member of Mtongwe our Majority L eader has just come 
up wi th a letter with no information.  Mr. Sp eaker it will only be in order for the H on. Member to 
read the letter for us and explain the issue behind that letter because if he tells you to read and 
you don’t know anything about it, it is not communication time we should follow the procedure . 
       Mr. Speaker if  he has come with a letter here let h im read for us.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Saad Faraj.  
       Hon. Faraj: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for this opportunity. Mr. Speaker we have 
laid dow n rules and procedures of this House which must be followed.  Mr. Speaker  with regards 
to the R eport, we cannot have  a letter being brought in the H ouse and to be represented as the 
Report that  we were supposed to get.  Mr. Speaker in any event that is, in any event if we were 
not able to extract any information from that partic ular entity that we are supposed to get 
infor mation from, the rules of this H ouse required us to come up with a R eport, it is as simple as 
that, a  letter remains a letter and a Report remains a R eport, thank you.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Leader of M ajority.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker, I thi nk that am trying to 
bring the H ouse to order because this letter, let me re ad it so that. .. 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Saad Faraj.  
       Hon. Faraj:  The Majority L eader has no mandate to bring this H ouse to order Mr. Speaker, 
he… the power  which he does not have Mr. Speaker thank you.  
        Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay L eader of  Majority you should not take 
my power.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker sorry and  that’s why we are now moving 
very first. Okay Mr. Speaker I wanted to bring this letter to make sure that whatever it has being 
passed I have taken a step and this letter reads;   
(Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ) read letter ) 
       Members of the County Assembly are mandated by the Constitution to represent their Wards 
to which Kenya Ports Authority falls in one of the wa rds. A request for a Statement was sought 
on in the Count y Assembly seeking to know the CSR projects undertaken by your organization  
and other benefits to the people of Mombasa from 2013 to date . I shall be pleased to receive a 
quick response to the matter for submission to the County Assembly by Tuesday, 2nd August 
2016.  That's why I came with this letter so that to r equest this H ouse to give me more time so 
that when i get response from Kenya Ports Authority so that I can lay it on 2nd August this year, 
thank you Mr. Speaker .  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswaba h Rashid) : Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
       Hon. Mwalimu: Thank you Mr. S peaker i just wa nt to r aise again this issue Mr. S peaker 
because it seems the office of the Leader of M ajority had slept on this matter Mr. S peaker…  
(Laughter ) 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4        By them just writing a l etter if am not wrong the letter was written yesterday an d he is trying 
to persuade the H ouse that next week 2nd the R eport will be in this House Mr. Speaker and the 
matter was raised two weeks ago , the Leader of M ajority should come clear he had forgotten  to 
work on this issue and Mr. Speaker i con cur with..  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa  Amur ? 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker the M ember how did he come to know the date and information in 
that letter ? It is very unbelie vable that someone who did not do that knows about it, thank you. 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker t here are copies of the said letters going around this House . 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker he is misleading the H ouse, the only paper..  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon Amur  without the permission of the 
Speaker . 
       Hon. Amur : Sorry Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :   Yes Hon Mwalimu . 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker if it were not appropriate am sur e what you  are holding on 
your table Mr. S peaker  and what Hon orable  is holding it is showing that it has circulated , my 
point is we had raised this issue two weeks ago.   
        Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Amur you cannot be two people speak ing 
at the sa me time  it is the rule of the H ouse, so i will give you time let Hon. Fadhili finish .  
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker my concern is that the office of Leader of M ajority slept on 
this issue and we had raised this issue two weeks ago, it  is upon this House to ask the Leader of 
Majority to be serious on this issue . If we are going to take people as by the way,  this is a 
Honorable  House Mr. Speaker,  he should respect what has transpir ed in this House,  thank you 
Mr. S peaker . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Amur what were you saying . 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker my learned friend Hon . Fadhili we don’t  have copies if he has he 
should share with us where did he get the information? He has requested until next Tuesday,  so 
he ca nnot tell us that he knows the date he never told us the content of that letter , he is putting 
our Majority L eader in the dark Mr. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Patrick Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker this is a se rious matter and we should not take it lightly, the 
Mombasa Ports A uthority is making millions of shillings and yet Mombasa is benefiting nothing,       
Mr. Speaker the Leader of M ajority should visit if possible le t him book an appointment, b ecause 
we are  losing a  lot of money, as you heard the Kenya Ports A uthority is investing in other 
counties in Social C orporate R esponsibility . We are working as a family and we have to know 
which benefits are Mombasa people getting, even us visiting the ports is not a crime, am hearing 
Members murmuring here, we have to work a milestone so that we have answers for our people, 
Thank you . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Mwadzi we. 
       Hon. Mwinga:   Thank you Mr. Speaker I  just wanted to inform the Speaker who was just on 
the floor h e said this matter is serious.  Mr. S peaker i think all matters raised here are serious …. 
(Applause ) 
       It is not only this matte r but all matters, I think the M ajority Leader is right to read us the 
letter because Mr.  Speaker and we know KPA is a very big firm , so i think he should be given 
time so that we can get a proper R eport and know what the KPA must do to this county . So I 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 think the Majority L eader is right he should be given time so that he can br ing a proper R eport, 
thank you Mr. S peaker.  
(Interruption)  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Point of order ! 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : What is your point of order?  
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker the two speakers, the speakers who have just left .  
       Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : How many speakers do we have in this House …  
(Laughter ) 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  The H on. Member who has just left Mr. S peaker, he w as saying that he 
supports the Majority L eader and in the letter of the Majority L eader has reques ted Kenya Ports 
Authority, he has given Kenya Ports Authority until Tuesday and the Hon . Member who has left 
he was saying that he supports the Leader of M ajority and yet he is saying we give Kenya Ports 
Authority ample time for them to give us what they h ave done to Mombasa . Mr. Speaker, It can 
take them 30 minutes for them to tell us what they have done to Mombasa residents , what they 
are planning to do.  We have seen the port has expanded by them doing so what are we getting we 
as the residents of Mombasa ? In fact Changamwe we want to know what we are getting in 
Changamwe . I think my point should be given  weight that the office of the Leader of M ajority 
dragged in this issue, and whatever that he is being told in this House he should take it seriously 
or else the House will act upon the Leader of M ajority for him failing to deliver, thank you Mr. 
Speaker ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Wangudi.  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Mheshimiwa  Spika nashukuru kwa fursa hii niweze kutoa hoj a yangu 
Mheshimiwa Spika . Jambo la  kwanza ningependa kufahamisha N yumba hii  kuwa hoja hii 
imeletwa katika N yumba hii na Mheshimiwa Fadhili ambae tunapatana na yeye kwa upande wa 
Bandari  ya Mombasa . Suala ambalo mwenzangu alikuja nayo ni kupata Ripoti katik a Nyumba 
hii, hivi sasa n i vizuri Kiongozi  wa Walio Wengi ameandika barua na majibu atayapata lakini sio 
Ripoti.  Sisi tunahit aji majibu, hiyo barua ni yako B wana Kiongozi wa W alio Wengi sisi tunataka 
Ripoti tunataka vitengo zetu upate R eport kutoka kwao kama kuna plan yoyote na sisi kama 
Waheshimiwa tunawakilisha Mombasa kila mmoja anaishi Mombasa ana W odi, Wodi ziko 
Mombasa iwapo kuna mambo yoyote utaongeza hapo utupe Ripoti B wana Majority Leader.         
Kwa hio sisi tunahitaji ripoti hatuhitaji barua tuna taka ripoti kuwasilisha kwa wananchi wa 
Mombasa … 
(Applause ) 
       Tujue miradi wanaofanya za Mo mbasa, iwapo kuna miradi tujue M wenyekiti iwapo kuna 
miradi zilifanywa wakati wa Manispaa , wakati wa Kaunti  tujue, a hsante Bwana Spika . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I think M embers this has been deliberated so i 
will just give you a minute each those who are up ; so we start with C hairman Hat imy then Odari 
then Nas ser, then S aad. 
       Hon. Nasser  Rashid : Mheshimiwa  Spika yeye akianza hatamaliza , ana Standing order  
pale…. 
(Laughter ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa  Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. S peaker kwa heshima nataka yeye aanze . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes. 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6        Hon. Nasser Rashid:  Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika nasema hivyo sababu najua y eye 
atakamilisha mazungumzo ya W aheshimiwa wote. Nafikiria mimi nawakilisha eneo la Shimanzi 
asilimia 80 ya Kenya P orts Authority iko kwangu , nafikiria  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  
ameleta barua na amejieleza  na anaomba apewe nafasi ya kuleta Ripoti Mheshimiwa S pika, 
ningeomba Bunge  hili tumpe mda ili aweze kuleta Ripoti hii, A hsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes we start from this side, Hon.  Saad then Onje 
then we finish t here. 
       Hon. Faraj:  Thank you so much Mr. S peaker, am very disappointed by some Members 
saying that Kenya P orts Authority is very busy firm and it means  that we County A ssembly are 
not busy, and by doing so we are diminishing  the ima ge and power that we have as a County 
Assembly … 
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Speaker in all these boards and some of us including Madam  Serah Nyamvula has been 
in a board  we understand that in each board any parastatal board we have a department which is 
a corporate department that deals with only corporate social responsibilities . Mr. Speaker for us 
to get the information is dealing with the right people ; we need to understand who we are dealing 
with, it is very easy for us to get that information we need to go to the right place and for this 
particular matter that the Majority Leader writes directly to the Corporate affairs Director so that 
he can give us the information needed to this House. Thank you Hon . Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Paul Onje . 
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi.  Mheshimiwa Spika Kiongozi 
wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  yuko sawa alipewa nafasi ili aende aangalie kule  Bandarini  ni kama 
kazi gani wameweza kusaidia nayo watu lakini vile unavyojua ofisi ya  Kiongozi Wa Walio 
Wengi Bungeni  bado ni changa . Juzi ndio ameingia kwa ofisi hata vibali vya kufanya kazi vizuri 
hata bado hajapewa mara ukienda huku unaambiwa mara pesa haijapatikana hizi pesa sijui 
zimekwama wapi? Sasa nyinyi mwataka afanye kazi na nini? Kwa hivy o Mheshimiwa Spika 
tuko na  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  mzuri ambaye anachapa kazi na ametupa barua 
ambayo hivi sasa umesoma tumpatie nafasi tusiwe na haraka yetu itatufanya tukose haya mambo 
yetu ya kupeleka vitu haraka haraka ndio inafanya tunakosa vi tu. Ndio sasa nasema Mheshimiwa 
Spika  ukimpatia nafasi ndio tena ata tuletea mazuri na kila W odi itapata pia . Nashukuru ndugu 
yangu Mheshimiwa Fadhili vile alileta haya mambo kwa Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  na 
ofisi ya  Bunge la Kaunti  tumpatieni nafasi tunamjua Mheshimiwa Hamisi Mwidani ni mchapa  
kazi ndio maana kila siku ndio anarudi kwa hii Nyumba. A hsante.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you , yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari . 
       Hon. Odari:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Hon. Speaker Mombasa County has not benefitted 
from the Kenya Port s Authority d espite the Constitution on the F ourth schedule Part Two 5 (b) 
stipulating that ferries and harbours are under the County Government. Hon . Speaker we have 
made so many efforts to ensure that the constitutio n is respected in regard to that provision that 
unfortunately Mombasa has not benefitted from the Kenya Ports Authority . Changamwe Ward is 
one of the larger contributor of the income of the Kenya Ports Authority ; this is due that 
Changamwe is an Industrial  area and it is in Mombasa County there are so many companies 
there especially transport companies and factories which are making....  
(Interruption ) 
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon.  Jimmy Odari I think you are going the 
wrong direction we a re discussing something else the R eport delayed we  are not discussing the 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 actual Report we don't have the R eport , we don't know what is being done or what has been done 
so we are waiting for the R eport to know...  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Odari:  This is t he... 
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : But we are discussing the Leader of Majority at 
the moment . 
       Hon. Odari:  Okay are we discussing the Leader of Minority . 
(Laughter ) 
       Anyway Mr. Speaker let me identify myself to the statement of the letter … 
(Interruption ) 
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : That's why i give you one minute . 
      Hon. Odari:  We shall re quest it through the Corporate C ommittee at the KPA and I must say 
that we need a proper R eport not just a letter , we need a proper R eport stipulating what the KPA 
has done in  this County as from 2013 upto now. Thank you.  
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy you can now finish up now . 
      Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri muda 
wangu umechukuliwa na Mheshimiwa kutoka Ganjoni ….. 
(Laughter ) 
       Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni amefanya vile alivyoweza ameandika barua na lau 
ingekuwa mumemwambia aende angeenda na akaleta Ripoti….  
(Applause ) 
       Anangojea aambiwe aende Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo kuomba muda kama atakubaliwa 
na sioni kwa nini Nyumba hii isikubali ule muda aliou omba Mheshimiwa Sp ika…. 
(Applause ) 
       Ningeomba apatiwe muda aende atuletee Ripoti ili alete kila kitu. A hsante.  
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay thank you M embers I think we have 
discuss ed it very much . Hon.  Fadhili is concerned that it is eviden t also that work has been done 
not partially but it has done all it has been tackled , so Hon. Mwidani I think you have done the 
job so M embers  are eager to know what the corporat ion is doing , what is the KPA is doing for 
our people here in Mombasa. So Hon.  Mwidani I think  you can  continue , when do you think it 
will be ready?  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwida ni): Probably Mr. Speaker on 2nd August, 2016 . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay you go we shall facilitate it is better for 
you to go rather than waiting for that letter to come is that okay …. 
(Consultations ) 
       Members I think we have  resolved on this issue, we have resolved this issue Leader of 
Majority you should go there .  
       Hon. Odari:  Request from the Chair . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I know you want to go .  
       Hon. Odari:  I want to join the Leader of th e Majority so that we strengthen our case there .  
(Laughter ) 
       The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I know also Hon.  Saad, Hon.  Jimmy Odari 
want s to go, Hon.  Fadhili wants  to go . You see I know wh y you want to go but you should know 
there's a Com mittee on Transport here but it has been given to the Leader of Majority here 
otherwise it should be given to the Transport Committee and that c ommittee can go but it was 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 the L eader of Majority who was requested this question came directly to the Leader of  Majority. 
Yes Hon . Saad what are you saying?  
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker I want to show the gravity of this matter we cannot only give that 
opportunity to the Majority Leader . Mr. Speaker we need to form at least an Ad  hoc Committee 
for the purpose, t he formation of the Ad  hoc Committee will show the seriousness of this matter. 
Mr. Speaker I suggest a few people should be included to that list of Kenya Port s Authority , 
people who can actually articulate issues concerning our people …. 
(Applause ) 
       Thank you Mr. Speaker I am done.  
       Hon. Odari:  I second Mr. Speaker . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okay Members you should know that the Lea der 
of Majority represents the g overnment ; he is the Leader of M ajority elected in this House an d we 
agreed that he will represent this House but nevertheless if the House wants to go we can fo rm 
two or three representatives …. 
(Applause ) 
       Can accompany the Leader of M ajority and I think I will give the names of who to go at the 
end of the sessi on… 
(Laughter ) 
       Yes Clerk ? 
MOTION  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa 
kudokeza Nyumba hii kuwa kuna mtu mmoja ambaye alipigwa risasi na ni mf anyi kazi wetu na 
ikiwezekana pia tumpatie heshima ya dakika moja kwa sababu yeye alikuwa ni mmoja wetu ...  
(Members observed o ne minute silence in honor  of the departed)  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved N otice of Motion ) 
       Mr. Speaker I beg to give the fol lowing Notice of Motion . 
       That Aware  the County Assembly....  
(Interruption ) 
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Hatimy just to remind you did ask this 
House to a ccept that you should move the Motion  today , so let me ask if the House will  agree so 
Members will as many as are of that opinion that the Motion  by Hon . Hatimy to be moved 
today ? 
(Question put and a greed  to) 
       Hon.  Hatimy you can now move the Motion.   
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I think that I requested permissio n to be given to 
move the Notice of Motion  and you accepted anyway  am going to move.  
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes move . 
MOTION  
CONSTRUCTION OF THE PRAYER PLACE IN THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved the Motion ) 
       THA T AWA RE that the County A ssembly has a designated place for prayer for Muslims 
since the year 2012;  
       FURTHER AWARE that the existing prayer rooms are small and cannot hold the  ever 
increasing number of faithful working in the building and coming to pray;  
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9        NOTING THAT countrywide it has been a standard requirement to provide a place of 
worship  for prayers for  Muslims in public institutions;  
       CONCERNED THAT failure to expand the praying space of prayer for Muslims will 
occasion unnecessary hardsh ips and distress;  
      I urge  Mr. Speaker this  House to  resolve THAT:  
The County A ssembly to provide  a larger space for prayer for M embers of the Muslim faith 
given the nature of the worship which demands that they pray even during working hours  to 
avoid  distraction from work .  
       I beg to move Mr. Speaker Sir.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mr. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj ? 
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker I raise to second this Motion .  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It has been pro posed that the construction of the 
prayer room in the County Assembly to be constructed in this House ... 
(Question proposed and a greed  to) 
       Yes Hon.  Odari . 
       Hon. Odari:  Mr. Speaker I raise to support this Motion  with amendment, my amendment is 
that....  
(Interruption ) 
      Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Just a minute it has been seconded so the 
procedure i s the Motion  will be seco nded and then the mover of the Motion  will be given a 
chance to deliberate on the matters and then everybody w ill be given chance to contribute and 
then you can move your amendments. Yes Hon.  Hatimy ? 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ku nipa fursa hii ya kujadili huu 
Mswada ; juzi tulikuwa kwa mwezi wa Ramadhani na pia katika hizi siku za kawa ida 
Mheshimiwa Spika watu wanatafuta mahali pa  kuja kuomba Mungu. Kwa hio naomba 
Mheshimiwa Spika tunaomba tupate pahal a farag ha kwenye eneo hili la  Bunge  tupate ku ongeza 
ili watu wengi zaidi wa je kuswali , watu w anaswali mara tatu , mara nne na hata uki angalia 
kiheshima na kidini si vizuri kuvunja swala na wengine aje na kwa hivyo naomba tupatiwe 
nafasi ili tuweze  kuongeza hii nafasi tunatumia.  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Faraj?  
       Hon.  Faraj:  Ahsante s ana M heshimiwa kwa fursa hili , swala ni muhimu kwetu sisi 
Wais lamu kwa sababu sehemu iliyoko hapa kwa kweli imekuwa ndogo kwa wale w anaswali .        
Mheshimiwa S pika ukiangalia nafasi ya wale walioko pale na wale wanatoka katika kila kipindi  
kuswali katika  kila swala ni sehe mu ambayo ni ndogo sana na inabidi watu wangojeane kwa 
zamu atoke yule ndio waingie wale wengine . Mheshimiwa S pika hili ni jambo la umuhimu kwa 
sababu linagusia utenda kazi wa wafanyi kazi wetu na ikiwa hatutaweza kuwapa fursa kama hii 
itabidi watoke hapa kwenye hili J umba waende sehemu nyingine ili waende kuswali na waweze 
kupoteza wakati unaostahili kufanya kazi vile inavyohitajika . Kama unavyofahamu Mheshimiwa 
Spika Waislamu wanaswali vipindi vitatu na vipindi viwili kila leo vinatuku ta hapa tukiwa 
kazini . Kwa hio hii ni fursa M heshim iwa Spika itakuwa imeweza kuwapunguzia uzito ndugu 
zetu, dada zetu ambao  wako  huku ndani kwa sababu kutoka kutapu nguzia utenda kazi wetu 
katika J umba hili.  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Simi nyu. 
       Hon.  Siminyu: Mr. Speaker I stand to support and even add that if we could have a prayer 
room for us as Christians because we need prayers ; somet imes we have confusion in this H ouse 
because the devil is ruling but if we have a place where we can  worship and intercede for the 
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 10 House and the M embers can have the same and pray . Mr. Speaker matters to do with G od there 
is no b argaining I fully support this Motion  and plead if we could have a room for praying , thank 
you. 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon. Jimmy Odari?  
       Hon.  Odari:  I fully support this Motion  but with amendments ; as we know H on. Speaker 
matters of religion or worship are paramount in fact we should be praying all the time . We as 
Christians are ordered to pray all the time there is no limit we are supposed to be praying every 
hour like myself H on. Speaker  I am forced to go up to Kenya C inema to pray over lunch time 
and in other places but  if we had a prayer place or a C hapel in this place also it would be very 
good for the Christians . Let us also have a prayer house for Christians that is why I am 
requesting fro amendments to the Motion  to include a prayer house for the Christians.  Thank you 
Hon. Speaker.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. M swabah Rashid) :  Yes Madam Dharwesh?  
       Hon. (Mrs.)  Zainab Said:  Ahsante s ana Mheshim iwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii , mimi 
pia naung a mkono hoja hii iliyoletwa na H atimy . Mahali pale kweli ni padogo ni si kwa wale 
wako pale peke yake ama wenye afisi , hata wale wa  kuja kulipa bills wale am bao waja kutafuta 
Waheshimiwa wana kazi nao pia waswali pale . Kwa hivyo pale mahali pataka papanuliwe na 
patengenezwe pawe pazuri ili kila moja aweze kupata nafasi.  Ahsante . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Hon.  Serah Nyamvula ?  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika mimi nasimama kuunga mkono katika 
mambo ya dini yote ni sawa ; mimi naomba tu nimesimama kama mama wa jinsia na mimi 
nimeandika barua kwa  Karani wa Bunge  kwa vile naona kuna naf asi itatokeza nachukua nafasi 
hii Mheshimiwa S pika kuomba nafasi ya ofisi ya jinsia . Niwe leo niko , kesho siko ni kama hii 
sehemu  ambayo tunatumia wenzetu Wais lamu wanatumia iliwekwa kitambo si  ndio waliopeana 
ile walienda lakini ile ofisi ba do ipo . Kwa hivyo katika hiyo hali ya kuongeza hapa na kule 
nachukua naf asi hii tukisukuma hivi tukipata nafasi pale juu ama popote pale tupeane ofisi ya 
jinsia ili miezi saba kutoka sasa tukiondoka tutakuwa tumeweka ofisi tayari saa hizi 
tunatengeneza mambo ya structur es….. 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Protect me Mr. Speaker . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Hon.  Jimmy Odari please are you up on a poi nt 
of order?  
       Hon.  Odari:  Point of Information?  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Ras hid):  Who  do you want to inform ? 
       Hon.  Odari:  Hon. Nyamvula because what she is br inging  up is a very pertinent Motion  
whatever she has raised is not related to what is on the floor . 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Mheshimiwa Nyamvula . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker can I please inform the H ouse that in  fact if you look 
at the O rder pape r this Motion  is not there I am taking a good advantage of an issue which  is 
equally…..  
(Interruption ) 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Ra shid) :  Hon.  Saad what is it?  
       Hon.  Faraj:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa niaba ya kama Mwenyekiti wa M aendeleo ya 
wanaume mimi pia ningeomba baada ya kuwa nimepata ofisi yao kina dada sisi pia tuwe na ofisi 
yetu ili tuweze kuisukuma maswala yetu ya kina baba.  Ahsante.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members , Hon.  Serah have you finished?  
July 27, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                               79 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 11         Hon.  (Mrs .) Nyamvula:  Yes Mr. Speaker as I thought  Hon. Saad is a serious M ember that 
we have honored  him as a gender person the office will be considere d. Thank you.  
        Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Mary , then Hon.  Nasser.   
        Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi: Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika,  ningependa kuunga mkono mjadala hu u 
kwa sababu kuna hiv i sisi Wakristo tunasema roho mtakatifu anashuka mpaka  watu 
wanaongezeka kwa kuja kumuabudu M ungu . Hivyo basi tungeomba vile  vile roho ameshuka pia 
kuwe na nyumba ya W akristo ili kuwe watu wana  abudu Mungu katika N yumba hii na tukiwa 
tunaendelea kumuabudu Mwenyezi M ungu . Kama hivi sasa kuna mahali Waislamu wan a abudu 
Mwenyezi M ungu lakini mahali padogo alafu pia W akristo wapate mahali pao wale mashetani 
ambao huwa w anazunguka zunguka katika hili J umba likigonga gonga vichwa vya watu 
wakakosana natumaini tukipi tisha mjadala huu alafu pia na Nyumba itawekwa ya W akristo 
maombi yataendel ea vile inavyohitajika mashetani wote watapeperuka na watakimbia kwa 
sababu hata Pastor  Mheshimiwa Siminyu  pia yeye natumai amekubali . Kwa hio mashetani 
ambao walikuwa wanatu zingira sasa wataishilia mbali Mheshimiwa S pika, kwa hivyo n aomba 
jambo hili lichukuliwe maanani na tufanye haya ambayo yanahitajika kwa sababu kama kuna 
hiyo spirit  ya watu wanataka kuomba wanaj itokeza ni jambo la muhimu sana . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :   Ok Mheshimiwa Nasser Rashid? 
       Hon.  Nasser  Rashid : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika mimi naunga mkono kikamilifu na 
pia tuan galie hapa na kule kusije kukato kelezea mmoja a liyeramba anaunga mkono akasema 
anataka na  yeye aunge mkono…  
(Laughter ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika yey ote m wenye maombi naye ajipange alete Mswada wake hapa sisi 
tutamsik iza na tutamjibu sio mwenzako anaomba na wewe waendelea kuomba pale pale , kila 
mmoja akuje hapa na maombi yake . Ahsante sana.  
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Yes Leader of Majorit y? 
       Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika nafikiri hii ni hoja  
moja ya maana sana kwa sababu Mwenyezi M ungu amesema lazima aombwe kila mahali na 
sioni kwamba ina sh ida yeyote ile hata wenzetu wali omba chumba cha kuabudu hai jakuwa 
dham bi kwa sababu Mwenyezi Mu ngu ni y ule yule. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika ningependa 
kwamba hii hoja tuipitishe nafasi zit afutwe twende kuzidi kumuabudu M ungu , ni jambo la 
maana sana.  Ahsante sana. 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Hatimy can you reply to the Motion . 
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika nashukuru Members kwa ku unga 
mkono huu Mswada na ningesema kuwa tuweze kupata nafasi ya kutosha ili watu waweze 
kufanya ibada zao na pia itatubidi tupate kibali ili  tuweze kujaribu ili tuweze kujenga kama 
unajua hatuna pesa za kutosha kusema ati Kaunti  itajenga kitu lakini twasema sisi tuko tayari 
tutajitolea kujenga kwa sab abu itakuwa ni mambo ya pesa . Kwa hivyo ni tujitole e  kama 
tulivyofanya wakati wa Manispaa  na hii pia tutashikana kwa sote ili tupate kujenga .       
Nashukuru sana  kwa kuunga mkono huu Mswada na sote M ungu ni yule yule tunaye  muabudu 
tutaweza kushikana tuhakikishe tumelifanya hili jambo.  Ahsante Mheshim iwa. 
       Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy Members you have 
deliberated and I have to put the question . 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
The House rose at 3 :48p.m. 