November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 9th November , 2022  
Third Assemb ly - Seventh  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 10:00a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
  
[The Speaker (Hon. A harub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair ] 
 
PRAY ERS 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable  Members , you may s it. Yes Cler k, next order 
please?  
 
MOTION  
ADDRESS BY H IS EXCELLENCY  GOVERNOR DURING THE THIRD ASSEMBLY  
[Resumpt ion o f business which was interrupted on Tuesday 8th November , 2022 at 2:30 
p.m.] 
 
Honourable  Members , this is the resumpt ion o f business which was interrupted on Tuesday 
8th November 2022 at 2: 30p.m  during the sixth sitting, the Motion on the Address by H is 
Excellency  Governor during the Third Assembly  is now open to Members who have not 
contributed . Yes, Hon ourable  Bernard Ogutu, please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Ogutu: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii  ili niweze kuchangia 
kwenye  hoja hii. Mheshimiwa Spika , kwanza kabisa nataka nichukue nafasi ya kipekee 
kukupongeza kw a kuchaguliwa kwa mara ya pili bila kupingwa . Mheshimiwa Spika , pia niweze 
kukushukuru kwa kusimama na mimi wakati wa uchaguzi ; mimi nilisimama na chama cha 
ODM, lakini ndani ya ODM mimi nilikuwa kama independent candidate , lakini ulisimama na 
mimi na tuka weza kuleta ush indi na leo ni Mheshimiwa ndani ya hili Bunge . Mheshimiwa Spika , 
niweze kupongeza wananchi watukufu wa W odi wa Changamwe, kunipatia nafasi hii  
kuwakilisha mara ya pili ndani ya hili Bunge. Mheshimiwa Spika , najua hata wale ambao  
wamefika mar a ya tatu, Mungu akipenda pia sisi tutafika huko In sha Allah . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nataka pia kuchukua nafasi hii kuwapongeza wenzangu ambao waliweza kuchaguliwa na wale 
ambao pia waliweza kuteuliwa, haikuwa jambo rahisi kupatikana katika il e party list ; kuna  
wengine walitumia mbinu nyingi sana, lakini hawakuweza kupata nafasi hizo . Mheshimiwa 
Spika , na wale ambao pia walienda kwa watu wakaomba kura na waka weza kupigiwa kura 
nawapongeza. Nikirudi Mheshimiwa Spika naomba unilind e, na pata shida sana kutokana  na 
Waheshimiwa.  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order! Hon ourable  Members ! Let the Member make his 
contribution please.  
 
Hon. Ogutu : Mheshimiwa Spika nikirudi kwa hotuba ya Mheshimiwa Gavana , 
nilifurahishwa pale aliposema kwa mba atatuletea Ward Development Fund. Mheshimiwa Spika , 
katika  Bunge iliyopita iko Wodi ambayo hawakuweza kupata maendeleo yoyote ndani ya miaka 
mitano  lau tungekuwa na Ward Development Fund Mheshimiwa Spika, hakuna Wodi hata moja 
ingekos a mae ndeleo ndani ya Kaunti ya Mombasa Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
Gavana alitaja mambo ya mazingira na sisi kama watu wa Changamwe tunaona kwamba kazi 
inaendelea, lakini kule kwetu hali sio mzuri sana, manake ameweka uzito uku mjini na Kisauni 
Mhes himiw a Spika. Sisi pia tunaomba hio kazi iweze kufanyika kule kwetu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika pili katika mambo ya mazingira tunaomba wale vijana ambao 
wanafanya kazi ya mazingira, waweze kuwezeshwa ili kazi yao iwe rahisi Mheshimiwa Sp ika, 
wanafanya kazi katika hali ambayo ni duni sana.  Mheshimiwa Spika Gavana aliweza pia 
kutengeneza task force  “jopo kazi” ya afya, Mheshimiwa Spika, mpaka sasa tunangoja kukutana 
na wao, angalau na sisi pia tutoe mapendekezo yetu, ili zile shida ambazo z inaku mba wale 
wananchi wetu pale nyanjani ziweze kunuku liwa na kuchukuliwa hatua. Mheshimiwa Spika 
tunajua hali ya afya ndani ya Kaunti ya Mombasa. Juzi nimekuwa na kesi moja ambayo 
kwamba, mtoto aliweza kufariki kwa sababu ya utepetevu Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshi miwa 
Spika hapo hapo tunajua ya kwamba ndani ya mi ezi sita idara ya hio hio afya, wamekuwa 
wakilipisha watoto ambao wako chini ya miaka mitano. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba 
ikiwezena hio tuchukulie na hatua kali sana, ili iweze kuondolewa mara moja, i li wa toto hao 
waweze kupata huduma ya afya Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshimiwa Spika hotuba ya Gavana 
ilikuwa mzuri sana, lakini tukiangalia mambo ya elimu hakugusa kabisa na ni donda ambayo ni 
sugu kabisa, sijui ni lini tuliweza kutoa bursary na sa a hii ambavyo tuna ongea , serikali kuu chini 
ya UDA, Mheshimiwa Spika wanataka kuondoa higher education loan board , ikitolewa na 
hatujajipanga vizuri Mheshimiwa Spika, watoto wetu wengi watakuwa wanakaa nyumbani, 
hawataweza kupata elimu bora Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hayo Mheshi miwa Spika naomba 
kuunga mkono hoja hii Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Bernard Ogutu from Changamwe 
Ward yes, Hon ourable  Abdirahman please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Abdirahman Ab dulkadir : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me t his o pportunity to 
make my maiden speech, all glory belongs to the Almighty. From the onset let me take this 
opportunity to say my heartfelt appreciations to the residents of Old Town, for the unwavering 
support and confidence in electing me as a Member of  this House. I take pride in that status b ut, 
feel humbled by the responsibilities that it carries ; I will be worthier of the trust they had have 
placed in me and I will not let them down.  Let me also send my salutations to my predecessors 
the right Hon ourable  Amir M urfad Amur, who was a gallant l eader not only in our Ward, but he 
was a strong pillar of this House.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 3   Mr. Speaker , I will strive to fill his shoes ; I have as a goal my ambitions to build on his 
efforts and those of others who have preceded me so that I may play my part in creating 
something even greater for those who have yet to arrive. I would also like to extend my thanks to 
the Hon ourable  Members of this House  who have welcomed me with warmth and kindness.  Mr. 
Speaker,  I came to this place wit h hig h hopes, but am a reali st and a pragmatist ; before politics I 
had a  13-year career in Business Finance and Investments. I am here to improve the lives of 
others by implementing practical common -sense  policy and legislation that will reflect the 
knowl edge I have gained from real commercial world.  It is my honor to convey my felicitation to 
His Excellency  Governor Abdulswamad Sharrif  Nassir and his administration, for hitting the 
ground running. From the Governor’s address I will focus on the element of reve nue c ollection. 
My fello w colleagues have exhausted the Ward Development Fund aspect of it ; from his address 
I would also like to commend the good work done by the rapid result initiative in setting the bar 
high on matters collection of revenue. I would li ke to  implore with them to go a further step and 
furnish this House, with a comprehensive report detailing the loop holes that prevent the County 
from meeting its target from revenue collection.  Mr. Speaker we are coming to a County 
government that has a s tagge ring pending bill ; as of March 2022,  our pending Bill stood at a 
whooping Ksh s 4.2Billion, we are ranked third only after Nairobi and Kiambu. By the 
Governor’s admission we have no fiscal  space to run this County. Mr. Speaker I am afraid all our 
deve lopme nt promises we made to our people may not be realized.  Mr. Speaker , we need to 
establish a special task force committee drawn from this House, whose mandate will be to 
examine, inspect closely and thoroughly every shilling of the Kshs 4.2Billion.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Let this task force be charged to distinguish genuine claims from getting fraudulen t claims. 
Mr. Speaker , we must balance our financial books ; I will close my remarks with the words of His 
Excellency  the Governor  that public expectation  is higher than it has e ver been, and we must get 
it right. Thank you , God bless this House, God bless Mombasa County.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Abdulrahman . Yes, Hon ourable  
Hassan Mohamed please make your contribution . 
  
Hon. Hassan Mohamed: Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipatia fursa 
dhimu fursa muhimu  ili kuweza kuchangia kwa kile nitakacho jaliwa. Mwanzo kabisa natoa 
shukrani zangu za dhati kwa Maulana, kwa kutupatia uhai na uzima na baada ya uhai ni  afya 
ambayo ni zawadi tosha kwa mwana damu . Leo tuko hai baada ya mchaka  mchaka za kura za 
mwaka wa 2022 , ni shukrani zake Mwenyezi Mungu anazo  stahili pekee.  Nitatoa shukrani za 
dhati kwa waungwana waliweza kunichagua katika kata ya Magogoni, ambapo wengi wanasema 
kwamba ndio kitovu cha Kisauni.  Hii iko wazi kwamba watu wa Magogoni walichagua kiongozi 
anayestahili, wala si kiongozi wana e mpenda.  Nasema hivi kwa sababu ya historia yangu 
kibinafsi , niliweza kuzaliwa Nandi, Rift  Valley nikakulia Majengo King’orani  nikahamia 
Kisauni wakati nimebalehe , lakini watu wa Kisauni wakaona kwamba kiongozi si o upande 
yeyo te isipokuwa kiongozi akiwa anastahili basi apewe. Ni thibitisho tosha kwamba demokrasia 
inaweza kuafikiwa kwa undani zaidi ; vile vile nit awashukuru walioko katika nyanja  tofauti 
ambao waliweza  kush ika usukani kuendesha chama cha ODM.  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 Nafikiri kati ya wengi niliweza kupata misuko suko ya siku kadha baada ya mchujo , lakini 
kwa sababu chama cha ODM ni chama cha uadilifu nikaweza kupata stashahada yangu. 
Nazungumza niki wa dhati na nikiwa na matumai ni zaidi kwamba  chini ya uongozi wako 
Mheshimiwa Spika  tutaweza kupata manufa a zaidi na wewe ndio nguzo yetu  wewe , ndio 
matumaini yetu. Mheshimiwa Gavana tuna imani ata weza na atafanya na ushirikiano wenu 
utatufanya sisi kuonekana ni kioo cha jamii na kuwe za kuhaki kisha tunafanya yale ambayo 
tumeyaahidi wananchi. Wananchi wana imani kubwa na sisi, na Mheshimiwa Spika tuna imani 
kubwa na nyinyi. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank very much Hon ourable  Ulher Hassan. Yes, 
Honourable  Katana please make your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Katana:  Ahsante sana Mhes himiwa Spika kwa nafasi hii ad imu. Kwanza nachukua 
wakati huu kuwapongeza Waheshimiwa  wote ambao walipata nafasi katika viti vili vyomo katika 
Bunge hili. Pili, nataka kukupongez a wewe M heshi miwa Spika kwa muhula wako wa  pili, tena 
nataka tena nikushukuru, maana nilipokuuliza kwamba naweza kuwa mtu wa kwanza kukuunga 
mkono urudi kuwa Mheshimiwa Spika  hukusita na ukanipa nafasi hio na hivyo basi jina langu 
liko katika kumbukumbu ya  mpiga kura  peke e aliyepata nafasi hii adimu ya kukuunga mkono 
kama Mheshimiwa Spika kwa mara ya pili katika Bunge hili. Mheshimiwa Spika na pia kama 
vile Mheshimiwa Ogutu alivyosema  ya kwamba  anakushukuru katika mchaka  mchaka uliokuwa 
wakati wa kutafuta n afasi hizi , nitaku wa si mwingi wa fadhila kama sitarudisha shukurani zangu 
kwa wema na fadhila zako ulizokuwa pamoja na  mimi  katika wakati huo mgumu na Mwenyezi 
Mungu aendele e kukuhemisha na kukubariki.  
Nataka pia nitoe shukurani zangu za dhati kwa watu w a Shanzu , Mhes himiw a Ulher 
amesema kitovu cha siasa za Kisauni ni Magogoni, labda kwa takwimu zake . Mimi kivyangu 
nitawapa shuk rani sana wakaazi wa Shanzu kwa kuwa kwa hakika walijitokeza kwa wingi kwa 
kunipigia kura, kwa sababu ukiangalia katika takwimu z a upiga ji ku ra utakuta Kisauni akitoka 
Mheshimiwa Mbunge Bedzimba mwenye kura nyingi ni mimi. Nataka kuwashukuru sana kina 
mama wa Kisauni ambao walitoka na mimi pasi na kitu mfukoni lakini wakaandamana na mimi 
ili kueleza wananchi wengine wote  wa Shanzu n zima kwamba h ii nafasi ilikuwa tunahitaji ili 
tuweze kuwapigia kura, nitat aja jina la mama mmoja anaitwa M toto She e, huyu mama 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni mama wa miaka 76, ambaye katika zile harakati za kwenda mlango baada 
ya mlango kunisaidia kutafuta kura kuna ng’ombe  wa a jabu akatokea pale akamfukuza huyu 
mama na hata ninavyosema, huyu mama hatembei sawa sawa kwa sababu alikuwa na kile 
kimombo wanaita dislocation .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika , nataka pia nitoe shukurani zangu kwa kina baba wa Shanzu ambao 
pia kwa hakika walijitokez a kwa bidii wakanisaidia mpaka kuipata nafasi hii. Vile vile kati ama 
miongoni mwa wazee walioungana pamoja na  mimi  na kufanya hatua zaidi ili mimi kuipata 
nafasi hii, nitamtaja Mzee Suleiman Kahindi ambaye wakati wa kupiga kura Mheshimiwa Spika  
ilibidi n imbebe akiwa na mpira tumboni ili akanipigie kura . Mheshimiwa Spika , ingekuwa kwa 
nafasi yangu, na nafikiri baadae pengine ukinipa muongozo nataka nitoe shukurani za kipeke e 
kwa vijana kwa ujumla wa Shanzu ambao walijitokeza usiku na mc hana katik a bidii zao ili 
tuhakikishe tumekipata hiki kiti. Kunae mfuasi wangu sugu, hili hata nisipolitaja nitakuwa nina  
andamana na laana ambazo itakuwa si vizuri.  Kunae mpendwa wangu wa karibu sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika anaitwa Rednad Msuko ambaye tulikuwa p amoja  nae katika mbio hizi, 
wakaribu sana lakini siku chache ili tukaribie kupiga kura aligongwa na gari na akafa hapo hapo.  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 Na niliahidi ya kwamba Mheshimiwa kwa kuwa serikali ya Kitaifa ilikuwa imepanga 
kujenga barabara ile kimombo wanai ta, dual carriage way basi niliahidi hata wakati wa mazishi 
yake  ya kwamba,  mahali pale ambapo rafiki yangu huyu wa karibu sana aliyenisaidia katika 
kampeni zangu, basi niliahidi hapo mahali ni lazima Mheshimiwa Spika patengezwe yale matuta 
ili yaweze kupunguz a aja li ambazo zimekuwa  nyingi  na ambazo zinachuku a maisha ya 
wapendwa wetu . Mheshimiwa Spika , baada ya kuwashukuru wakaazi wote wa Shanzu , nataka 
kwa uchache sana niingilie hotuba ya Mheshimiwa Gavana. Sitataja vipengele vingi 
Mheshimiw a Spi ka; katika hotuba ya Gavana kwa sabab u wenzangu tangu jana nataka kuamini 
ya kwamba wamekuwa wakizitaja, mimi nitataja kimoja  tu, tena kwa moyo wa huzuni sana. 
Baada ya kutaja vitengo vya watu walio  niunga mkono hawa wa kutoka Shanzu Mheshimiwa 
Spika, kwa h akika  mtu ana moyo wa kuelewa na wa kibinadamu , ni hali ya kuhuzunisha na kwa 
kuwa Mheshimiwa Gavana katika hotuba yake, yeye mwenyewe alisema ya kwamba watu wa 
Mombasa kwa mara hii wana matumaini sana katika serikali hii na ya kwamba hakutokuwa na 
sababu yeyote ile Mheshimiwa Spika ya kwamb a Mheshimiwa Gavana na serikali  yote sisi 
tukiwa ndani ya kwamba kuwe na sababu yeyote ya mpiga kura wa Mombasa Kaunti kukosa 
huduma yake. Mimi nataka kusema hivi Mheshi miwa Spika , kulingana na kipengele hiki 
Mheshimiwa Gavana kwa kauli zake alikiongea ; Bunge hili chini ya uongozi wako likaweze 
kuiweka kidete serikali hii ya Mheshimiwa Gavana Abdulswamad  Shariff Nassir ili hata kama  
kila hit ajio la mkaazi  mpig a kura wa Mombasa Kaunti  halitaafikiwa, lakini asili mia kubwa 
tukaweze kuyafikia ili matamanio ya watu wetu wa Mombasa waweze kuyaona. Kwa hayo 
mengi naomba nito e shukurani zangu, a hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Allen Katana. Yes , 
Honourable Pamela Arwa please make your contribution.  
  
Hon. Ojala:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute on the 
Governor’s address . Before I contribute to th e Gov ernor’s address, I would like to divert and to 
say some other things ; first, I have to congratulate you for being elected  for a  second term in this 
Honourable House, this is because you are competent Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , I also want to 
thank my party leade r and ODM as a whole, Right Hon ourable  Raila Amolo Odinga, my mentor 
darling boss, the incoming  Commissioner Hon ourable Mishi Juma Mboko and you in particular 
Mr. Speaker  because it was not easy for me to nominated to come into this Honourable House, 
you really  fought for me and you said do or die Hon ourable  Pamela you will appear on the party 
list. I really thank you a nd I thank you dearly Hon ourable  Speaker and this is a great honour and 
privilege , I cannot take it for granted . Mr. Speaker, I really appreciate you my boss  and may God 
bless you abundantly , you will remain our hero in this House … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Mr. Speak er, if I contribute on the Governor’s address he mentione d in this House his 
five years plan,  that is mwanzo mpya  manifesto to strengthen  good govern ance in the County. 
Mr. Speaker , he also emphasize d that he will d eal with poverty reduction to ensure that  our 
County became a thriving hub for business and innovation . Again Mr. Speaker , this would also 
allow the opportunity of employment for our youth s; he also dealt with a short -term plan which 
he undertook office as  a rapid in vestment  plan. This will also help us in the County to improve in 
the revenue collection.  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Mr. Speaker , the Governor mentioned in this House that his administrative will rely on 
legisl ation and o versight ; we thank our Excellency the Governor because we believe as 
Honourable  Members in this House  that we will not resemble the Governor of Meru who does 
not recognize  the importance of the Honourable M embers in the House … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Mr. Speaker , the Governor has promised us that he will bring more series of Bills in this 
House , that us as Honourable Members we are ready to debate on those Bills and pass  them as 
law requires . Mr. Speaker , I will not mention all the Bi lls that he promised us, we have the 
Finance Bill, Mombasa Finance Bill , 2022/2023, Climate change, Sectional Bill those ar e 
important Bill we must ensure as Honourable Members that we pass them accordingly. Mr. 
Speaker,  we have a challenge as special electe d lea ders, we had our Excellency Mr. Governor 
speak of devolution ; that the office of the Attorney General will explore a  set frame to ensure 
that we have the Development Fund , but, I urge my co lleagues as a Honourable Member  even 
though on a side it is a c halle nge, but I urge them that we support the Ward Development Fund 
because even our people outside will be in a positio n also to enjoy the same because I know one 
day one time, we will also be elected as Honourable Members in this House…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 Mr. Speak er my final remark, I thank you very much  and assure you  this Honourable 
House will give you maximum support in an y Bill that will be brought in this Parliament. 
Otherwise with the few remarks Mr. Speaker, I request to rest there. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Orwa Ojala. Yes , Honourable  
Swaleh Kibwana please mak e your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. Kwanza 
kabisa ni kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu  kutuwezesha na kuniwezesha kuweza kurudi katika 
Bunge hili katika kipindi cha muhula wa tatu , si kwa sababu tuna nguvu, si  kwa sababu tuna 
uwezo lakini  kwa sababu  Mwenyezi Mungu alitaka tuwe hivyo. Pili , Mheshimiwa Spika nataka 
niwashukuru watu wa Wodi  ya Miritini ambao licha ya udhaifu  wangu, hawajapata kiongozi 
mwengine ambae anaweza kuwasaidia isipokuwa mimi…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika … Wodi ya Miritini ni Wodi  ambayo ni ya watu ambao ni wa hali ya 
chini, ni Wodi  ambayo ina  changamoto nyingi, kuanzia masham ba, k uja elimu, nafasi za kazi na 
hata vitongoji duni Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika ni W odi ambayo inahitaji ms aada 
kwa kila njia kati ya serikali kuu na serikali Gatuzi  hivyo basi nataka nimshukuru Mwenyezi 
Mungu na nataka Mwenyezi Mungu anisaidie  kuweza kufikia malengo yao ili  pia mimi nami 
niwekwe katika kumbukumbu ya viongozi ambao walibadilisha maisha ya watu wao. 
Mheshimiwa Spika , nitakuwa ni mkosa wa fadhila kama pia sitakushukuru kwa  sababu sisi 
wengine tumekuwa katika vipindi vi tatu tumeona tofauti kubwa .  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Tuliingia Bunge hili 2013 tukiwa na Spika mwengine na huu muhula tumekuwa na wewe 
kipindi cha pili tum eona mabadiliko Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mheshimiwa Spika , nataka niseme kwamba  kila mtu aliyeko hapa ana malengo ya kuwez a 
kuenda ngazi nyengine kwa  hivyo tunakuomba sote tulio hapa uweze kutukuza yani uweze 
kutuinua ili tuweze kutimiza malengo yetu  ya maisha. Nataka nipongeze wenzangu ambao 
waliochaguliwa, wale ambao ni mara yao ya kwanza, wale ambao ni mara ya pili na wale ambao  
pia ni mara yao ya tatu ; nawaambia ndugu zangu ni kwamba sote tulio hapa ni ndugu na sote 
twahitajiana, kuna maisha baada  ya siasa vile vile . Kwa hivyo mimi langu kubwa ni 
kuwapongeza na kusema kwamba tuweze kushirikiana na tuweze kurekebisha wale am bao 
wamekuja , yale makosa tuliyofanya nyuma tuyarekebishe na pale ambapo tunatak a tuboreshe, 
tuboreshe zaidi Mheshimiwa Spika.  Nataka ni washukuru wafanyikazi wote wa Bunge la Kaunti 
ya Mombasa  Mheshimiwa Spika ; wametusaidia, wametulinda, wametuelekeza katika  hali ya 
kazi kwa sababu sote hatuna taaluma ya hizi kazi ambazo tumepewa hapa , kwa hivyo nataka 
nitoe shukrani zangu za dhat i kwa wa fanyi  kazi wote wa Bunge la Kaunti .  
Nikigusia tu kidogo katika hotuba ya Gavana wetu Mheshimiwa Spika ; nilimsikiza na 
nikamuang alia ni kama ambaye kidogo atokwe na machozi kwa  sababu jukumu ambalo 
amepewa na hali halisi ilivyo,  kazi ni kubwa zaid i; anayo nia, ana moyo wa kubadilisha Kaunti 
ya Mombasa kwa hivyo ni jukumu letu kama viongozi kuunga mkono pale ambapo anastahili 
kuungwa  mkono na pia ni jukumu letu kama viongozi kukosoa bila kuogopa, bila ya kuona haya 
pale ambapo tutaona serikali itaku endea kinyume ya matakwa ya watu wa Mombasa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika , yote haya niliyo  zungumza ni mazuri lakini pale kwa kutekeleza ndio pana  
shida. Tumekuwa katika Bunge hili miaka kumi, tumeongea mambo mazuri na matamu lakini 
utekelezaji ukawa shida. Ombi langu ni kubwa ; kuwaambia Waheshimiwa  twataka tuone 
Mawaziri  kwa sababu mambo yote haya kuyatimiza itategemea  na timu ambayo Gavana 
atachagua, akichagua timu ambayo ni  ya maslahi hakuna kitu kitapiga hatua katika Kaunti  hii, 
kwa hivyo jukumu letu moja oversigh t tuhakikisha kwamba tumeweza kuona kwamba tumepata 
team ya Mawaziri  ambao watatekeleza kazi zao vizuri Mhesh imiwa Spika.  
Mheshimiwa Spika , nimefurahi kuona ya kwamba kila mtu aliyezungumza hapa, ameweza 
kutaja maslahi ya wananchi wake na kila mtu lengo l ake ni hilo, nitakuwa sitaongea sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kusema kwamba narudisha shukrani kwa Mwenyez i Mun gu na nazidi 
kumuomba Mwenyezi Mungu kwamba tuweze kufikia malengo yetu ambayo yametuleta hapa, 
ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The S peaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Kibwana. Yes , Honourable  
Hawa?  
 
Hon. Hawa Omar:  Thank you Mr. S peake r Sir for this opportunity . I am Hawa Omar , the 
nominated MCA, Youth representative. First of all, I would like to congratulate you Mr.  Speaker 
Sir for being elected Speaker of this House unopposed, this portrays the utmost faith we have in 
you and your  capabilities and competencies at your duties. Congratulations once again , I also 
want to congratulate my colleagues for being elected to this House, both elected and nominated it 
was by the grace of God. Mr. Speaker Sir, I also want to take this opportuni ty to  first and 
foremost thank Allah for His blessing, I am in this House because of His grace.  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 8 I also want to take this opportunity to t hank the party, my party, ODM party for specially 
electing me as the party and youth representative of this House. The potential, zeal, passion and 
faith that they saw in me is of mutual feeling. I want to again take this opportunity to thank my 
family and  friends for their prayers and utmost support in my dreams and ambitions.  Mr. Speaker 
Sir, when we now go to  His Excellency G overnor Abdulswamad Shariff Nassir ’s speech, there 
are a few things that I picked that are key underlying to my youth representativ e docket and this 
is the access to and diversification of opportunities for the youth.  Mr. Speaker Sir, an estimate of 
40 per cent  of the popula tion in Mombasa County comprises of youth and 60  per cent  of the 
youth population in Mombasa County is unemploy ed. So, Mr. Speaker Sir, this is an alarm to our 
economy ; I would like to thank our able Governor and his task force for coming up with 
mitigations on  how youth opportunities are diversified. The Governor in his speech talked of 
one; fighting poverty by mak ing Mombasa a thriving hub for business and innovation where 
young men and women are employed. I would also like to thank the Governor’s intention i n 
making Mombasa the most business friendly to the youth where he intends to bring down the 
cost of licensin g for Tuktuk and public service vehicle s, also on digitalization of transactions 
therefore improving the aspect of transparency and accountability.  
Mr. Sp eaker Sir , the Governor also urged on property developers to employ our local youth 
in their projects  to create employment and spur the growth of Mombasa. I also like to 
congratulate him because he already initiated the process of waiving fees and mark et licensing 
penalty that had prevented our people especially youth for productive activities. This will help 
our people especially youth towards encouraging trade and investment both the big manufacture 
and small -scale  mama mboga . Lastly but not least  Mr. Spea ker Sir, it is on the promotion of 
tourism by creating a pleasant standard and living environment ; as from the Governors speech I 
would also to congratulate him for the work well done in terms of its efforts in cleaning the 
environment within a short span of time. Mombasa is clean and also on his intention of initiation 
a climate change program where it is at my highest faith that youth will be part and parcel of this 
program.  
Lastly, I would also want to thank the youth representative pioneer who did his p art in 
being the voice of the youth in the Assembly in the last five years, it is my utmost hope th at I 
have his continued support in youth agendas . With those few remarks I stand to support the 
Governor ’s address. Thank you.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much . Honourable  Abdulrahman Hawa. Yes , 
Honourable  Mwalimu Makarani?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, 
thank you for this opportunity for me to give my maiden speech in this third Assembly . I want 
first to thank the almighty God for this chance to serve the people of Port -Reitz Ward for a third 
term Mr. Speaker, my gratitude for Port  Reitz for having confidence in my leadership , also let 
me extend my hearty congratulation t o my fellow Members for emerging victorious , may God 
guide us as we embark on this journey to serve the peop le of Mombasa. Mr. Speaker Sir, allow 
me to congratulate you as you continue to be of service to this House and Mombasa residen ts. 
Mr. Speaker , I look  forw ard to work with you and under your leadership as we exercise our 
mandates to the electorate . Mr. Spe aker, I also remember you digging the bore -holes in all the 30 
Wards and not even stepping on the ground where you  dug the bore -holes , of which helped us a 
lot…  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor   Page 9  
[Applause ] 
 
…in coming to this Hon ourable  House . Mr. Speaker, we really used the bore -hole as a tool 
for what we did for our electorates and am sure this time round you will do more  for us. I also 
know this time round you will work to promote the House Committees so that they do their 
mandate s well. Mr. Speaker , not forgetting the officers who serv e in the County Assembly in 
different capacities ; I hope the next five years will be a time to work towards a world class 
Assembly in  line with the mission of the Assembly . They hold an integral  part in running the 
activities of this House Mr. Speaker.  
As I go to the Governor’s Speech, H is Excellency  the second Governor of Mo mbasa  
informed us that we are in the third c ycle of devolution therefore we must get it right . Fresh 
opportunities eased the moment to call on all Members to dedicate all energies in As sembly 
business fully participate in Committee work and fa milia rize with various laws, statu tes 
beginning with standing Orders Mr. Speaker. Cordial relations with County assemblies , His 
Excellency  the Governor asked that there be an improved framework for relation between 
Executive and Assembly. Hon ourable  Members , the Governor is r eady to work with us Mr. 
Speaker and on this note, I would like to bring to your attention in a weeks’ time or some few 
days there was an Hon ourable Member whose car was clamped and it was hard for him to look 
for assistance so we hereby  ask through your leadership in office for the Governor to give a 
liaison person whom we can lia ise with in times of hardship .  
Mr. Speaker , the rapid result initiative, its purpose is to increase collection of o wn-source 
revenue, if we are able to  increase this , we as a County we will greatly improve the lives of the 
people of Mombasa. On taxation , Mr. Speaker, the Governor in his speech said that  his 
government does not want to further burden wana nchi with taxes and it is for that reas on 
therefore that it seeks to broaden the tax bracket. Mr. Speaker Sir , we will support him in this 
noble journey to ease the living standard for the County to provide services efficiently . Mr. 
Speaker, poverty and in novations ; without creativity we cannot innovate anonymous , the 
Governor was standing to say that poverty is our common enemy and that innovation will be the 
only way to fight poverty but to eliminate or improve poverty level within Mombasa we have to 
be creative and therefore to come up with creative ways of solving the problems that face our 
people.   
Mr. Speaker , we are ready to pass the Finance Bill once brought to the floor of this House. 
This is the one of the most important statu tes that enables  the County government serve the 
people ; without the people , without the Finance Bill nothing can be achieved . I, therefore call 
upon all Honourable Members to participate fully when this Bill is brought to this House and 
help to revolutionize the business en vironment that holds so much promise . We want the 
business to thrive here which will have the r ipple  effect on our economy , from street vendors to 
car dealers.  
Mr. Speaker Sir , on environment nasema heko kwa kazi nzuri ambayo Gavana ameleta 
katika idara ya M azingi ra kuondoa taka katika mji wetu. Mheshimiwa Spika japo kuna 
malalamiko kutoka sehemu zetu tunazotoka za Changamwe na Jomvu kwa sababu tumeona kuwa 
shughuli ilianza lakini kwa upande wetu shughuli hii haijazua matunda Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
hivyo tungeo mba up ande…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 …Tungeomba upande wa ofisi ya Gavana iweze  kuchukulia jambo hili kwa haraka ili watu 
wetu wa Changamwe na Jomvu  pia waone pia wao ni  walipa ushuru katika Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa.  On waivers , Mr. Speaker we welcome the move by his Ex cellen cy Go vernor waiving 
accrued  clamping fees and market license penalties that have prevented our people from 
engaging in productive economic activities . Honourable Members , I know we are ready to serve 
and contribute in our capacity as the representa tives of these people, please let me stop at this 
stage to allow other Honourable Members to spe ak as we look forward to legislative and these 
many more issues that face the people , including Education, Tourism, Health, water and energy 
resources of the ne xt five years . Mr. Speaker , before I sit, I would like to bring the attention of 
this House that there are seven legislative Bills that will be introduced into this Honourable 
House . The Mombasa County Finance Bill and we know the mandate of the Finance Bill ; it also 
includes zoning levies in our places ; another one we have is the County Revenue Service Bill, 
the Mombasa County Se ssional  Parties Bill, the Mombasa County Climate Change Fund Bill, the 
Mombasa County  Transport Bi ll, the Mombasa Coast General Teaching and Referral 
Corporation  Bill and lastly but no t least, the Mombasa County Ward Development Fund Bill.  
Mr. Speaker , we are ready to receive the legislative Bills in this Honourable House and I am 
urging the Honourable Me mbers  to work hand in hand wit h the Executive so as to pass and serve 
the people of Mombasa in an efficient way.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani . Yes, 
Honourable  Boy Juma , please make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Amriya  Juma: Okay, thank y ou Mr . Sp eaker. First and for emost , I wish to 
congratulate you for the hard work you have put, I have been with you through the journey and it 
might appear that it was an easy task to be re -elected as the Speaker but it is the hard work 
throughout the four years,  we have been together , so congratulations.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Secondly , I wish also to thank you in person for the support ; both emotional, financially 
and you have been through with me through the journey so thank you very much as they call you 
prince Aharub or the ni ckname Aroro surely you are the prince because…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
We will not imagine the favours you have accorded to us as members we cannot imagine 
any other person who has the zeal or the will to do the same or fitting in your big shoes so kudos  
job f or that. I want to start my maiden speech by thanking the Almighty God for giving me this 
opportunity to serve in the third Assembly as now the elected Member as Mjambere Ward. Mr. 
Speaker,  I remember back in 2020 when I expressed my intention of vying as a Member o f 
County Assembly of Mjambere Ward it was a big joke ; a joke of the year. Actually , some 
Members busted out in berserk  as in out of laughter and they were like she is not serious ! But it 
is a legacy that once you dream it you can achieve it , so I return al l my gratefulness to Allah and 
also secondly I want to appreciate my party leader or my Deputy party leader Hon ourable  
Hassan Ali Joho for first of all for pin -pointing me right from the classroom at 25 years old from 
the law class and he could r ead that I have leade rship qualities and he picked me to serve in this 
Assembly as a nominated MCA at 25 years old and that gave me an opportunity to show case my 
prowess in law and I served as a Chair of Justice and Legal affairs Committee then . 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 So, he re mains to be my me ntor and his legacy lives on. Second of all I also I would 
disservice also appreciate the late Hon ourable  Hatimy, the late who has been the former 
chairman of ODM is one of the key pillars to where I am today,  he also believed in the  dream  
and also, he was firm t o sup port so I will do a disservice if I will not acknowledge and may his 
soul rest in peace and his legacy lives on and we will be praying for him each and every time In 
sha Allah! Also my gratefulness extends to my family fo r thei r both moral and financial  supp ort 
in this journey it has not been easy they sacrificed their time and all for us to be here also I want 
to be grateful to my friend and also a colleague Hon ourable  Fatma Mote she has been a friend 
indeed and a friend in nee d is a friend indeed she has wal ked w ith me through the journey from 
nomination to election I am not seeing her around but I will not fail to acknowledge her even 
midnight calls she used to check up on me on how is it going in Mjambere so I appreciate her for 
all that.  Finally , Mr. Speake r I want to give my great and heartfelt thanks giving to the people the 
great people of Mjambere Ward; they say in football I am not a fan of football they said one who 
plays home ground has an added advantage . I think I wa s in that key note because I was at h ome 
so I was in an advantageous le verage with as opposed to my worthy opponents that much has 
been said that also they put on work and trust and they saw the value in electing first women in 
Mjambere which is not easy so  I want to give them round applause … 
  
[Appla use] 
 
I want to give them hands thumb up for that and lastly,  I also want to thank my team ; my 
special Committee team Amriya from Mjambere . It had a cocktail of this young girl s; vigilant 
and energeti c young peop le who a re thirsty and hungry for a change an d als o mixe d share of a 
cocktail , very old experienced senior citizens who were willing to give advice and show us the 
way, so I think that even gave me better leverage  and with thankful heart . Finishing the tha nks 
giving I will move on and comment on  the Governor ’s speech ; Mr. Speaker , the Governor’s 
speech in my view was adequate and sufficient , he did not want to bore us with so many words , 
long speeches and he went straight forward . To me as I re ad through th e speec h, I saw that he 
was deliberate that he  ment ioned the Ward Development Fund to encompass to all his 
development agenda that maybe  he had not touched on because that itself is a mother of all 
pillars of development as enshrined in our laws.  
The devo lution shoul d go to the grassroots according to t he Ac t; at the village level , so I 
think in my view that itself mentioning the word that he has goodwill into creating or enshrining 
the Ward Development Fund to law , that itself surpasses all other ag endas and will fit in in to the 
Ward Development Fund and so w e are  open for the Ward Development Fund because as I speak 
coming from Mjambere eleven years into devolution Mjambere residents have not been able to 
access health care they have to go to Nyali, the y have not able to a ccess basic education they 
have to cr oss to Nyali, they also they have not able to access lighting and all that . So, this Ward 
Development Fund will bring down devolution to the grassroots level and give empowerment , 
both financial and al so for p ublic involvement , empowerment as peop le wi ll decide what priority 
to them so that will be a welcome idea.  I do not see myself or any other Member surviving 
without the Ward Development Fund because of much promises we made to our good people 
and t hey believe on  us.  
Mr. Speaker , I also want to hig hligh t that time is of essence and we are 60 days into our re -
election and our citizens are getting impatient and we as the devolution family must come 
together and we are seeing that there is a c hallenge in the exe cutive because I know there are 
new b ut the law does not have a vacuum , there is no vacuum in law  and if is a new government 
or a new officer is not in or in the government process should continue . 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 12 Citizens do  not understand much ; so, as a devol ution family we sho uld come together and 
push and show a nd we  make sure that the A nnual Development Plan (ADP ) because we are in 
six months into our financial year 2022/2023 and do  not have an ADP and  when we come back,  
we will be in our third semester . So, it its impor tant even to push ours elves further so we can 
have not all devel opment agendas but at least  we can start with the scholarship education so on 
and so forth.  So that is one thing that we as an Assembly need to do ; I will push hard to see that 
atleast this fina ncial year we get t o service . 
I also wanted to comment o n the  sectional properties on land issues that the Governor 
intended to bring ; Mr. Speaker , we realize that in Mombasa we do  not have any land policies or 
land laws , we just have the National Land Act an d National Registra tion of Land Act . I am 
seeing that the re is a challenge in land  because of the historical injustices right in Mjambere ; we 
have so much of Nyumba za Vilema  House without land and the most beneficial practice to 
utilize the spaces that  we are already hav e that is creating sectional titles l ike f loor… you have 
land here , you have land at the second floor you have land at the third floor and each unit have 
their title deeds and there free hold or lease owners to the specific  unit. So, I think that is a 
welcom e idea because it will make most of the r esidents of Mombasa home owners because 
most of us including some of the Honourable Members here are still tenants so when we have a 
Sectional Properties Act , it will allow even so me of the Honourabl e Members here  in this House  
that are still tenants to own houses and to be home owners. So that is a very welcome  idea, we 
are ready and we will be willing to give input beca use from where I stand, I have been trained as 
an advocat e so I will be ready to give input into the Sectional Properties Act so that we get value 
and our people will also benefit from the Sectional Properties Act.  
Lastly , but not least I also want to comm ent on the educatio n; we need a lot of reforms on 
educ ation  because Mr. Speaker our  Elimu F und as it is , as it stands is a bit insufficient because of 
what the Governor has highlighted , because of insufficient funds . So, it makes it a bit hard for us 
to at least have this  Elimu Fund being actualized  every year  properly, so I think the best way to 
do is to have reforms in  these sectors  so that we can get even on opening the doors for PPEs and 
grants on the areas of the  Elimu Fund  so that our children can go to school and be better lawyers 
than I  am and be better teach ers than who we are today and even be better doctors and nurses 
because in 2022 the  other day we advertised for jobs here even for a watchman it required a 
KCS E certificate . So, ten years to come even a f irst degree like the one I am holding here would 
not be sufficient , it will require a Master’s  degree or a PHD for you to get a reasonable job group 
for you to sustain yourself . So, education  should not be take n lightly in Mombasa or our 
generatio n wil l miss out on very important placements and very importa nt opportunities in this 
country , not even in the County and outside the country if we take education the way we are 
taking it right now bec ause we need to fur ther even the ones holding first degr ees to move ahead 
and do masters and second degrees because the system of the world is very competitive so that 
we are at the same per with the world as it moves . 
Finally , Mr. Speaker also on the tr ansport sector I am seeing that there are mu ch ch anges 
but we will prefer that we are actively engaged in the public p articipations that are ongoing , they  
are not sufficient . In my maiden speech , I am saying that it should be devolved to the v illage 
level Mr. Speaker so that everybody is enjoined , otherwise thank you very much for this 
opportunity. Lastly , i congratulate all Members, the new Members, the senior citizens who have 
come here again and again and I wish to congratulate you  as, it is not easy I hav e been nominated 
and now an elected , I am seeing the difference and  it is not easy , so congratulations again and 
thank you very much.  
 
[Applause ] 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 13  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable Amriya Boy . Yes, Honourable 
Shuhudia.  
 
Hon.  Shuhudia Shalehe: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunip a nafasi hii . Kwanza 
ningependa kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu , pia ningependa ku shukuru chama changu cha ODM 
kwa kuniteua katika Bunge  hili la Kaunti ya Mombasa . Pia ningependa kumshukuru 
Mheshimiwa  wangu Mbun ge wa Likoni pia kw a juhudi zake alizofanya mpaka ni kawa kwa 
Bunge  hili la Kaunti ya Mombasa pia nisingeweza kumsahau Gavana  wangu Abdulswammad 
Sharif f Nassir pia kwa juhudi zake kwa kunipa moyo pia kwa kunisaidia nikafika hapa. 
Ningependa kushukuru chama c hangu cha ODM kwa k uniteua haikuwa rahisi vile mpaka 
kuchagu liwa kuwa kwa party list  ilikuwa vigumu sana nafikiri nilipata cha ngamoto nyingi sana 
mpaka kufikia hapa, kuhusu hotuba ya Mheshimiwa  Gavana  Abdulswa mad Sharif f Nassir 
ningependa kuiunga mkono sa na sana haswa kwa u pande wa taka taka nafikiri amefanya juhud i 
nyingi sana mpaka sasa hivi mji wetu wa Mombasa ni safi ukitembe a utakuta majaa yote 
ameweza kuyasafisha kwa hilo ningependa kumpea kongole nafikiri sina mengi zaidi kufikia 
hapo nafikiri huo n i mchango wangu kwa  upande wa  hotuba  ya Gavana  ahsanten i. 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable Shuhudia . Yes, Honourable Mwavula 
Mbele , please make your contribution from Bamburi Ward. 
 
Hon. Mwavula: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. My name is Patrick Mbele fr om Bamburi 
Ward; first of a ll I would wish to thank you for this opportunity to address this Honourable 
House and to also weigh in on the maiden speech of our Governor that he made on the 24th of 
September this year . Before I dive into that particular age nda Mr. Speaker Sir, kindly allow me 
to first appreciate and thank the almighty God for granting me this r are opportunity to serve His 
people particularly those of Bamburi Ward. In the same breath Mr. Speaker Sir, allow me to 
thank my fa mily starting with m y dear wife , my parents, siblings, relatives and not forgetting the 
newly found family of friends and cam paigners that put in immense contributions during my 
campaigns, to the people of Bamburi Ward kindly receive my heartfelt appreciat ions and 
gratitude f or giving m e the  chance to serve you as your MCA . I am greatly indebted to you and 
by God’s grace I shall  serve you to my best and probably surpass your expectations . As of now , I 
am first amongst many however we are together in this and a s the famous Mombasa  sensationa l 
musician Susumila says , sasa wacha ngoma  itambae  and indeed ngoma inatambaa .  
Honourable Speaker  Sir, I also want to  take this opportunity with your permission to thank 
the former  administration  led by His Excellency Governo r Hassan Ali Joho for coming  up with 
the Governor’s Young Leadership Program which  I am a product of . I urge the current 
administration to carry on this program and further expand it to accommodate more people  that 
might wish to join it , which includes the g eneral public.  Mr. Speaker Sir, right f rom t he day that 
we were sworn in together with my area MP Honourable Rashid Jum a Bedzimba we made 
deliberate efforts to start serving the people, our people and I wish to bring to your attention that 
on the 29th of O ctober this year we oversaw the graduat ion o f 328 women that have now been 
empowered with skills on urban farming, bric k making, baking and business skills . The training 
will help these women whom in them are my mothers, sisters and friends to help them dev elop 
busin esses  and as well as uplift their livelihoods.   
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 14 Mr. Speaker Sir, the same mothers and sisters and the people  of Bamburi Ward also look 
forward to myself and other leaders being able to support them in other ways to formulate the 
businesses, to run  the busine sses and to also make more profits which I think would fall in 
squarely  with the Ward Development Fund whi ch will give us the ability and the energy to also 
propel the businesses . Mr. Speaker Sir, I also wish to bring to your attention that we a lso have 20 
youths in Bamburi Ward who are among hundreds of youths  that we took through a sensitization 
mentorship p rogram on seafarer jobs.  Mr. Speaker Sir, the 20 have now been offered 
employment letters and will soon be boarding ships to go and w ork in crui se sh ips in other parts 
of this country, for this I would wish to first of all thank you for allowing us to form  an Ad Hoc 
Committee which I chair which we were to oversee matters of the seafarers cruise ship jobs and 
as of toda y Mr. Speak er Sir I would also wish to thank Members of the Ad Hoc Committee 
starting with the Honourable Juma Manuari who was also the move r of that particular Motion 
during our first meeting with the Governor at his office. For me , Juma Manuari I do not see him 
here but  he is a hero to the seafarers for bringing this such kind of conversation to the 
Governor … 
  
[Applause ] 
 
I also wish to tha nk other Members of this Committee that include Hamisi Nyota, 
Mheshimiwa  Solomon Ngugi, Honourable Hawaa Cheka and o ur good senior Samir  Bhaloo and 
for all others that assisted us on this journey , we thank you. Mr. Speaker Sir, this Committee was 
also help ed by the wise assistance of the Assistant Clerk Sebby and Director of Research Doctor 
Richard Kaka . We thank you so m uch for the findin gs of  this Committee , they are quite pleasing 
but have not made it to the floor of this House pending its formalization.  We also wish to bring 
to the attention of other Members of this House that the findings are quite pleasing and would 
give us more opportunities not only on the blue economy sector but also other inter linking 
sectors that are also inter twinned by the blu e economy.  
On today’s agenda , Mr. Speaker Sir, I would wish to first of all commend His Excellency 
the Governor fo r his zeal to serve  the people of Mombasa and wish to assure him that we will 
work closely to make sure that we transform the lives of our pe ople, in his maiden speech Mr. 
Speaker Sir, the Governor touched on areas that he wishes to bring to attention of th is Assembly 
in form  of Bills which include: The Transport Bill. Mr. Speaker Sir, I come from a Ward that has 
immense challenges on matters o f transport and as highlighted yesterday by Honourable Member 
Milka Areba is that we face very many challenges in my  Ward, particularly  on matters of 
transport and to be in specific  on matters of roads.  I would wish not knowing the details of this 
particul ar Bill, I would wish that this Bill come to the floor of this House so that we can make 
our contributions and see h ow we can h elp o ur people further to  ease the burdens that they have.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, part of the Bills that the Governor said he wishes to  bring to the attention 
of this Assembly is the Coast General Teaching and Referral Hospital Corporation B ill which in 
his wis dom t he Bill is supposed to better the services that are given to the people of Mombasa in 
matters of health.  Mr. Speaker Sir, again I would also wish to bring to the attention of this House 
that my Ward is one of the very few Wards within this County which  does not have even a single 
health facility . It is a sad state we have people in my Ward that go through so much because we 
do not have health facilities particularly the mothers who have to deliver babies on their ways 
trying to make it to the Coast General Hospital. So, for that Mr. Speaker Sir, I am really waiting 
for the Bill to come so that I  can make my contributions and so t hat we can better the lives of our 
people . 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 15 Again Mr. Speaker Sir, the Governor also mentioned that he will bring to this  Honourab le 
house the Climate Change Fund Bill; I also do not know the details of this particular Bill but I 
would also wish to bring to  attention that one of the Wards that has been on the fore front in 
matters of climate action is Bamburi Ward an d we do so by planting mangrove trees on the 
borders of our oceans . Mr. Speaker Sir, one of the things that I wish to bring to attention is that 
this particular community that practices mangrove farming is slowly getting tired of doing that 
particular activi ty an d the reason as to why they are getting tired is because there is no 
compensation for the conservation that they are doing so I would real ly foresee or think that the 
governor in his wisdom would also put in the matter of compensation for the conserva tion that 
our people are really putting effort towards in many parts of this County and at this moment I 
would wish to particularly speak for t he people of Bamburi those from Majaoni, Mdengerekeni 
and other parts of Bamburi that are really putting in a lot  of effort in matters of conservation.  
Lastly Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to thank you in person and give you my heartfelt congratulations 
for reta ining the seat of the Speaker and  would wish to let you know that I form part of many of 
us that will walk with y ou in  this journey to better the lives of the people of Mombasa . Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker Sir and for all Honourable Members I wish to congratula te you and particularly 
the ladies, the women of this house congratulations, a hsanteni sana . 
  
    [Applause ] 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable Patrick Mwavula Mbele . Yes, 
Honourable Samir Bhaloo please make your contributions.  
 
Hon. Bhaloo:  Kwa majina ninaitwa Samir Bhaloo kutoka Wodi ya Tudor . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa  Spika ; ninataka kutoa shukrani kunipa nafasi hii, na pia nataka nikupongeze 
binafsi , nataka kutoa shukrani zangu kwa waka azi wa Tudor kwa kunichagua mimi kama mfanyi 
kazi wao n a kuwawakilisha wao hapa Bungeni . Wakaazi wa Tudor wako na matumaini 
makubwa sana na wako na i mani ku bwa kwa hili Bunge  la tatu Mheshimiwa  Spika ; katika  Wodi 
ya Tudor  tuko na takriban m uoroto tano na hao wote am bao wanaishi hapo ni watu wa chini 
kabisa.   Mheshimiwa Spika , niko na changamoto kubwa sana ; la kwanza Tudor estate  kuvunjwa, 
la pili watu wa m uoroto haw ajawahi kuhusishwa katika hizi shughuli , watu wa m uoroto pia 
wanaathirika kimaisha na wao wametengwa sana. La mwisho Mheshimiwa Spika nataka 
tuangal ie masuala ya hospitali ya Coast General ; kuna zile ada watu wakienda wanalipa za 
kutibu, nataka  tuangalie masuala hayo ya kulipa hiyo shilingi 200. Mheshimiwa Spika sina 
mengi ni hayo tu. Ahsante.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you again ve ry much Hon ourable  Samir Bhaloo from 
Tudor Ward. Any other Member who has not contributed ? 
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Waheshimiwa , nafikiri nyote mulioko hapa mshachangia katika huu Mswada . Kwa hivyo 
nafikiri nitaregesha huu us ukani kwa Kiongozi wa Wengi  lakini lab da niongezee kwa kusema 
nimewasikiza Waheshimiwa mkitoa maoni yenu na nataka kuwapatia wasia kwa sab abu mimi ni 
kijana mdogo sana , hapa nafikiri wengi wenu wamenishinda kwa umri lakini hii safari mnavyo  
iona sio safari ndogo . 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 16 Kama vile tunavyosema saa hii tumemaliza miezi mawili na siku zinaenda na Mungu 
akitujaalia afya tunaweza fikisha miaka mit ano na asipo tujaalia ya Mungu ni mengi labda 
wengine tunaweza tusifikishe.  Lakini miaka mitano msione ni mingi Mheshimiwa Spika , ni 
mafupi sana, Disemba ndio hiyo  ikifika nafikiri ifikapo wiki ijayo  tutakuwa na kalenda yetu wiki 
ya kwanza ya  Disemba kawaida  huwa t unaenda mapumziko mare fu yaani long recess mpaka 
Februari , kwa h io ni miezi miwili  tutakuwa nje ya ofisi.  Nafikiri wengi wenu hapa mumeweza 
kuongea na tay ari mshaona yale majukumu ambayo yalioko nje kule ; majukumu ni mengi na 
matarajio ni mengi na hali ya uchumi imekuwa mb aya huk o nje kusema kweli, watu hawana 
kazi, watu wana shida, watu badili ya kula milo mitatu utapata  watu wanakula mlo mmoja na si 
kwa k upenda kwao lakini ni yale maisha  ama hata wengine hata h uo mlo mmoja hawana labda 
ya kuweka juu ya meza . Kwa hivyo  Wahesh imiwa kama vile tumesema kesho mbele ya 
Mwenyezi Mungu kila mtu atahukumiwa kwa yale al io yafany a, na nyinyi mlioko hapa ama sisi 
sote tulioko hapa hatuko hapa kwa uerevu wet u; nitaregelelea tena kusema hivi kwamba 
Mombasa kuna zaidi ya watu milioni moj a lakin i mlivyopatikana nyinyi 41 na mimi 
mkanichagua nikawa 42 si kwa uerevu wetu lazima Mwenyezi Mungu  mwenyewe  amejua ndio 
maana akatu patia sisi huu uongozi .  
Kwa hivyo  tujaribuni kivyovyote  Waheshimiwa najua safari ni nzito lakini tuseme 
tumeweza kurekeb isha ha ta kama ni  asilimia kidogo  lakini tuseme tumeweza kuboresha maisha 
ya ndugu zetu manake naamini ya kwamba hapa hakuna mtu ambaye  hatoki Mombasa hapa . 
Sote ni watu wa Mombasa hatuna ukabila, hatuna rangi, hatuna dini, suala lolote likitupata 
linatup ata kam a sisi watu wa Mombasa, kwa hivyo  mimi ningeomba hatuna chama pia tusiseme 
mambo ya sijui chama, sijui nini …Mimi ningeomba vile t umeingia katika hili Bunge tufanyeni 
kazi kwa umoja ili tuweze kuboresha maisha ya wana Mombasa manake sio rahisi . Kama vile 
mnavyosema nimeweza kumnukuu ndugu yangu hapa Abdirahman nafikiri akisema kuna 
pending bill  ya bilioni nne na labda huwezi jua wawe za sikia kuna nyengine zaidi zimetokezea. 
Hivyo basi,  sisi tujaribuni na tumu weke Mungu mbele, nina hakika hapa kila mtu an a dini yake 
lakini sote tunaamini kuwa kuna Mwenyezi Mungu , si ndio?  
Sidhanii kama kuna wale wengine ambao ndugu yangu Madialo jana alisema hapa, sisi 
sote tunaamini kuna Mwenyezi Mungu , si ndio ndugu yangu ? Kwa hivyo  sitosema mengi , 
nafikiri ile Bunge  iliyopita  kile Kiti alichokuwa akikalia Mheshimiwa Samir Bhaloo nyote hapa 
mnajua kulikuwa na yule mzee wetu akiitwa Mohammed Hatimy na  saa hii yuko mbele za haki 
na Mwenyezi Mungu amjaalie awe ni mwenye kuingia kwenye pepo, amuepushe madhambi 
yake yote kwa sabab u aliku wa ni mzee mzuri , pia ametuelekeza . Mimi binafsi mwenyewe hapa 
nilivyoingia yeye ndio alinishika mkono, akanielekeza ile njia ya kufuata na nafikiri yeye pekee 
katika lile Bunge  lililopita  yeye pekee yake ndio mtu aliyefariki . Kwa hi o ningeweza kumtambua  
kwa maana  kila nikiangalia kile kiti huwa  namuona yeye lakini sasa naona amekalia Samir 
kidogo anafanana na yeye hata zile  nguo alikuwa akivaa , saa zengine alikuwa anapenda kuvaa 
zile light light  kama za Samir.  
Kwa hivyo  sitosema mengi Waheshimiwa , najua maju kumu tu nayo mengi mbali na 
wananchi, familia zetu tukisema hapa tuanze kuangalia familia zetu wenyewe kila mmoja hapa 
nina uhakika hana chini ya watu 100 wa familia wanasumbua tu kila siku kwa sababu wanaona 
ushapata uongozi . Kabla hujakuja kwa mwananchi na  nina i mani nyote nikiwaangalia nyinyi 
hapa mwanzo huwa mnawasaidia wale watu ; mwanzo hata sio familia watu wa karibu,  
mnajaribu kusaidia wale watu kando . Kwa hivyo  majukumu ni makubwa , wengine tayari  naona 
hapa wataanza kubadilisha namba za simu, wengine tay ari uta ona wataanza ku  block  watu lakini 
sasa ni majukumu yaani zile ofisi ambazo tumetafuta sio vile ilikuwa  tunat arajia tukiwa kule nje 
lakini sisi yote tunasema tunaamini kwa Mwenyezi Mungu na tutafanya uwezo wetu ambao 
twauweza ili tusidhulumu watu . 
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 17 Hilo ndio j ambo la muhimu ndugu zangu. Kwa hivyo  sitaki  kuzungumza mengi nimefurahi 
vile nyote mumechangia na nimeona  kila mmoja wenu hapa ana nia ya kusaidia watu wake na 
ana moyo na hilo ni jambo nzuri sana…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
…na hilo ni jambo nzuri sana maana n yote si jasikia mtu hapa akijizungumzia suala lake 
binafsi ati sijui mimi, maana leo tumekaa hapa miezi miwili  hatujalipwa mshahara na sijasikia 
hata mmoja wenu akisema sijalipwa mshahara lakini kila mmoja wenu anapoenuka anasema 
wananchi wangu, wanasema wa nanchi,  wananchi, wananchi na ilhali nyinyi wenyewe pia 
mifuko ni mitupu. Kwa hivyo Mwenyezi  Mungu awajaalie , awap atie nguvu hivyo hivyo ya 
kusaidia wananchi. Kwa hayo machache nitaregesha huu us ukani kwa ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa 
Mwamwiri ili aweze  kujibu  kwa huo Mswada . Ahsanteni.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika nire geshe shukran kwa Waheshimiwa wenza walioweza kuchangia hotuba ya Mstahiki 
Gavana kwa mujibu wa kanuni zetu za kudumu za Bunge hili tuk ianza n a ibara 17 ambapo ni 
wajibu wa Gavana kuhutubia Waheshimiwa pindi wanapo  chaguliwa.  Pia Mheshimiwa Spika 
ibara ya 18 katika kanuni za kudumu zimempa fursa Gavana ahutubie Bunge hili angalau mara 
moja kwa mwaka ama akipenda zaidi na kwa utamaduni wa B unge hi li tumekuwa tukitarajia 
hotuba ya Gavana baada ya kutoka likizo ndefu ambapo huwa tumerudi Bunge mwezi wa Pili . 
Mheshimiwa pia kuwashukuru Waheshimiwa wametekeleza wajibu wa Kanuni za kudumu 20 
(5) ya kwamba wana w ajibu k uchangia hotuba ya Gavana baada ya awamu tat u baada ya hotuba 
ile kutolewa ambayo ni kielelezi na muongozo ya ni yapi tunayo  tarajia kutoka kwa Msta hiki 
Gavana katika ruwaza yake ya miaka mitano ya utawala wake . 
Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa Wahesh imiwa wenza ni bayana ya kwamba maneno ya aliyesema 
kwamba kama ndoto yako haitishi basi inakupasa urudi kulala uote tena ; kwa yale tumenukuu 
kutoka kwa Waheshimiwa  wenza yote yana sad ifiana na matarajio ya wananchi kule mashinani 
japo ni mlima mkubwa kukwea lakini kwayo Mheshimiwa Spika imani, jitihada, nia na ari ipo 
kwa Waheshimiwa kwamba watakabiliana na mlima ule kuhakikisha wameweza kutimiliza 
malengo ya wananc hi chini ya uongozi wako kama Spika wetu . Mheshimiwa Spika lakini vil e 
vile chini ya utekelezaji wa serikali tawala chini ya Mstahiki Gavana Abdulswamad Shariff 
Nassir  Waheshimiwa wameonyesha nia njema na kuhakikisha kwamba wako tayari kushirikiana 
na utaw ala. Kwa hivyo iliyosalia Mheshimiwa Spika ni  kumsihi  na kum uomba Mstahiki Gavana 
aweze kuwajibika na kuharakisha Baraza lake la Mawaziri ili kazi iweze kutekelezeka rasmi 
mashinani na Waheshimiwa wenza na Bunge hili likiwa chini ya Kiti chako tuko tayari kupeana 
mkono wetu, mchango wetu, Ho ja zetu  na Miswada  yetu kuhakikisha kile ambacho Mstahiki 
anatarajia kutekelezea wananchi wetu wa Mombasa tukiwemo ndani sisi tutaweza kumuunga 
mkono moja kwa moja Mheshimiwa Mstahiki Spika.   
Mheshimiwa Spika , nikimalizi a itakuwa sijaitendea haki lugha teule  ya Kis wahili kwa 
sababu wachangiaje wengi wamechangia kwa lugha ya Kiswahili lakini yapo mapungufu kidogo 
mbeleni ni wajibu tutarekebisha tukisonga.  Mheshimiwa Spika , katika swala ya matumizi ya 
ngeli ama tukisema nge li ni nini ; tutakubali ana kwa mba ngeli ni vikundi vya majina ya Kiswahili 
ambayo huundwa kutokana na viunganishi na viwakilishi na katika matumizi ya ngeli aghalabu 
mara nyingi  watu hutumia ngeli ya a -wa, ngeli hii hutumika kwa viumbe vyenye uhai lakini 
vinapochu kua maj ina ya nasaba majina haya Mheshimiwa Spika aghalabu haya wingi kama ni 
baba inasalia kuwa baba na hatujaidhinisha katika Kamusi ya Kiswahili ya kuwepo na mababa 
ama mubaba, kama ni mama anasalia kuwa mama na kama ni dada anasalia kuwa dada.  
November 9, 202 2                          COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified v ersion of this Repor t can be obtain ed from the Hansard Editor  Page 18 Kwa hivy o yale majina ya nasaba Mheshimiwa Spika hayana wingi yanapotumika katika 
lugha ya Kiswahili aghalabu kwenye majina yenye uhai lakini kwa wanyama vinayo fursa ya 
kuchukua wingi. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nikiwa miongoni mwa wanafalsafa wa Bunge 
hili itaku wa ni w ajibu wangu ya kwamba tuwekane sawa kwa hilo na kwa uwezo wa Mwenyezi 
Mungu nina imani na tutajivunia zaidi tutakapochangia zaidi tukiwa Mombasa katika lugha yetu 
teule ya Kiswahili.  Kwa hayo mengi Mheshimiwa Spika naomba Mwenyezi M ungu ch ini ya 
uongozi wake kama wetu atujaalie Bunge letu la Tatu tuweze kukamilisha hatamu yetu salama 
wasalimin  na vile vile yale yote ambayo tutayafikisha kwa Bunge hili kwa minajili ya 
kuwatendea haki wananchi wetu basi yaweza kutekele zeka kw a upande wa pili wa  utawala ili na 
sisi tuwe miongoni mwa wale tutakao  kumbukwa kwa wema lakini pia kuombewa dua njema na 
wananchi wetu wa Mombasa ya kwamba tuliwajibika katika kutekeleza majukumu yao kwa ajili 
yao. Ahsanteni Waheshi miwa na  tuzidi kushirikiana na tupambane k uleta biashara katika Bunge 
hili ili lisalie kuwa miongoni mwa Bunge bora zaidi katika Jamhuri yetu ya Kenya. Ahsant e na 
Mwenyezi Mungu atubariki na atuwezeshe.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you ver y much Honourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri 
and Honourable  Members for your contribution. Hon ourable  Members , I now put the question 
that the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri, Leader of Majority Party that 
Pursuant to the provision of Standing Order 20 (5) the thanks of the Co unty As sembly  be 
recorded for the exposition of public policy contained with the address of the Governor during 
the opening of the Third  Assembly conveyed Monday 24th of October, 2022 be approved by this 
Honourable  House in the same terms as debated . 
 
[Question p ut and agr eed to ] 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes, Clerk next Order please?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Wednesday 9th Novem ber, 2022 
at 2:30p.m.  
 
The House rose at  11:37a.m. 
                                                                  
 
 
 
 
 