February 20, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
  
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 20th February, 2019  
The House met at 2:45p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats. Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
CONTROL OF MISUSE OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT VEHICLES  
 
 Yes Hon. Moha med Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg t o give notice of the following 
Motion;  
 
THAT AWARE that there is a standing of conduct that prohibits a public officer or 
employee from using any government property fo r other than off icial purposes;  
 
FURTHER AWARE that use of government -owned  or leased vehicles is restricted to 
official purposes and never be used for private purpose such as personal business;  
 
NOTING that is the responsibility of the Chief Officer to ensure that governme nt 
vehicles are properly used;  
 
CONCERNED that some County government vehicles are being spotted in odd hours 
at awkward places such as bars;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that: 
 
1. The County government create a special unit within the Inspector ate, tasked with 
the mandate of monito ring the use of all the County government vehicles ; 
 
2. The County government to ensure that no government vehicle is on the road 
especially outside office hours (7 :00a.m-6:30a.m) unless on official use or carrying 
out an  emergency.   

February 20, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 In such as an instance, the authority for use of the vehicle shall be in writing by the 
officer in charge of the station where the vehicle is attached ; 
 
3. The County government to ensure that all government vehicles are branded with 
the name of  the respective County department so as to ease identification as well as 
curb misuse of such vehicles ; 
 
4. The County government sensitizes County officers or members of the public to 
report in detail to the Chief Officer any government vehicle suspected o f being 
engaged in unauthorized  private use.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Clerk?  
 
PROCE DURAL MOTION  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY CALENDAR  
 
 Yes Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker Sir, I do take this opportunity 
to give the  following  Procedural Motion : 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion;  
 
THAT pursuant to Standing Ord er 24 (1) and 25 (1) this House RESOLVES  to adopt 
the County Assembly Calendar Regular Session -2019.  
 
 Mr. Speaker I hope all the Membe rs have a copy of the attached calendar . Mr. 
Speaker we have some periods;  
 
 FIRST PART  
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes you  need a Seconder . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani) : So Mr. Speaker let me read the schedule 
of the Calendar then I call my Member to second the Motion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Proceed . 
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani) :  
 
 PERIOD         DAYS  
  
FIRST PART  
 A. Sitting Days  
Tuesday  12th February , 2019  -Thursday, 28th March , 2019  Tuesdays (Afternoons),  
         Wednesdays (Mornings 
         and afternoons) and  
         Thursday  (Afternoons)  
February 20, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 Short Recess  Friday,  29th Marc h - Monday,  8th April,  2019   
  
Sitting Days  Tuesdays,  9th April  - Thursday,  9th May,  2019   Tuesdays   
         (Afternoons), Wednesdays 
         (Mornings and   
         afternoons) and Thursday 
         (Afternoons)  
        
Long Recess  Friday,  10th May - Monday,  17th June, 2019  
 
SECOND PART  
Sitting Days  Tuesdays,  18th June - Thursday,  8th August , 2019  Tuesdays   
         (Afternoons),Wednesdays 
         (Mornings and   
         afternoons) and Thursday 
         (Afternoons)  
 
Long Recess  Friday,  9th August  - Monday,  9th September,  2019 
 
Sitting Days  Tuesdays,  10th Sept - Thursday,  17th October,  2019  Tuesdays   
         (Afternoons),Wednesdays 
         (Mornings and   
         afternoons) and Thursday 
         (Afternoons)  
 
THIRD PART  
Short Recess  Friday,  18th October  - Monday,  28th October,  2019  
Sitting Days  Tuesdays,  29th October  - Thursday,  19th Dec, 2019  Tuesdays   
         (Afternoons),Wednesdays 
         (Mornings and   
         afternoons) and Thursday 
         (Afternoons)  
 
Long Recess:  
Friday,  20th December,  2019  - Monday,  10th February,  2020. 
 
 Thank  you Mr. Speaker, may I call my colle ague Chief Whip to second the Motion.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Chief Whip second . 
 
 The Majority Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
nimesimama kuafiki hoja ilioletwa na Kiongozi wa Walio  Wengi Bungeni . 
 
(Silence)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Chief Whip, before I propose a 
question the Majority Leader when moving his Motion read Standing Order 24 (1) and the 
Calendar brought before this Hon ourab le House indicate some changes in the dates of 
December which are not same as per our Standing Order . 
February 20, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4  So I will refer back the Calendar to the House Business Committee to deliberate on 
this; either to amend the Standing Order and bring back the Calendar as it is for the House to 
approve the Calendar because as you can see in Standing Order 24  (1) it states that , Except 
for the Session commencing immediately after a general election, the regular Sessions of the 
County Assembly shall commence on the second Tuesday of February and terminate on  the 
first Thur sday of December , of which the Calendar before us the termination of the Calendar 
is not as in the Standing Order . So I will refer back to the House Business to correct this 
anomaly  then bring back or amend the Standing Order then bring back the Calendar for the 
House to approve . So the Leader of Majority you will discuss with the House Business 
Committee then you bring back the Calendar. Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  To pass it with amendments . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Hatimy I think the Sta nding Order is 
clear amendments must be in a written form so we do  not have the written amendments with 
us so it is better the Leader of Majority to rectify the Motion or the Standing Order for the 
House to proceed. Yes Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majo rity (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker this is a House of rules, 
regulations and laws I can agree whatever you have given the direction so that I can rectify 
because I do  not want somebody somewhere to come and challenge this House , so please 
give me time  so that I  can rectify this with the House Business and I come  with a complete 
format of the County Assembly Calendar.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): You can just amend the Standing Order with 
the House Business then bring the Calendar. Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 Yes Hon. Moham ed Hatimy?  Use your mic rophone  Hon. Moham ed Hatimy . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Sir I seek leave to table this Motion tomorrow . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Under which Standing Order ? 
 
(Silence)  
 
 So what is it Hon. Faith?  
 
 Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika sioni haja ya 
Mswada  kutokuletwa kwa Nyumba hii wakati tulikaa kwa Kamati ya House Business  
kupitisha biashara za wiki na my able Chairman  alikuweko na hakusema ataenda kuf anya 
marekebisho  na sisi Waheshimiwa tuko na ari ya ku jadili  huo Mswada . Kwa hivyo sioni haja 
ya ku iahirisha  ije wakati mwengine tukizingatia kwamba ilikuwa ije mwak a jana  kabla 
twende kwa mapumziko . Kama kungekuwa na marekebisho angefanya wakati huo wakati 
tulikuwa House Business .  
 
February 20, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        7 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Hatimy  you are asking for the leave of 
the House so should I proceed to propose a question or what do you want it to be?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Okay permission granted, the Motion to come back tomorrow. Yes Cle rk? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 There being no other business the House stan d adjourned until Thursday at 2 :30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 3 :06p.m. 