October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednes day, 18th October , 2023  
Third Assembly – Eightieth  Seventh  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  10:25a.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Deputy  Speaker ( Honourable  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable Members get seated. Yes , 
Clerk first Order please?  
 
 
COMMUNICATION  FROM THE CHAIR  
PROPOSAL TO AMEND PART XXI AND THE SECOND SCHEDULE OF THE MOMBASA COUNTY 
ASSEMBLY STANDING ORDERS  
 
Honourable Members , I have received a proposal from Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwi ri, 
the Leader of the Majority to amend part XXY and the Second Schedule of the Mombasa County 
Assembly Standing Orders . Let Hon ourable  Mwamwiri to proceed and inform the House on the 
proposal.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker Sir, Pursuant to Standing Order No.233 of the Mombasa County Standing Orders, I 
hereby tender my humble request to the County Assembly Procedure and Rules Committee to 
consider the following amendments to the Standing Orders.  
 
That, the C ounty Assembly performs most of its functions through Committees ; the 
Committees being housekeeping , watchdog and Sectoral Committees;  
 
That, these Committees have to  be enshrined  in specific Standing Orders or on the Second 
Schedule of the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders.  
 
That, in order for the County Assembly to operate optimally, I propose the following 
amendments to the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders.  
 
1. Incorporation of Powers and Privilege Committee which is established  pursuant 
to Section 15 of the County Assembly Powers and Privilege Acts 2017; Section 15 provides 
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 2 that, “There is established for each County Assembly a Committee known as the 
Committee of Power s and Privileges” ,  
 
2. That, Standing Orders 185 be amended by deleting Public Investment so as the 
Committee to be known as County Public Accounts Committee , 
 
3. That, a new Standing Order be inserted to establish a Committee to be known as 
County Public Investments Committee , 
 
4. That, a new Standing Order be inserted to establish a Committee to be known as 
County Security Disaster Management Committee.  
 
5. That, a new Standing Order be inserted to establish a Committee to be known as 
Equal Opportunities for the purpose of considering the interests of Persons with 
Disabilities and marginalized person within the County.  
 
6. That, the second Schedule be amended as follows:  
 
(i) Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs  
(ii) Committee on Agriculture and Livestock  
(iii) Committee on Blue Economy and Fisherie s  
(iv) Committee on Education  
(v) Committee on Info rmation Tech nology  
(vi) Committee on Youth, Gender, Sports and Social Services  
(vii) Committee on Trade, Investments and Cooperation  
(viii) Committee on Tourism and Culture  
(ix) Committee on Transport and Infrastructure  
(x) Committee on Lands, Housing and Urban Planning  
(xi) Committee on Environment and Solid Waste Management  
(xii) Committee on Health  
(xiii) Committee on Water, Climate Chang e and Natural Resources  
(xiv) Committee on Labour and Public Services Administration  
 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you , the Leader o f Majority. 
Honourable Members, pursuant to Standing Order 233 (3) the proposal to amend XXI and the 
Second Schedule of the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders is hereby forwarded  to the 
Committee on County Assembly Procedure and Rules for necessary action.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
PAPER S 
COUNTY REVENUE FUND ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH 
JUNE , 2023  
 
Yes, Lead er of Majority ? 
 
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 3 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speake r. Mr. 
Speak er, I wish to lay Paper for County Revenue Fund Annual Report and Financial Statements 
for the year ended 30th June, 2023.  
 
[Paper L aid] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , the Annual 
Report and the Financial Statements for Financial year ended 30th June, 2023 stands committed to 
the Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation. Yes Clerk?  
 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF MOMBASA ANNUAL REPORT AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR 
FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30th JUNE, 2023  
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. 
Speaker , I wish to lay Paper, County government of Mombasa Annual Report and Financial 
Statements for the financial year ended 30th June, 2023.  
 
[Paper L aid] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , the Annual 
Report and the Financial Statements for year ended 30th June, 2023 stands committed to the 
Committee o n Finance, Budget and Approp riation for consideration. Yes C lerk?  
 
NOTICE OF M OTION  
 CLEANING OF DRAINAGE SYSTEMS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Honourable  Jactone Madialo , MCA Mikindani Ward.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Mr. Speake r Sir, I beg to give a Notice to the  Motion;  
 
THAT AWARE THAT, part 2, section 11 (a)  of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of 
Kenya, 2010 mandates the County government with the function of County public works 
and services  including storm water management in built up areas;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT, Sectio n 74 (1) (d)  of the Mombasa County Environmental 
Health and Sanitation Act, 2017 stipulates that the maintenance of all sanitary fitments, 
waste pipes, soil pipes, drains, drainage connections and other drainage fittings and 
accessories should be good order and condition;  
 
  NOTING THAT, proper drainage systems play a vital role in safeguarding the well -being 
and safety of residents by preventing  flooding, mitigating the spreading  of waterborne 
diseases, and protecting our environment;  
 
FURTHER NOTING THAT, the condition of  drainage systems in close proximity to 
residential areas directly affects their functionality and cleanliness.  
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 4 Moreover, the presence of houses and veranda which are constructed on drainage systems 
poses a significant threat to public health and environment;  
 
CONCERNED THAT, if the drainage systems are not properly cleaned and maintained and 
that veranda and other facilities constructed on drainage system are not remo ved, it may 
pose a significant risk to the residents leading to spread of disea ses and loss  of lives and 
properties;  
 
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that:  
 
1. The County Assembly of Mombasa  hereby compels the owners of houses situated near 
drainage systems to undertake the responsibility of cleaning and maintaining the adjacent 
drainage systems in a timely and effective manner  
 
2. The County Assembly further directs relevant County departments and agencies, to develop 
and implement regulations and guidelines outlining the responsibilities, timelines, and 
penalties for non -compliance of p roperty owners regarding the cleaning and maintenance 
of drainage systems in proximity to their properties  
 
3. That in cases where veranda and other facilities are found to be constructed directly on 
drainage systems, posing a severe risk to public health and the environment, the relevant 
County departments shall take immediate action to address such violations.  
 
Thank you , Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Makarani ): Yes C lerk?  
 
MOTION  
CLEANING OF DRAINAGE SYSTEMS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Honourable  Jactone Madialo , please  propose  your Motion.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity once again . Mr. Speaker Sir, I 
beg to move the following Motion;  
 
THAT AWARE THAT, part 2, section 11 (a)  of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of 
Kenya, 2010 mandates the County Government with the function of County public works 
and service s including storm water management in built up areas;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT, Secti on 74 (1) (d ) of the Mombasa County Environmental 
Health and Sanitation Act, 2017 stipulates that the maintenance of all sanitary fitments, 
waste pipes, soil pipes, drains, drainage connections and other drainage fittings and 
accessories in good order and condition;  
 
NOTING THAT, proper drainage systems play a vital role in safeguarding the well -being 
and safety of residents by preventing flooding, mitigating the spread of waterbo rne 
diseases, and protecting our environment;  
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 5 FURTHER NOTING THAT, the conditio n of drainag e systems in close proximity to 
residential areas directly affects their functionality and cleanliness. Moreover, the presence 
of houses and veranda which are constructed on drainage systems poses a significant 
threat to public health and environment;  
 
CONCERNED THAT, if the drainage systems are not properly cleaned and maintained and 
that veranda and other facilities constructed on drainage system are not removed, it may 
pose a significant risk to the residents leading to spread of diseases and loss of live s and 
properties;  
 
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that:  
  
1. The County Assembly of Mombasa hereby compels the owners of houses situated near 
drainage systems to undertake the responsibility of cleaning and maintaining the adjacent 
drainage systems in a timely and effective manner , 
 
2. The County Assembly further directs relevant County departments and agencies, to 
develop and implement regulations and guideli nes outlining the responsibilities, timelines, 
and penalties for non -compliance  of property  owners regarding the cleaning and 
maintenance of drainage systems in proximity to their houses.  
 
3. That in cases where veranda and other facilities are found to be constructed directly on 
drainage systems, posing a severe risk to public health and the environment, the relevant 
county departments shall take immediate action to address such violations.  
 
   Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Who is your s econder?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  I ask Hon ourable  Frankline Makanga , the Honourable  Member fro m 
Chaani to second.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Makanga?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Thank you  Honourable  Speaker , I second.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now propose the 
question  that the Motion by Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo on cleaning of drainage system in the 
County be considered by the House . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Jactone Madia lo? 
 
Hon. Madialo: Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kunipatia fursa hii tena . Ningependa kuo mba 
kwanza wenzangu ya kwam ba tupate kuunga hoja hii mkono ; ninaichukuli a kwa uzito maana ni 
hoja muhimu sana maana  ndiposa hata Bwana Spika ukiniona vile nimevaa sijawahi kuwaa 
manna hii tangu niingie Bungeni … 
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 6 [Applause ] 
 
Maana ninachukulia hoja hii kwa uzito sana. Tunaju a serikali kuu ilitangaza kwamba 
kutakuwa na El Nino hata ingawaje zile siku ambazo walisema itaanza, haijaanza lakini dalili ipo 
ya kwamba hatakama  hakutakuwa na mvua nyingi ya kupindukia, kutakuweko na mvua na jana 
nilipokuwa  nikija ha pa Bunge kulinyesha mvua ambapo haikuwa kubwa sana lakini tuliona dalili 
kwa mbali ya kwamba kama mambo fulani haswa ya kusafisha mitaro ya maji taka, isipofanywa 
kwa haraka na kwa ustadi basi janga hili linaweza kukumba watu wengi  na nyumba nyingi 
zinaweza ku athirika na zinaweza kubomoka . Kwangu mimi ni kuomba Waheshimiwa hawa 
wakapate kuunga hoja hii mkono ; ni kwamba tunataka idara husika  ijitahidi kuhakikisha 
kwamba ile mitaro ya maji taka imejengwa mahali ambapo zatakikana zijengwe na zile  nyengine 
ambazo zinatakikana zifanyiwe ukarabati, zifanyiwe ukarabati . Hata hivyo pia tumekuja kuona 
kwamba kumekuwa na uzembe na utepetevu mahali na pia wakaazi wa Mombasa hawaja chuku a 
jukumu lao kuhakikisha mazingira yako sawa na mazingira ni safi.  
Ningependa kuwapatia m fano mmoja kutoka M ikindani ; hiyo m itaro ya maji taka 
iliyojengwa Mikindani  ilijengwa nikiwa m toto mdogo katika miaka ya themanini  nilikuwa 
ninaishi pale barabarani kuingilia M ikindani kulikuwa k unaitwa Riat kitambo . Sasa hivi 
kunait wa Kibaoni m ahali (??) amejenga kampuni yake.  Hiyo mitaro ilijengwa wakayi huo 
mapema miaka ya th emanini  na ilikuwa ni sawa kabisa lakini sasa hivi zaidi ya miaka thelathini 
sehemu nyingi imefukiwa michanga na hii miezi iliyopita pamoja na idara  nilijaribu kabisa 
kufuatilia na tukachimbua zengine ambazo zilikuwa zimewek wa michanga na hata wakaazi wa 
Mikindani wakawa wamepigwa na butwaa, wakawa wanashangaa wakasema kumbe kwani hapa 
kuliku wa na mitaro ya maji taka, walikuwa hawajui kwa sababu kwa muda mwingi watu 
walikuwa wameze mbea na wenye majumba ama wenye majumba ambao wako karibu na mi taro 
ya maji taka walikuwa hawajali kama watu wanatupa taka  hapo, wanaweka michanga hapo.  
Pia wale watu wanaju a Mikindani ; mvua ikinyesha hata hapo kati kati ya Mikindani 
mahali kuna hiyo social hall , hapo hapo kuna polisi huwa maji yanajaa hapo katikati ya barabara 
si kwa sababu ya jambo lengine kwamba hakuna maji taka iko lakini i lifukiwa na hapo tuli jaribu 
pia kuna wengin e ambao walijenga nyumba zao na pia wakajenga varanda  kuelekea kwa hi yo 
mitaro na wakafunika hiyo mitaro. Mikindani tumeshafungua varanda zengine na tunashukuru 
kuwa wengi wemeshatuunga mikono na maji tayari kwa uchache yameanza kutiririrka sasa. 
Hatuwezi kuwa na janga kama ilivyokuwepo hapo awali ndiposa ningependa na  pia jana 
nilikuwa n aongea na Mheshimiwa wa Mji wa K ale pia yeye akaniambia pia yeye kuna mahali 
ambapo walifukuwa ikagundulika watu walikuwa wanafikiria hakuna mtaro wa maji taka, 
wakawa sweetly surprised  kwa mabano ya kwamba kumbe hapa huwa ku na m taro wa maji  taka 
ambao ulijengwa na wakoloni.  
Kwa  hivyo tunaw eza kusema hivi, tukiwa responsi ble citizens  janga lengine hazitakuwa 
zinaweza kutukumba . Hivyo basi ombi langu katika hii hoja ni kwamba  na mwengine pengine 
anaweza kujiuliza kwamba je si tunapeana sana majukumu mengi  kwa wananchi ambapo 
hawawezi kujukumika nalo. Hatuulizi mambo mengi kwa wananchi, kupitia hoja hii kile 
ambacho tunauliza kwa wananchi ni kwamba  wiza ra ikishafungua mitaro, ikishasafisha mitaro, 
iwe jukumu lako wewe  ambapo uko n a nyumba yak o ama b iashara yako ambapo ime karibia h uo 
mtaro wa maji taka  kuhakikisha kwamba hakuchafuliwi . Hiyo ni kuw a raia mwema na tukifanya 
hivyo  usiruhusu mtu aje atupe takataka kwa mtaro wa maji taka ambapo uko karibu na nyumba 
yako amb apo iko karibu na biashara yako  na kupitia hiyo nikiendelea hivyo itakuwa imefunikwa 
na mvua ikinyesha maji itakuwa imekwama na manyumba yatabomoka na pia biashara yako 
itakuwa imeathiriwa .  
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 7 Tukifanya hivyo basi tutakuwa Mombasa mambo ya mafuriko na mambo ya manyumba 
kubomolewa n a maji itakuwa ni jambo ambapo tumeliweka katika kaburi la sahau . Kwa hivyo 
singependa kuwachosha Waheshimiwa maana jambo hili ni jambo ambapo ni wazi  na nashukuru 
kwamba Waheshimiwa nyinyi mumesafiri, Mungu amewajalia mumesafiri hapa na kule  na 
mukaona miji ambayo watu raia wako na uadilifu wa hali ya juu na pia serikali imejukumika 
katika kazi zake, na miji hiyo ni miji misafi . Kwa hivyo sisi hatukuzaliw a ama sisi hatu abudu a 
lesser God  kushinda hao n a pia sisi ni wanadamu kama ha o na pia sis i tunaweza sababisha 
Mombasa iwe bora ama iwe hi o miji ambapo tukienda kutembelea tuna tamani. Ahsanteni sana 
Waheshimiwa , ahsanteni sana Spika naomba niunge mkono katika hoja hii. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Solomon 
Ngugi.  
 
Hon. Ngugi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii. Nitangulize kumshukuru 
Mwenyezi Mungu. Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi nimesimama hapa kuun ga mkono na nina 
uhakika una ufahamu kamili kuwa mimi ni mwakilishi wa jamii ye nye kuishi n a ulemavu ndani 
ya Mombasa. Hili jambo anavyosema Mheshi miwa mwenzangu hii mitaro inapo jaa inawapa 
changamoto wale wenye nguvu zao kwa mlemavu ni mara nne zaidi na muna  ufahamu kamili . 
Kunao wale wanaotumia baiskeli, wengine wanatembea kwa magoti , wengine wanajiburuta chini 
na inapokuwa maji taka yametapakaa sehemu wanayok aa ni hatari sana kwa afya yao . Mimi 
niwaombe Waheshimiwa wenzangu, kwa unyenyekevu sehemu un ayotoka najua kila mmoja 
wenu hizo kata ndogo munazotoka zinao watu wenye kuish i na ulemavu , hili jambo tulitieni 
mkazo lisiishie hapa. Lipitishwe kwenye hili Bunge na lif uatiliziwe mpaka vitendo vitendeke 
kama alivyosema Mheshimiwa mwenzangu  yule mwenye kuishi hiyo nyumb a yeye ndio macho 
wa ule mtaro , yeye  ndio atakae  ulinda na yeye ndio atakae  haribu . Ikiwa atakubali mtu 
mwengine atupe taka pale aziwache zirundikane mpaka kufungike hasara itaanza kwake yeye na 
majirani zake waliokua hapo ndani. Sasa ni yeye  ni jukumu liwe kwake yeye maanake yeye 
usalama unaanza kwake yeye kama ni a fya nzuri ataan za kupata yeye i kiwa itatokea ni 
kipindupindu hiyo nyumba yake ik o karibu na mtaro ndio itaanza,  hana uwezo ni apige ripoti 
maanake tunajua sehemu zetu ziko katika tumeshukuru sehemu nyingi tunazotoka ziko sehemu 
ambapo wako maaskari wetu wa Kaunti ukifikisha ujumbe huo kuwa huyo mtu anatupa takataka 
kwenye mitaro ataleta athar i katika mitaro yetu watachuku a hatua . Sina mengi Mheshimiwa 
Spika yangu ni hayo. Ahsante.   
  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes, seconder of the Motion. 
Honourable  Makanga.  
 
Hon. Makanga: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika n a mimi  nasimama kuunga mkono hoja hii  
iliyoletwa na Mwakilishi Wadi wa Mikindani , mchungaji ambae ni mmoja peke yake katika 
Bunge hili . Mheshimiwa Spika katika mazungumzo yak e alisema mitaro ya maji taka l akini 
ningeomba labda Kiongozi wa Wengi, Wallah Bin Wallah wa Bunge hili Mheshimiwa 
Mwamwiri labda atufafanulie storm water  kwa sababu maji taka nafikiri ni ile ina beba sewerage . 
Kwa hivyo nafikiri kwa saba bu inafaa k wenda kwa kumbukumbu  ikiwa sa wa n dio iwez e 
kufanyiwa kazi kisawa,  labda Kiongozi wa Wengi utuelekeze ni maji taka ama maji ya mvua 
maana storm water  nimeangalia storm kwa Kiswahili inasema tufani . Sasa hiyo t ufani naona sasa 
inanishtua inakaa ile ya filisti  na Izraeli , kwa hivyo tuongoze kwanza kiongozi kwa Kiswahili 
alafu tuendelee tafadhali. Mheshimiwa Spika naomba.  
 
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 8 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Makanga , please proceed in 
building your Motion because you are out of order!  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika  ni Kiswahil i kinanitatiza kwa sababu 
kutafsiri kidogo kizungu kwa  Kiswahili ndio changa moto ila hata hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika 
nasimama ku unga mkono hoja hii mia fil mia Mheshimiwa Spika nikizingatia yale ambayo 
yametajwa hapa ni masuala muhimu sana.  Mheshimiwa Spika suala la kwanza kabisa ni 
alivyoelekeza na alivyoomba kwamba Bunge hili lipitishe kwamba wenye majumba ambayo 
yako mkabala na mitaro hii ya maji ya mvua wachukue jukumu.  Pili, namuunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu umepata uc hafuzi wa mi taro ile kwa mara nyingi ufanyika na 
aidha wapangaji walioko kwa majumba yale ama yule ambaye amejenga ile nyumba 
hajawawekea wale wapangaji mahali pa kuweza kutupa taka zao na mitaro ile inapojaa lalama 
huwa zinarudishwa kwa Mwakilishi Wadi na Wa di Administrator  lakini wakati wanachukua 
kodi wanaofaidika ni wale wenye yale majumba Mheshimiwa Spika.  Suala lengine ambalo 
Mheshimiwa ame omba ni kwamba idara inayohusika iweze kuangazia wale ambao walijenga juu 
ya mi taro; hili ni  donda sugu ndani ya Mombasa na leo hii mahali popote ambapo utapata maji 
yamefurika ukiangalia katika mipangilio ya majumba utapata kuna mmo ja alijenga katika njia ya 
maji. Sasa maji yakija yanakosa kutembea kwa njia inayostahili na siku zote maji lazima 
yatembee na yakikosa njia yake Mheshimiwa Spika b ado yatatafuta njia ya kuweza kupitia.   
Kwa  mfano , Mheshimiwa Spika katika Wadi yangu nishakwenda mim i na maofisa 
kutoka kwa idara ya mipangilio na majumba katika Kaunti hii na wak aenda wakaon a mahali 
ambapo hao wenyewe walipeana idhini ya hiyo nyumba kujengwa . Mheshimiwa Spika cha 
kushangaza nilipowauliza  maswali mbele ya mwenye nyumba walichanganyikiwa na wewe 
unaweza jijazia kile unafikiria kwa akili yako Mheshimiwa Spika naona umejishika vizuri ndio 
hicho hicho ambacho kilifanyika. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa anapoomba 
kwamba yale mavaranda ama majumba ambayo yamejengwa kupitiliza ya kazid i viwango vya 
ploti yao wakajenga kwa njia za maji kulingana na sheria wakajeng a mahali amb apo ingetupea 
urahisi wa kusafisha mitaro na sasa imekuwa ngumu kusafisha kwa sababu wamejenga majumba 
juu ya mitaro suluhu . Mheshimiwa Spika ni Hoja ya Mheshimiwa wa Mikindani anayesema na 
ambaye tunajua alipigiwa kura nyingi zaidi ndani ya Jomvu iweze kupitishwa na Bunge hili 
tuweze  kuendeleza mbele ili tuone inafanyiwa kazi.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pamoja 
na wana Chaani na nguvu zangu zote a mbazo ziko ndani ya mwili na  za kiroho  nasimama 
kuunga mkono Hoja hii. Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Makanga the 
newest Member in the Speaker’s Panel...  
 
[Applause ] 
 
And I hope you will be followin g the practices of the Assembly  thank you. Hon ourable  
Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor: Thank you, Mr. Speaker , I stand to support the Motion.  Mr. Speaker Sir , as 
you are aware the government has announced for us that we are going to be having El Nino that 
is coming up, thou gh the El Nino has not reached us but we can see the signs that we have rains 
that are comi ng and the rains that we are having nowadays are not the ones that we used to have, 
there is climate change with us right now and where I come from in my Ward Mkomani . 
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 9 I can see there are some things that are going on d rainage , but Mr. Speaker as you know 
in Mombasa when we get the rains,  we have the problems even if it is a short time there is a lot 
of water on our roads that means that there are existing drainages along the road . But I think 
without doing maintenance that is why we a re getting a  lot of water on the roads but for now that 
we have come up with this Motion I think it is going to help us in the Department that is 
concerned that before the El Nino  that are coming up that we are going to do our diligently duty 
to clean up the drainages because Mr. Speaker as we are aware  that the rains that are now with us 
in the world are not the ones that we are used to , right now we have seen in Israel T eleviv . We 
have seen in other parts of the world that here we are having a weather c hange in the  world so if 
we are not going to take precautions to have our drainages clean,  I think we are going to have the 
same thing, we are in a small island and please let us do our diligently duty to clean our 
drainages. In those few remar ks I say thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Mwalimu 
Juma?  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii, mi mi 
nimesimama kuu nga mkono mswada huu ulioletwa na rafiki yangu kipenzi Jac ktone Madialo. 
Mheshim iwa Spika ka ma tunavyojua sisi waswahili tunamisemo yetu ya kwamba tujitahadhari 
kabla ya hatari kwa hivyo hatari inakuja juu tulitangaziwa kutakuwa na mvua kubwa ya El -nino 
na ukiangalia mitaru yetu, mashimo yetu yamejaa uchafu eidha michanga, makaratasi, chupa 
mawe , nguo , pampers vitu vingi tu.  Kwa hivyo huu ni wakati mw afaka wa huu Mswada uweze 
kutekelezwa ili ile program  yetu ya wale vijana wetu Mombasa ni yangu iweze kurudis hwa ili 
hii kazi ya kuzibua yale mashimo na mitaru waweze kufanya kwa haraka iw ezekanavyo.  Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika na ahsante Mheshimiwa Madialo kwa kuona mbele kama twiga. 
Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, the Leader Majority?  
 
The Leader Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mheshimiwa Spika nim esimama kuunga mkono Hoja hii i li niendelee nitarudi katika ombi la 
ndugu yangu wa Chaani aliyetaka ufasaha katika lugha teule ya hususan jambo hili ambalo 
mdhamin i wa hoja hii amenukuliwa akisema maji taka akimaanisha storm water . Mheshimiwa 
Spika katika h ii kuna mambo mawili; kwanza maana halisi tukiteu a kutokana na kiengereza 
storm  itakuja katika maana maji ya dho ruba ama maji ya tofani yaani yenye uzito zaidi, lakini 
kusudio la Mheshimi wa katika swala hili la maji taka yeye alikusudia haikupaswa kuwa maji 
taka lakini kifasaha ni maji machafu. Maji machafu ni maji ambayo chanzo chake ni maji asili 
kama mto ama mvua , asili yake ni maji yanatokana na mvua. Kwa hivyo n i maji asili lakini 
yanapodondoka  na kutembea katika mitaru huweza kuchanganyik ana na taka taka za aina 
mbalimbali .  
Hivyo basi maji yale yanageuka yanaku a maji machafu , iwapo yataweza kukingwa kabla 
kuchanganyika na uchafu yanabakia kuwa maji masafi kama ilivyo katika baadhi y a mito.  Lakini 
tunapokuja katika maji taka  Mheshimiwa Spika lazima liwe limech anganyikana na shughuli za 
nyumbani na kwenye viwanda na taasisi hus usan yenye mwingilio na chooni ndio hayo tunayaita 
maji taka. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa kat ika ufasaha ilipaswa kuwa maji machafu , Mheshimiwa 
Spika nikiendelea katika ku unga mkono h oja hii ni jambo la busara kuwa ipo haja ya 
kuwahi miza wananchi wetu, jamii zetu kuwa na utamaduni wa  kujijali na kuchukua hatua wao 
pasi na kutegemea mtu wa pili ama serikali kuu .  
October 1 8, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor  Page 10 Mheshimiwa Spika , uchafu huu unaouchafu a maji asili yanatokana na shughuli zetu na 
jinsi tunavyojenga katika majumba, haidhuru au haigharimu mtu yoyote kuhakikisha kuwa 
sehemu anayoiwakilisha yeye, kwa sehemu an ayoishi yeye amechukua hatua ya k wanza kuweza 
kusafisha binafsi katika seh emu ile na yeye kuwa chachu ya mwengin e lakini ana yemf uata 
kuweza kusafisha.  Hivyo basi hata katika serikali itatumia rasil mali kidogo katika ufuatilizi na 
kuhakikisha ya kwamba hali ile imeweza kuboreshwa na gharama ile ya ziada itaweza kutumika 
katika maswala ya kuboresha za hanati zet u, katika maswala ya kuboresha taasisi zetu za kielimu 
itazidi kuboresha maswala yetu ya mataa ya barabarani na kukabili swala la utovu wa usalama 
ikiwa kama jamii yale madogo tunaweza k uchukua hatua.  Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono na 
niwaambie Waheshimiwa wenza katik a kuunga mko no hoja hii ili pia tuchukue hatua sisi 
wenyewe kule tunakotoka na jamii tunazo wakilisha na kuanza hamasa hii ya  kutekeleza hoja hii 
kabla hata serikali ku weka sheria madhubuti yakuweza kuwakabili watakaokuwa wanakwepa 
amakuvunja hali hii Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahanste Mheshimiwa Spika naunga mkono.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani) : Thank you, I now call upon the mover of 
the Motion to reply on his Motion.   
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I would like to take this opportunity to thank 
the Ho nourable Members for the over whel ming  support tow ards this Motion , I do not have much 
to add because much has been covered. Thank you  very much Honourable Members for that 
support.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable Members , I now stand  to put 
the question that the Motion as moved by Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo be considered by this 
House as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ]  
 
Honourable  Members , the Motion is adopted by this House.  Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable Members , the House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 18th October , 2023 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11 :03a.m . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 