September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday,  17th September , 2019  
The House met at 2 :58p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
  PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Have your seats . Yes Cle rk. 
STATEMENT  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON CONCERNS IN THE DEPARTMENT  
 Yes Hon. Prischillah , Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and P ublic 
works.  
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Bwana Spika. Taarifa  hii ilikuwa ije katika Nyumba hii s iku ya leo 
lakini nimeombwa na W izara husika kuwa ni wapewe mda kidogo kwa sababu wote wahusika 
wawili walifiliwa na wameondoka na hawako na hakuna ambaye ana yeweza kupeana R ipoti 
kikamilifu kuli ko Engineer  na Engineer  Migosi ambao walikuwa wanataka jam bo hili 
walichukulie wao wenyewe  kwa sababu walisema hawataki wapeane wajibu huu na R ipoti ije 
katika Nyumba hii ikiwa haiko sawa.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): What is it Hon. Murfad?  
Hon. Mur fad Amur:  Mr. Speaker I think this  may be is the hundred th time when we request 
for that S tatement, we are not saying that it is  an individual should, it is a Department, there is a 
Department . This job does  not belong to somebody Mr. Speaker , it is a D epartment so being told 
that the two people have lost their families or what, they did  not go with the office, this is m y 
fifth time on this floor the D epartment has an office , if they die today, does the mandate of that 
office also die? No, of course no t so we should not be told that if a D epartmental head is not 
there then there is no response to that issue Mr. Speaker Sir.  

September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  With all due respect Mr. Speaker we should not be taken for granted, it is becoming a day 
in day out problem to be told he has gone ov erseas, whenever they go, they don’t go with these 
offices, they still have these offices intact there…  
(Interruption ) 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): There is a Point of order, yes use your 
microphone . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri kid ogo nimechanganyikiwa, 
Mheshimiwa ana yezungumza ndie mwenye Taarifa  alieleta, ndie mwenye hiyo  Taarifa  alioileta 
Kwa hiyo  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri tuf uate sheria vile zinavyotakikana.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Murfad  Amur you are the one who  
requested for this Statement ? Mheshimiwa Chief Whip.  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti mimi ndio nilieleta Taarifa  hii 
lakini Mheshimiwa Amur ameweza kuleta amepatia  taarifa  kwa Nyumba hii na ni kwa kweli 
kwamba si mara ya kwanza kuleta maono yake kwamba Taarifa  inapokuja, haijalishi kwamba 
mtu amefiliwa au mtu ana harusi au mtu amesafiri ndio iwe chanzo cha mtu  kutoleta majibu 
katika Jumba hili . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, kwamba ilikuwa ni  Taarifa  anatufahamisha sisi 
kama Jumba ili tuweze k ufahamu hilo na sio mara ya kwanza ni dhahiri shahiri kwamba iko 
katika kumbukumbu  kwamba Mheshimiwa Amur amekuwa akiongelea kuhusu swala hili  kila 
mara kwa mara Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. M imi nimeleta Taarifa  lakini hadi kufikia sasa  
sijaridhika na majibu h ayo kwa sababu huo sio muafaka wa  kibunge Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Chief Whip.  Yes Hon. Milka . 
Hon. Moraa: Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, if the Hon. Member went to seek for 
information and that is the kind of re sponse she was given that there is no information coming up 
because the boss is not around, she actually has just brought what she got from the office so we 
need to give her time to get the proper response. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. M walimu ):  Order Hon. Members! Y es Chief Whip.  
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti hili ni Bunge na vile 
tunavyoenda hatuendi sawa kama Bunge ni lazima tuweze kuambiana ukweli. Waziri asipokuwa 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti haijalishi kwamba utaathi ri utenda kazi wa Idara  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti. Kwanza hili sw ali niliwahi kuuliza hata kama W aziri hayuko kuna Chief O fficer , 
Chief O fficer  hayuko kuna Director wa Roads  pia nae anahusika na hivi tayari yuko katika ofisi 
Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti lakini swala kama hili tunaambiwa kwamba watu hawako ofisini ni 
chanzo cha majibu kutokuwa mahala kama hapa Mheshimiwa Mwenyeki ti sio sawa kama Bunge 
na sisi W aheshimiwa sote tunao husika na swala kama hili, ahsante sana.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Amr iya Juma.  
Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you M r. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish there are some loud 
consultations I a m unable to address the House Mr. Speaker.  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Amur consult on a low tone , yes Hon 
Amriya proceed.  
Hon. Amriya Ju ma: Mr. Speaker I wish to state that when  you look at the nature of the 
Statement from Hon. Kitula it actually requires a comprehensive response because it talks 
about ...,  am on the floor and am distracted, but my point is, when you look at the nature of that 
Statement it requires a response from the year 2016/2017, 2017/2018, 2018/2019.  
Mr. Speaker yes the law does not apply in a vacuum, when one is not  in an office  the 
office should be operational but in every Department alive to the fact , in every D epartment the re 
are office holders in every D epartment and in law we recognize there is an element of force (??), 
force  (??) Mr. Speaker it is a principle in l aw that where in situation where unforeseen 
circumstances happen that substantiate that one person i s unable to perform their part of the 
bargain so this is my fellow Hon. Sheila has just stated tha t here the owner of the office w as 
bereaved and it was unforeseen that  is why this comprehensive report cannot come to the House . 
I think Mr. Speaker it  is reasonable to give it a benefit of do ubt based on that principle of l aw 
that in circumstances there are force  (??) can enable a contract not be performed Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi.  
Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speak er Sir. My  fellow Chairman for Health was actually 
trying to  give a joke here. I have keenly looked at the arguments especially how the Chair has 
argued Mr. Speaker Sir and sometimes it  is very important to listen carefully, becaus e if I look at 
what Hon. Chief W hip, this Statement actually if I look at it, it  is a very serious and 
comprehensive and it act ually requires a lot of knowhow . It is not a matter that can just be joked 
around with  Mr. Speaker S ir and am sure when this particular information comes to this House, 
am 100 per cent  sure that it i s going to  affect this House , it i s going to affect almo st all the 
Members in this House and therefore I will actu ally join my fellow Member here  who has said 
that let us for give them a benefit o f doubt and let them give us a very comprehensive report on 
this. Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you .  
(Interruption)  
Hon. Murfad Amur , I think yo u have already reacted to this S tatement, so let us follow 
procedures of the House. Hon. A mur let  us proceed , Hon. Mwamwiri?  
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mhesh imiwa Spika.  Mhes himiwa Spika nadhani 
ingekuwa mwafaka kwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kuepukana na changamoto zinazomkabili 
kama idara ingenukuu majibu yale kirasmi na yeye akawakilisha kwa Bu nge kama rasmi ni ili 
isionekane kwamba  anayotamka na kuyasema ni yake yeye wala hayatoki kule. Angeandikiwa 
angalau mistari mbili ; kutoka kwa I dara ya kwamba mazingira ya taarifa inaonekana Bungeni 
yako hivi , tunaomba anga a mda f ulani kuyatekeleza inavyos tahiki, yeye asome tu na awe na 
nukuu ya kwamba haya ameyachukua kwa Idara ili kusiwe na kigegezi ya kushurutishwa 
kusema yale ambayo yeye hayajui wala hayawezi na jibu alilopewa kule liko tofauti,  kwende 
wako Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ni mwafaka,  kwa Wenye V iti wakipewa kauli za mdomo 
wazikatae waje na kauli zikiwa zimeandikwa kwa sababu taarifa hii iliyoko ikiwa imeandikwa . 
Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante.  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Sumba Bwire?  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker indeed am aware that E ngineer 
Migosi lost his dad and whichever way, we do not have response with us so even if you take the 
whole day debating it, it may be not be able to bring the response. What I would wish to ask the 
Chairperson is to tell this House when wi ll the response be ready , maybe? That  is all thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Raphael Bwire.  Hon. Chair of 
Transport, when sh ould we expect a comprehensive R eport from the Department?  
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri nikipewa wiki ijayo Jumatano  
wakati wa saa nane itakuwa ni wakati mwafaka niweze kujibu haya maswali, ikiwa nimeomba 
hio wiki moja naf ikiri itakuwa nimeweza kupata kama itakuwa nimepata majibu.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is well noted that ne xt week Wednesday 
afternoon, we  will expect a compreh ensive response concerning this S tatement and the Assembly 
Hon. Members and Chairs, the Assembly will not tolerate on a verbal responses in future 
coming, so make sure whenever you bri ng back a response make sure it i s a written response to 
this Hon ourable H ouse. Yes, Clerk?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON  THE STATUS OF STREET  LIGHTING IN THE COUNTY   
Yes Hon. Chair C ommittee on Tra nsport, Infrastructure and Public Works? Prischillah  
Mumba.  
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika hata hii nilipata majibu hayo ambayo niliyo 
yazungumza kuwa nitapewa pamoja na hii ambayo ni ya kwanza.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Thoya?  
Hon.  Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru umenipa wakati huu . Nikiangalia karatasi 
iliyoko hapa akisimama akizungumza ni yeye tena asimame azungumze kwa kifupi na habari ni 
hizo hizo kusema wamefiliwa, mimi hekima yangu ilikuwa naona utuambie twende nyumbani, 
manake hata huyo unayetufuata ni yeye na tayari tumeambiwa hawa watu wamefiliwa sasa 
tutaambiwa lipi lengine?  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya you are  out of order!  So Hon. 
Prischillah Mumba we will give you also, Hon. Amur anything to say?  
Hon.  Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker I arise again to say we are being taken for granted, I 
will repeat it today and the day after tomorrow, this House is being taken for granted nothing is 
serious because again this is the same D epartment we are being accused of thi ngs that are not 
being done fairly. T he questions that were brought in this Hon ourable  House we went for recess 
for a whole month, their offices never went for recess Hon. Speaker, let a spade be called a 
spade, we want the truth whether we perform or we d o not perform in this Hon ourable  House . 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Amur. Y es Hon. Pri schillah the 
House will give you a weeks’ time for you to respond on this issue raised concerning the status 
of street light ing in the C ounty.  
If am not wrong the person who rose wanted to know the cost of maintenance that h as 
been going round in all the Wards and bring a comprehensive R eport that will  be detailed enough 
for the Honourable  House to understand better .  
 
 Hon. Mum ba:  (Off mic rophone)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay in a weeks’ time we will need the 
response. Yes Clerk next order?  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON TRANSPORTS , INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . MUMBA ON THE STATUS OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTE M AT BOMU 
CATHOLIC CHURCH IN A IRPORT WARD  
Yes Hon. Prischillah Mumba, Statement on Status of Storm Water Drainage System at 
Bomu Catholic Church in Airport Ward?  
Hon. Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika … 
(Hon. Mumba read h er response)  
Mr. Speaker Sir , I wish to give the following S tatement response on the status of storm 
water drainage system at Bomu Catholic Church.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, the referred storm water system was constructed by the defunct 
Municipal Council using Worl d Bank funds under the Kenya Municipal Programme. The 
project was implemented by the then Ministry of Local Government.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, the contractor left the last branch of the drainage open with depths 
ranging between 600mm to 1200mm, which poses cross ing challenges especially to 
school going children.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, the Department of Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works is 
planning to have the drainage covered using concrete paving slabs to enhance safety for 
the pedestrians and also protect th e drainage from solid waste dumping. The works will 
begin in the next two weeks .  
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes the Chief Whip is up?  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti.  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ni tasema vile Mheshimiwa Amur alivyosema kwamba Bunge hili linachukuliwa 
kimzaha kabisa na lazima tuweze kuongea ukweli ili tuweze kujua panapovuja ni wapi? 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti saa hizi Taarifa  hii nambari tisa  imetoka kwenye idara hiyo hiyo lakini 
Taarifa  namba ri saba  na nane  pia hazijajibiwa . Sasa hii H oja kutoka kwa idara hiyo hiyo ijibiwe 
lakini saba, nane  isijibiwe ! Tusemeni kweli sisi ni W aheshimiwa tukienda kwa njia hii tutakuwa 
hatuendi tukiheshimika.  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 Tusidanganyane  Taarifa  namba ri saba , Taarifa  nambari nane  sisi sote tunahusika lakini 
namba ri tisa  pia inatoka katika idara hiyo hiyo imeweza kuwajibika . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
hatuendi sawa na idara inachukulia Bunge la Mombasa sio sawa na iheshimu Bunge letu…  
 
(Interruption)  
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Point o f Order Mr. Speaker!  Mr. Speaker you know you are the 
Chair you have made a ruling and now if a Member is rising again revisiting the issues Hon. 
Speaker I think is very unfair…  
(Consultations)  
What I was trying to say Hon. Speaker I think you should be re spected as much as we 
may differ on what you have made the ruling so I was just telling my colle ague that is very 
unfair since the Speaker has made a ruling now he is revisiting the same issue that you have 
made a ruling . So it means until now he is talkin g about that so Mr. Speaker I think this is 
incorrect and I think they should respect your ruling. Thank you.   
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes well Hon. Amur?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker on the issue of Statement Number nine  you had no t 
made any ruling, the Chair just read the Statement that we do  not have copies ; I neither have a 
copy n or Members but maybe one or two.  Mr. Speaker we do  not have copies...  
(Loud consultations ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Order Hon. M embers, Order! 
Order! Hon. Members!   
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker you had not made any ruling,  the Hon. Member just 
read a Statement from the Executive and this is the same thing am saying this House is being 
taken for granted how can number seven , eight not be responded and number  responded to?  No 
Mr. Speaker we are saying no to this.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Chief Whip I think you had already 
reacted on this.  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ni taarifa Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti saa hizi w anatupatia hii lakini chunguza W aheshimiwa wa jinsia ya kike pekee yao 
katika Bunge hili ndio wana  majibu  haya Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti katika Nyumba hii,  
(Loud consultations ) 
Saa hi i ndio wananipatia hii...   
(Consultations ) 
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Hon. Members  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Hii sio haki Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, hii sio haki…  
(Interruption)  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Hon. Members Order !  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Sio katika  Bunge hili tusidanganyane…  
(Loud consultations ) 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Hon. Members Order !  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Tusid anganyane hakuna hii W aheshimiwa wa jinsia ya 
kike pekee yake ndio wana  majibu  katika Jumba hili , hakuna Mheshimiw a Mwenyekiti usikubali 
kutumia K iti chako vibaya…  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Hon. Members Order  
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Faith ndio ananipatia saa hii katika meza 
yangu hakuna Memba yoyote aliyekuwa na h aya majibu  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ; tusipelekane 
hivyo hiyo ni picha mbaya katika Bunge letu , ni picha mbaya kabisa katika Bunge letu tusikubali 
kabisa hiyo.  
(Loud consultations ) 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Order! Order! Hon. Members Or der!  
(Loud consultations ) 
Hon. Members Order!  Hon. Members you are out of order! Hon. Members have your 
seats!  Hon. Members have your seats! Hon. Members have your seats!   
(Loud Consultations)  
Hon. Ibrahim have your seat! Hon. Hamida have your seat!  Hon. Members there  is a 
response before this House and let the Hon. Mem ber who brought this Statement respond first if 
he is satisfie d with the response for the Honourable  House to proceed. Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
(Loud Consultations)  
Hon. Omondi:  Okay thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker Sir…  
(Loud Consultations)  
Am being interrupted…  
(Loud Consultations)  
Mr. Speaker Sir am being interrupted I need your protection ! 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed .  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Hon. Omondi : Okay am going to react ; am the one Mr. Spe aker who indeed requested 
for this particular Statement and indeed this situation is in my W ard and before I react to this 
particular Statement I would just like to say  that it is very wrong to purport…  
(Loud Consultations)  
Mr. Speaker Sir it is very wrong  to purport that these Reports were only given to ladies 
because again it is not the Speaker or not even the Chair who gives these Reports, these Reports 
are given at the entrance. So I fail to understand …  
(Applause)  
 If it happened that all these  Reports  are only given to the ladies then again maybe it is just 
a coincidence or something might have happened that is number one ; number two Mr. Speaker I 
would like to say that I am very much contented with this response only that what I wanted let it 
only be on the P aper. Mr. Speaker,  I hope that the way the Department through the Chair have 
communicated it will be so, because you have heard that in two weeks time they will be working 
on that particular Project….  
(Applause)  
 Mr. Speaker I am very sorry the rea son that I am emphasizing on this  is because this issue 
or this drainage has already caused deaths . As I said last time we have already lost at least two 
young children on the same drainage. So I do not have any problem with this response but…  
(Applause)  
 But what I only want that let us have implementation, let it be implemented the way it has 
been put. Thank you.  
(Applause)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim. Hon. Members I think 
the Member who brought this Statement does not oppose  what has been responded, but what he 
wants to see is the implementation of the response. So in two weeks time Hon. Ibrahim will be 
waiting for a Statement in this Hon ourable  House showing if whatever  the Department has 
responded  is being implemented. Yes Clerk? Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika sheria ni sheria. Sheria imekuja umeulizwa 
swali, Taarifa  na kujibiwa  Taarifa;  ikiwa Taarifa  imejibiwa ni aidha uwe na  swala mbadala  ama 
kuwe kuna hatua itachukuliwa. Lakini  swali  Mheshi miwa Spika lishajibiwa nafikiri itakua ni 
makosa kuweka sharti ya kusema baada ya wiki mbili tena inafuatiliwa tena. Nafikiri 
Mheshimiwa Spika hapa nataka tufanyeni mambo ambayo yanakwenda kwa mujibu wa sheria…  
(Interruption)  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwali mu): Hon. Mohamed Hatimy I think I was clear 
enough that the Hon. Member did not oppose the response but what he said is he wants to see the 
implementation of the response in  two weeks time. And that is why I advised the Hon. Member 
if in case or in the ne xt weeks he might come to this Honourable  House and question the 
implementation of this response, b ut I did not tell him to as k another Statement or another 
question . 
It will depend on the Hon. Member from Airport Ward if whatever that he has raised has 
been implemented ; it will depend on the Hon. Member to appreciate or ask a questi on as to why 
or to show the Honourable  House whatever that is transpiring in his Ward.  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nakubaliana lakini hio itakua ni marudio, na marudio 
tukiangalia Kanuni za Bunge  ziko wazi kabisa nafikiri nambari 46  iko wazi kabisa, swali 
lishaingia kwenye kikao hiki halafu ukawa utakua unalipeleka na kulipeleka na yeye asharidhika 
na lile jibu al ilopatiwa, useme baada ya wiki mbili arudi tena nafikiri itakua ni kinyum e cha 
sheria Mheshimiwa Spika. Angalia  Kanuni za Bunge nambari 46 inasema nini….  
(Interruption)  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok Hon. Hatimy we have heard you but w hat I 
have directed in this Honourable  House will stand. I said the Hon. Member has acc epted the 
response and it is up to the Hon. Member to question the implementation if he will, if he will not 
question then they will be no repetition of anything. Yes Clerk?  
(Interruption)  
Yes Hon. Thoya, what is it?  
Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I want your gu idance and a way forward on how we will move 
in the near future ; if somebody requests for a Statement from either Committee, is he the one to 
show the satisfaction or should there be interjection from other Members who did not request 
that Statement? Becau se the same will repeat itself and whatever you are seeing are the signs of 
the near future. It is just very sad whereby Hon. Omondi did a request and if you look it is related 
to his Ward; t hen Mr. Omondi is not given the opportunity and other people get in, just take the 
total show the same will repeat itself and we need your Solomonic guidance in this. I do not want 
the same to happen to me tomorrow if at all Hon. Omondi has requested for a Statement, is he 
the one to show the satisfaction or other Hon. Members maul that kick on his behalf. Thank you.  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Thoya. On the same note, the 
Speaker of the sitting of tomorrow morning will respond on what you have raised. It will be  a 
written response to this Honourabl e House on how we are going to manage our Sta tements and 
orderly in this  House. Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ndio nizungumze juu ya Statement , sheria za Statement  ni 
nini? Wakati huo huo Mheshimiwa Spika tukiangalia hii Order Paper  ya leo imeuliz a Statement  
ujenzi wa barabara   2016 /2017, 2017 /2018, 2018 /2019 ndani ya Nyumba hii.  
September 17, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           80 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Hapa mimi kama Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha niliuliza swali nikaleta orodha za 
Miradi ya Kaunti,  tukaziweka Mheshimiwa Spika zikaja hapa tena ni  kuregelea  chini ya Kanuni  
za Bunge nambari 46  at the same time Statement Nambari nane  pia ni vile vile utaona kuwa ni 
marudio tena ambayo yote ni kinyume cha sheria Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo twataka 
uamuzi ukifanywa Mheshimiwa iwe itachukua  vitu vyote hivi Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsa nte. 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Faith?  
Hon. Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speaker. If the Report of Statement No.7 was brought in 
the House, the question which was asked in Order  No. 8 was totally different; s o it is good if the 
Hon. Member can go  in the reference and see how the question was. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok thank you. I think I have already ruled that 
from what has transpired and what Hon. Renson Thoya the Speaker of tomorrow’s sitting will 
respond on how we are going to manage the Statements of the day of this Hon ourable  House. 
Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Having there being no other Business the House stands adjourned until Wednesday, 18th 
September , 2019 at 10:00 a.m.  
The House rose at 3:34 p.m. 
     
 
 
 
      
   
 
 
 