October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday , 11th October,  2018  
The House met at 2:36p .m. 
 
(The Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  we may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
(Consultation s) 
 
QUORUM  
 
Serjeant -At-Arms can  you ring the bell.  
 
(Serjeant -At-Arms rung the q uorum bell) 
(Members entered the Chambers)   
 
Yes Clerk I think we have the quorum now we can continue. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
Yes Hon. Moses Aran can you please give the respon se. 
 
Hon. Aran : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir , I kindly request you give me one 
week so that I can submit the report; a lso in addition there is something that I have noticed 
actually today I went to see the County Executive Member  my Minister in c harge of Youth, 
Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs and I noticed that the response that they are supposed to  
give us the y received it on Monday so it  means that yesterday was holiday and they did not  
have enough time to compile the report so that I can c ome and present in here . We need to 
find where the problem is , we need to sit down or you need to give your directive so that in 
future we do not incur these issues  as per presenting report inside here. Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Moses if I may get it right  I think you are the 
Chairman of that Committee so are you telling this House that you do not know where your 
Commi ttee stands?  

October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 You do not know about our Clerks, so how am I supposed to give you a directive of your 
own Com mittee? It is your Committee which is supposed to submit those question s to the 
CEC Member . So what directive do you want from me?  
 
Hon. Aran : Mr. Speaker I stand to be corrected or to be informed but what I know if 
a question or any issue has  been raised inside here it goes to t he Clerk’s office then from 
there it has to be delivered to the.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : It does not go to the Clerks ’ office;  if it goes to the 
Clerk s office then why are we giving it to the relevant Committee , it goes to the Committee 
then the Committee is the o ne who  sits down and see if you have the answer if you do not 
have the answer you ask the Minister . 
 
Hon. Aran : Mr. Speaker I still stand to be informed , my Committee as Chair I do not 
deliver the lette r to the relevant Minister in this case to my Waziri , it is being done by our 
Clerks  so that was why I was ask ing we need to know where there is a  problem because when 
I went to seek…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : The Clerk again falls under you because you are the 
Chairman of that Committee , right?  
 
Hon. Aran : Yes Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So maybe if you are saying that your Clerk is not 
performing his work then you should report the Clerk to the Senior Clerk.  
 
Hon. Aran : Ok, I will inquire that Mr. Speaker but  that is the report that I received 
that they only received that information on Monday so they are supposed to res pond back  and 
they asked that I give them enough time to compile a detailed report and then send it back t o 
the Committee.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi . 
 
Hon.  (Ms.) Chireri : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Langu ni huzuni na sikitiko 
kubwa kwa vijana wetu ; Mheshimiwa Spika “Ngoma ya watoto huwa haikeshi ” ndio 
tukaambiwa hivi. Kamati hii inaongozwa na watoto watupu ndio maana twapata hizi shida. 
Kwanza Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa hii Kamati mwanzo ichanganywe…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kibwana . 
 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker I think my co lleague is not using 
Parliamentary words, I think Hon. Moses Aran is a Chair and also a Hon.  Member . 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 So I think he should use good language and also respect the Chair I think he is a 
Member  of that Committee and the Chairs must be respected Hon. Speaker. T hank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi, are you a Member  of that 
Committee?  
 
Hon. Chireri: Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ni rafiki wa hii Kamati lakini si 
Mwanakamati na maneno niliozungumza ni msemo , “Ngoma ya watoto haikeshi” . Kwa 
hivyo mnenaj i aliyenena Mheshimiwa mwenzangu naona ata tathmini katika akili yake halafu 
atajijibu ni kwa sababu gani nimezungumza maneno haya. Mheshimiwa Spika hili sw ala si la 
leo si la jana , ni mapendekezo yangu ya  kuwa Mwenyekiti angekuwa ameifanya hii kazi 
akatule tea hili jawabu lakini mimi nahuzunika  sana na Mheshimiwa Ramla pale alikuweko 
anataka hili jawabu alipate lakini ni kama ambaye pana mchezo wa paka na panya hapa. 
Mheshimiwa Spika hii Kamati ni lazima uiangalie mwanzo kama nilivyokwambia muda ni 
mrefu na umepitwa na wakati Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Moses Aran your prayers are granted so you have 
been given another one week you can bring back the response.  
 
(Applause)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes again Hon. Moses Aran you have another response;  
I hope you have this response or still you need the time,  yes? 
 
Hon. Aran:  Mr. Speaker I humbly request you also give me one week to respond  to 
all the reports that were directed to my Committee. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Aran I think there's a problem with your 
Committee if I may not be wrong, when were you given this statement, the second one?  
 
Hon. Aran:  Last week Mr. Speaker and...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : And you were  given a period of two weeks?  
 
Hon. Aran:  No, one week . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Oh you were given a period of one week?  
 
Hon. Aran:  It was raised last week but the report that came was verbal Mr. Speaker 
sir so what I did as the Chair I requested them  to do in writing so that when I come and 
present that report  it is something you can trust and something that Members  can see 
physically rather than just giving a verbal report that the tender is out, we are working on the 
stadium, I don't want to give ou t a verbal report Mr. Speaker.  
 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So you are asking for another one week?  
 
Hon. Aran:  Yes I kindly and humbly request Mr. Speaker that on behalf of my 
Committee all the statement s or the report that are required to be presented in this Hon orable  
House I do them next week without fail.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Okay am giving you another one week, by next week 
Thursday you should have all the response s, both of them . 
 
Hon. Aran:  Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
Statement from Committee on Lands I think Ahmed Salama is not in, do we have the 
Vice Chair Hon. Abrari is not around, any Member  from the Committee of Lands? Yes Hon. 
Fadhili?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker I stand on behalf of t he Chair, 
we are yet to sit as a Committee concerning the issue raised on the tenants of Changamwe but 
we are aware of the notices that were given to the tenants in Changamwe and other estates of 
Mombasa County but it is not so urgent that we had some issu es to tackle as a Committee of 
which we are suppose d to respond to this Hon orable  House by next week and am sure also by 
next week we might sit on this and come to respond to this Honorable  House. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Fadhili I think  this issue was answered last week 
and said that the Department of Lands was arranging for an induction for people to 
understand this issue, this thing was answered last week.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker what I was saying is that as a 
Committee to precisely to sit and deliberate on this issue we have not sat but as you have said 
the Vice Chair said t he Department is organising an i nduction or a retreat for Hon. 
Members ... 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : I think Hon. Fadhili th e problem is with the Clerk ’s, 
Clerk’s can you check your notebook this thing was replied, why are you bringing it again?  
 
(Silence)  
 
I think Hon . Abrari replied that last week.  Hon. Ogutu I re member  very well you are 
the one who asked that statement and H on. Abrari replied to you.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika ile Mheshimiwa Abrari alijibu ni taarifa  ambayo 
iliitishwa na Mheshimiwa Hatimy . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Hatimy, Hon. Abrari replied to your statement, was 
it the same issue or different? Was it touching Changamwe? I think you can continue, have 
you finish ed Hon. Fadhili?  
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Hon. Mwalimu  (Deputy Speaker) : Yes Mr. Speaker  I have finish ed and am 
responding to the statement as per the Order Paper unless the Hon. Member  is not satisfied  
with wh at i have stated before this Honorable  House and if you will allow me to proceed I 
also have a Statement . During our 80th Sitting Mr. Speaker you had requested the Chair for  
Transport to bring to this Honorable  House the schedule of when Members  are going to s ee 
the technical teams  repairing streetlights in our Wards and I have seen the Hon. Chair just 
moving around but unfortunately the statement is not in this Order Paper. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili, yes Hon . Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Og utu: Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naomba Mheshimiwa Fadhili asiondoke 
katika ile mada ambayo tunahitaji, y eye alikuwa anajua kwamba taarifa yake ya maji iko 
angefuatilizia mapema na akaona ime wekwa kwa ratiba ya siku ya leo Bungeni . Mheshimiwa 
Spika hili jambo ni  muhimu sana kwa watu wa Changamwe  na watu haw alali kwa sababu ya 
haya maneno, s asa ikiwa si dharura kwa Mheshimiwa Fa dhili kwa watu wa Changamwe ni 
dharura sana na sisi tunaomba i kiwa wataongezwa wiki nyengine N yumba hii ilinde watu wa 
Changamwe mpaka wap ate ile taarifa ambayo itatoka kwa kitengo ambacho kinahusika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili? When are  you planning to sit down as 
a Committee of land?  I heard you stating that you had not sat down.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Than k you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I 
clearly sta ted that as a C ommittee we have not sat down but I said and the Hansard is there to 
at least if somebody wants to make a fo llow up he can make a follow up;  I said we are aware 
of the notice that was given to the tenants of Changamwe , and the other tenants in  other 
estates in Mombasa . So as the statement Mr. Speaker the Hon. Member  was asking if the 
Committee is aware of the notice that was given to Changamwe residents on behalf of the 
Chairman and the Committee , yes we are aware of the n otice but we are yet to sit and 
deliberate on this issue . Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ogutu . 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker I think Hon. Fadhili has not gone through the prayers ; we 
requested to know when the project is  likely to commence , two we wanted to know the 
relocation plan , three we wanted to know the relocation package then again the involvement 
of the people living in that area,  that is public participation which I think was clearly  done. 
Thank yo u. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Hon. Fadhili I am giving you one week and 
you can sit down with your Committee so as next Thursday you can give us the reply. Thank 
you and again Hon. Fadhili you were asking about the issue of the street lights an d I think I 
saw the Chairman for transport, she was here or she just left ...any other Member  of transport?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
Ali Sharif, Ali Shomari both of you, you’re Members  of Transport? ! I think last week 
you were here when we were talking about the issue of the street lights.  
 
Hon. Ali Sharif:  Yes Hon. Speaker I was here.  
 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So do you have any reply?  
 
Hon. Ali Shari ff: La hatuna jawabu h atujakaa kama Kamati.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So next week, but I thought Hon. Priscilla st ated that 
already the transport and infrastructure have started moving around the other areas.  
 
Hon. Ali Shari ff: Ndio Mheshimiwa Spika .  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Other Wards but I don’t think  there is any Member  who 
has noticed that his/her Ward  there is anyone who went there to fix their lights?  
 
Hon. Ali Sharif f: Ndio Mheshimiwa  Spika walikuwa Wodi ya Tononoka niliona 
mwenyewe.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Walikuwa eneo lako? But we need the program , the 
other Members  need to know when they are going t o their areas, s o it seems like they are 
favouring the Committee of Transport!  
 
(Applause ) 
 
Maanake mwanzo walikuwa Shimanzi sijui Tudor sasa wameenda Tononoka kwa 
hivyo wanape ndelea hivyo wanaenda kufanyia Kamati yenu pekee ama W aheshimiwa 
wengine hawak o kwenye hiyo ratiba ama ni eneo B unge la Mvita peke yake?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ni Mwanachama  wa hiyo Kam ati labda pengine awe 
ametolewa sijui lakini yeye ni Mwanachama  wa hiyo Kamati ya Uchukuzi.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker during our 80th sitting and it’s in 
the Hansard record when I stood I de clared my interest that I am a Member  of that 
Committee but I was raising that statement because it is an issue that each  and every elected 
Member  has to know and I remember  telling the Chair that she is somehow bias ed because 
she decided to start with Tudor and we are seeing that today she has moved from Tudor to 
Tononoka. So Mr. Speaker our concern is when are they coming to Nyali Ward? When are 
they coming to Changamwe and Kisauni Mr. Speaker?  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire . 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.   Mr Speaker just to remind the Hon. Members  
according to the last ruling you made ov er the same issue was that the Chairperson of the said 
Commit tee was to bring that timetable;  in fact it was not an issue for the Committee to sit 
down and organise they said there were no longer involved and she was just to bring the 
timetable so I don’t agree with the Hon . Member  who has just said that they have not yet sat 
down to discuss the same it was not yet to be discussed. They were to bring the time table 
today according to your ruling Mr. Speaker , so we are yet to see the timetable. Thank you . 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 The Speaker (Hon. Kh atri): I think it was very clear she was supposed to go to the 
transport minister and get the schedule bring it back to the House there was no need for you 
Members  to sit not unless may be that C ommittee has a problem and maybe needs to be 
disbanded and we select a new C ommittee. Yes Hon. Faith, you wanted to add something?  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwende : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo 
la huzuni sana kama tutakuwa tukileta taarifa tunangojea majibu na huku tunaambiwa b ado 
bado na wananchi huku wanalia mashinani tutakuwa ni kama hatujielewi tukiwa katika hii  
Nyumba  kwa vile zile Kamati kuna  marupurupu  tunapata na inafaa tukae chini tujadili yale 
maswala ambayo yanaletwa kutoka mashinani. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kuna haja ya 
haraka sana haya ma mbo yachukuliw e na isichukuliwe kama mzaha kwa sababu kila mara 
tunalia na hili jambo. Kamati ziweze kuwajibika vilivyo na taarifa ikija si Mheshimiwa 
analeta n i wale wananchi ambao wamemtuma, hivyo basi  ni tuwe na umakinifu kwa kazi 
ambayo tunafanya. Ahsa nte sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kitula, Chief W hip? 
 
Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa katika  jawabu ambalo linaendelea hapa 
katika kikao cha leo Mheshimiwa Spika ni dhahiri shah iri mimi kupitia M wenyekiti wan gu 
wa maswal a ya vijana katika Kamati ya vijana katika B unge hili ni jambo la kushangaza na 
kuna  shida kupitia makarani wetu uamuzi unaweza  kutoa siku ya tarehe nne alhamisi 
iliyopita ni jambo la kushangaza barua hazijafika katika hi ki kitengo  barua zilifika tarehe ti sa 
jioni na tarehe kumi ilikuwa ni siku ya mapumziko  wakati majibu tunastahili kuleta alhamisi 
ya leo. Mheshimiwa S pika kwa hivyo pia kuna tatizo kat ika makarani wetu hawapeleki barua 
katika idar a husika hivyo basi  ningependa uongozi wako kupitia swala hil o Mheshimiwa ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika sijaribu kuwa Wakili  wa makarani 
lakini makarani wanafanya kazi hapa shida ilioko ni lazima tubadilishe mfumo ; hawa 
Mawaziri ni wadogo kwa Karani. K wa hivyo mfumo ni lazima sisi tupate mtu ambae 
tutamshika na kupata mtu ujumbe wote uende kwa Katibu , yeye ndie Katibu  wa Cabinet  
malalamiko yaende kwa  Katibu  kwa sababu hii imekuwa ... huu ni (??); twataka Katibu  
awakusanye wote kumi awalete hapa t upambane nao maana sasa hi vi makarani wetu 
twawaona wanafanya kazi twajaribu vile wanavyoweza lakini kusema kuwa tutawanyoshea 
wao kidole cha lawama nafikiri itakuwa ni makosa Mheshimiwa S pika. Haya ni madharau ya 
kutokamana na department ’s executive Membe rs, Ministers  wa departments,  ni lazima 
tupambane nao.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Kwa hivyo Mh eshimiwa Hatimy unasema W aziri wa 
barabara ana madharau sio?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Nimesema M awaziri wote si  kusema mmoja , nimesema 
wote.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khat ri): Lakini hapa tunazungumzia hili swala la mataa  kwa 
hivyo unakubaliana kwamba W aziri wa barabara ana madharau.  
 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Sasa Mheshimiwa  Spika ukimtaka mwenye kuku wapige 
kuku mimi nasema kuwa w ote waletwe awe ni wa barabara.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Tuanze na ile shida ambayo tuko nayo sa a hii; ile 
twaizungumzia ukiangalia ile hoja ambayo imeletwa hapa kuhusu hoja ya mataa , maoni yako 
unaona kama Mheshimiwa  Hatimy unaona vipi.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Maoni yangu naona Waziri wote wamezembea . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Ogutu.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika pengine  kuongezea hii imeonekana wazi 
Mheshimiwa  Spika na hatuhitaj i kuambiwa tumeona kutokana na M wenyekiti wa vijana 
amehitaji taarifa  haijakuja, haijakuja pe ngine kule juu kuna shida tumekuja kwa housing 
tumeona iko shida hatujapata hiyo taarifa  mpaka sa a hii tumekuja kwa barabara. Kw a hivyo 
inam aanisha hata zile zengine ambazo zimebaki taarifa  ingeit ishwa kwao pengine 
haingeletwa Mheshimiwa S pika na sio leo w ala jana kila siku taarifa  ikiitishwa lazima 
ichuku e wiki mbili tatu zengine hata miezi miwili alafu kule mashinani wanasema kwamba 
MCA ni mtu mwengine mdogo sana ambae sio kitu mbele yao . Kwa hivyo ikiwa tutaendel ea 
namna hiyo basi pengine kuna njama ya k ufanya  sisi pengine tusirudi kwa ile Nyu mba 2022.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante,  kwenye swala la makarani nafikiri munaweza 
kuwa na muhuri mkipeleka barua  kule munagongewa imepokelewa  sisi ndio tuwaelezee 
ikigongwa imetoka tarehe nne igongwe tarehe t ano basi tunajua kuna ushahidi  lakini sa a hii 
hatuwezi kulemeza upande mmoja lazima kuwa na makaratasi ya kuon yesha mlipeleka 
taarifa  ikapokelewa isiwe mchezo w a kulaumiana alafu ikija mambo kila mmoja anaruka, 
naam  Hon. Shomari?  
 
Hon. Ali Mohamed Shomari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika kwa kunipatia fursa 
hii mimi, kwanza ningerudi kwa Wanachama  wenzangu wa K amati ya barabara, kwa kweli 
tumezembea nafikiri huu  ni mkutano wa pili mkutano unaitishwa na Wanachama  hawaji sasa 
sijui tuta saidiana vipi kuhusu hili  swala. Mwanachama wa Kamati ya  barabara nafikiri 
mwajijua kwa kweli jambo la mataa ni muhimu sana mimi mwenyewe Magogoni  miezi 
miwili ya nyuma kumekufa watu zaidi ya watatu wamekatwa mapanga na vijana wanaojiita 
Wakali kwanza  hata imebidi nikodishe mtu wa  kupanda na miguu ili kurekebisha yale mataa . 
Kwa hivyo naomba hawa M awaziri wanatudharau lakini sisi wenyewe kama Kamati ya 
barabara lazima tushikane tuwe kitu kimoja tuweze k ushauriana , yangu ni hayo. Ah sante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Kha tri): Waheshimiwa nadhani iko wazi mukiangalia  Kanuni za 
Bunge kama W aziri anawadharau nafikiri Fadhili kuna Kanuni ya Bunge  fulani una ijua si  
ndio? Unaweza  kutuambia F adhili ni Kanuni ya Bunge nambari ngapi  nimeisahau. Hon 
Hatimy ile Kanuni ya Bunge  ya... 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: 62. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Can you please read for us Hon Hatimy?  
 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Procedure of removal of Members  of Executive 
Comm ittee, before giving notice of M otion. This one is the procedure of  removal from office;  
there is the one for removal.   
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Tusom ee tafadhali labda wengine hatuna ufahamu.  
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read Standing Order No. 62)  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:   
Befor e giving notice of Motion under S ection 40 of the County Government Act the 
Member  shall deliver to the Clerk a copy of the proposed Motion in writing stating 
the grounds and particulars upon which the propo sal is made  for requiring the 
Governor to dismiss a Member  of County Executive Committee on ground of gross 
violation of a provision of the C onstitution or of any other law, where there are 
serious reasons for believing that the Member  of County E xecutive has committed a 
crime under national or international law or for gross misconduct the notice of 
Motion shall be signed by  the Member  and the cl erk shall submit the proposals 
Motion to the S peaker for approval.   
 
This shows the procedure of removal.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Does the Hon . Member  fall under misconduct?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: The Hon . Member ? 
 
The Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : Yes the Hon. Executive Member . 
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ndio ikiwa mtu ameshindwa kufanya mambo mengi , ndio.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So the Hon. Executive  transport falls under misconduct , 
right?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I cannot say right or wron g. 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But we have been discussing this issue Hon . Hatimy.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Hatujaongea conduct yake.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : These are the things Members  are complaining here.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Sisi tunajadili habari ya kazi, conduct hatujaongelea.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Bwire, I think you want to answer that 
question?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mheshimiwa Spika nadhani kwa ufahamu wangu tulikuwa tunajadili ni 
kwa nini Kamati ya barabara haijaleta ile ratiba ya utengen ezaji wa mataa mitaani , hatuja  
jadili kuhusiana na  Waziri wala lolote kuhusiana na Waziri ambaye anasimamia ile wizara. 
Sasa nadhani tunakwepa  ule mjadala wetu, ni tujue tu K amati yenyewe ije itueleze kwamba 
Waziri haja wajibika . 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10 Kamati yenyewe haijatueleza  mpaka kufikia sasa, sasa s isi lawama zetu tunaziweka 
kwa Kamati, sisi tunasubiri Kamati ije itueleze kwamba W aziri haja wajibika, ndio tuanze 
kujadili W aziri mwenyewe, Ahsante . 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But there is a Member  amesema W aziri hawajibiki ama  
kitu..., I think there is a Member … 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Ni Mheshimiwa Kit ula na yeye hayuko katika hiyo K amati.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ali Shari ff. 
 
Hon. Ali Sharif f: Naam Bwana Spika , mimi kama Mwanachama wa hiyo Kamati 
nasema Waziri haja wajibika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hajawajibika.  
 
Hon. Ali Sharif : Ndio na naku pa chang amoto ; Mheshimiwa Spika sisi kama 
Waheshimi wa hapa Bunge twataka tujaribu W aziri mmoja t ukimuita hapa  wengine  
watawajibika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So it is upon you C ommi ttee to do that, any way yes Hon. 
Faith, I think faith was standing, you can wait for Faith because the mic rophone  was far so 
that’s why I gave it to Faith.  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwende : Mheshimiwa Spika nikiongea hapa maswali ni mengi 
mashinani na tuko hapa kuwakili sha wananchi, na kusema kweli tangu tuje kwenye hii 
Nyumba  taarifa  zikija huwa hazijibiwi kwa wakati ambao wafaa, hata majibu yakija huwa si  
majibu ya kuridhisha. K wa hivyo ni fursa imefik a saa hii tuamke na tujue wale M awaziri 
wako chini yetu, tuliwa kagua  hapa hapa, sisi ndio ku sema hapa kwa hivyo yafaa watufu ate 
vyenye wananchi wetu wametutuma . Ndio maana kila mara twapitisha bajeti  ambayo 
inawapendelea wao lakini mwisho wa siku mambo hayafanyiki, tunataka waje hapa ama la 
sivyo mmoja anyoroshwe ndio wale  wengine washike njia. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fed dis. 
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mbura : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, mimi kwanza ningeomba hizi 
Kamati kwa sababu majibu yanakuja kwamba ki la mmoja amebeba msalaba wake; Kamati 
yasema ha ikutani, mara K amati inasema hao wenyewe hawaja wajibika, kwa nini tusianze 
sisi wenyewe hapa Bungeni sisi wenyewe tuka fuatilizie baada ya sasa tukanyosha kidole 
tukajua twan yoosha kidole sisi tumewajibika. K wa sababu upande w a mataa ama upande wa 
barabara  Wanakamati wenyewe wanasema hawakutani,  sasa kama hao hawakutani huyu 
Waziri watampata vipi? Kwa hivyo ningeom ba Kamati zote pamoja na hiyo ya Uchukuzi  
waweze kukutana ama tuweze kukutana tujadili  kabla hatuja mnyooshea kidole W aziri, kwa 
hivyo naomba wal e wa barabara wakutane na hata K amati zengine zikutane baada ya hapo 
sasa ndio mtaangalia ni wapi kumelemaa, ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Nyiro.  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , nikikumbuka ni juzi tu tulikuwa t una 
kikao na Mheshimiwa Gavana na tukapeana malalamishi . 
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11 Malalamishi  ya kwamba mara  nyingi M awaziri wanazindua miradi mashinani p asipo 
na ufahamu wa Waheshimiwa  na Mheshimiwa Gavana akapeana amri ya  kwamba mam bo 
yoyote ambayo yatafanywa na M awaziri mashina ni mtu wa  kwanza kujua atakuwa ni 
Mheshimiwa. K wa hivyo si  kwamba tu M awaziri wanageuka kanuni ya Bunge hili lakini pia 
wanageuka kanuni ya bosi wao ambaye ni Gavana  wetu kwa sababu Gavana amesema 
kusifanywe lolote katika Wodi kabla Mheshimiwa wa Wodi  ile hajaambiwa ili na yeye aweze 
kutilia pondo mradi ule ionekane kwamba wazi Kaunti inafanya kazi kwa hali moja. K wa 
hivyo nafikiri imefika wakati tuone ni wapi uzi ulikatika tuunganishe ili  tuone kwamba kuna 
mawasiliano ; shida kubwa hapa ni mawasiliano, mawa siliano kutoka Bungeni  kwenda kwa 
Mawaziri na mawasiliano kutoka kwa M awaziri kuja mpaka Bunge hili, hususan wakati wa 
kupeana maombi kutoka kwa wananchi ambayo  tunataka kupata majibu . Saa nyengine 
Mawaziri wanalalamika kwamba Bunge hili linawasilisha maom bi yale kuchelewa kwao, 
maombi hayo kwao na ndio maana wao w anashindwa kuleta majibu mapema. K wa hivyo 
naomba kuwe na mawasiliano na pia M awaziri waweze kuwajibika zaidi kwa sababu wao 
ndio watekelezaji  wa zile sheria  ambazo sisi tun azitengeneza  katika Bu nge hili. A hsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro Yes Hon. Kitula.  
 
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri swala hili linatoa 
kizungumkuti katika Bunge ; ni kweli  na dhahiri shahiri kwamba tayari mimi kama Kiranja 
wa Bunge pa moja ma M wenyekiti Kamati ya U chunguzi pamoja na Naibu  wake muwakilishi 
wa W odi ya Timbwani tulienda katika idara ya Uchukuzi  na kusema kweli Chief officers  
pamoja na Waziri walikiri hawaja wahi kupata barua yoyote kutoka katika Bunge la Kaunti  ya 
Mombasa, lakini ikiwa Wanachama  wa Kamat i hiyo nao pia wamekiri kwamba Waziri 
hawajibiki. T ungep enda kupata mwongozo wako kama M wenyekiti wetu katika Bunge hili 
kuhusiana na swala hilo, ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni Nyumba ya sheria, twaomba kwa 
heshima twataka barua itoke kwako wewe iende kwa  cabinet  ya malalamiko ku waelezea 
mambo haya, isiwe imekwenda kwa Katibu  iwe imekwisha kwa Katibu. T wataka iende kwa 
cabinet , waende wakaambiwe kwa cabinet  yao kuwa kuna  mashtaka haya  na tupate tena 
uulize wakupatie majibu ndani ya  siku saba wakupatie majibu kwa sababu sisi ikiwa twaja 
hapa kila  siku na hakuna  mambo yanayofanyika ni kama kupoteza wakati. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba tafadhali andika barua  utie saini wewe mwenyewe kama Spika 
ya malalamiko ya  kusema kuwa M awaziri hawawajibiki na kazi zao, nafikiri hiyo itakuwa 
imetatua hiyo shida.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Hatimy, huo mwongozo wako 
nimeusikia lakini sisi hapa tuko na kit u inaitwa kanun i za B unge na ziko sawa kabisa kwa 
sababu umesoma  nambari 62 . Kwa hivyo mimi  nitawaambia Kamati ya Uchukuzi  kama  mko 
na shid a na W aziri wenu mw ende, nawapatia wiki moja mpaka Alhamisi moja mulete hapa 
majibu, mw ende mumuite  huyo W aziri a je awaeleze shida iko wapi. K ama mumeona kuwa 
kama vile m umesema hataki kuwajibika tuf uateni sheria, Kanuni za Bunge nambari 62  iko 
wazi na kuna watu wengine ambao wanataka hiyo kazi , pia kama yeye anaona hawezi 
kuwajibika na hiyo kazi ambao watashughulika na watasaid ia wananchi wa Mombasa . Kwa 
hivyo Kamati ya Uchukuzi  mwende  mukae hayo ni majukumu yenu mumepatiwa hiyo 
Kamati .  
October 11, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Rep ort can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 Unajua majukumu yako katika hiyo K amati na lazima tutatue shida za Waheshimiwa  
za huko mashinani , kama huwezi toka kwa hiyo K amati wach a Mwanachama  mwengine 
aingie katika hiyo K amati ndio tutatue hii shida . Kwa hivyo K amati ya Uchukuzi  tunawapa 
wiki moja mje m tueleze e hilo jambo la mataa kama watu wameenda kurekebishiwa ama 
bado ; kama mko na shida na Waziri wenu mtakuja pia mueleze katika  Jumba hili, kuna 
taratibu  za kuf uata hivyo basi mtasoma vile Kanuni za Bunge  zinasema n a mtatueleza na 
tutafuata huo mw elekeo . Karani?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members  this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 16th October, 2018 at 2:30 
p.m. 
The House rose at 3 :22p.m. 
 
 