August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 2nd August, 2016  
The House met at 2.3 7pm. 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk . 
PAPER  
       Yes Hon. Amir Thoya , yes Hon.  Serah Nyamvula . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula : Mr. Speaker there is no quorum . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Clerk please ascertain if there is quorum . 
(Clerk confirmed no quorum status)  
       Yes please ring the quorum bell . 
(Sergeant A t Arms rung quorum bell)  
(Clerk confirmed quorum status)  
 (Applause)  
       Yes Hon . Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir, I stand to present  a paper on the site visit of Kenya  
Ferry S ervices .  
(Hon Thoya laid  paper ) 
       The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Thank you, Yes Hon Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker I also seek leave this House to discuss this in this House, thank 
you. 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Yes Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir, I stand before this House to place a N otice of 
Motion  on the report on site visit to Kenya F erries Limited on  29th July 2016 . 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2        The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       Yes Hon. Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir once again with your permis sion I beg to move our 
Motion in this H ouse abo ut the report of site visit to K enya F erry Services held on 29th  July 
2016 , I beg Hon . Siminyu to second . 
(Hon. Siminy u nodded ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Members I propose a question . 
(Question  proposed and agreed to)  
       Yes Hon.  Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir, the Committee on Transport and P ublic works of 
the Assembly paid a courtesy call to the Kenya Ferry Services and we wish to present to this 
House a report on the site visit on the Kenya Ferry Services on 29th July of 2016.  
       Mr. Speaker Sir present on that day as Committee M embers …  
                                                             (Interruption)  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Point of information . 
      The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Fadhili , what is it?  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Spea ker we understand that it is a M otion  that 
is supposed to be discussed in this Hon . House, it has passed as reported , a report has been laid. 
       It is upon the C hair to give us what is in the report but not  to read the report Mr. Speaker;  to 
give us the advantages of this report and not t o read the whole report because it is now a M otion 
that is being discussed in this House and not this report . 
       So Mr. Speaker , just for the House, we are supposed to he ar from the C hairman of Transport 
what are the advantages that the Committee has b rought to this H ouse on this report , not to read 
the whole report. Thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon. Ndanda Chiro.  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Mr. Speaker, I also have a point of information, I con cur with 
Hon. Fadhili u nless the C hair for Transport stands on S tanding order no. 76 because the 
procedures of this Assembly is that a M otion is not going to be read Mr. Speaker sir . 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3        So Mr. Speaker I think he just gives us what he saw and what are the basic things based o n 
the people of Mombasa and then we continue debating that Motion . Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I think since most M embers have not read 
the report, the report has just come today and the Chairman asked permi ssion for this report to be 
discussed today . 
       So I think it is onl y fair for him to read for the H ouse because that report nobody has read  
this report before; except the Members of the same C ommittee so I think it is only prudent  for 
the C hairman to read the report for the House and then we discuss it.  
       Hon. Amir Thoya can you continue plea se. 
       Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       Mr. Speaker sir Members of the C ommittee who were present;  
Members:  
 
Hon. Amir M. Thoya  Chairper son  
Hon. Zainab S. Kithinzi  Vice -Chairperson  
Hon Fatma S . Mote  
Hon Patrick Siminyu  
Hon Priscilla Mumba  
Hon Saad F Ahmed  
Hon Zainab S Ali  
Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu  
Hon. Kibwana Swalleh  
Hon. Ahmed Ebrahim  
Hon. Mswabah Rashid  
Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani  
Hon. Asha Hu ssein  
Hon. Beatrice Kai  
 
Committee Staff  
Abdallah Khamis Abdallah (Senior Clerk Assistant II)  
Nasra Ahmed Omar (Hansard Reporter II)  
Hafsa Kirao (Public Relations)  
 
 
 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4 1. Introduction  
       Mr. Deputy Speaker Sir and Hon. Members, this is the report of the Co mmittee on Public 
Works and Transport on the site visit to the Kenya Ferry Services Limited offices on 29thAugust 
2016.  
       The report was prompted b y a request for statement from Members of the County A ssembly 
on the matters of the separation of women and children at the Likoni Ferry crossing while on 
board the ferries and the issue of establishment of a Diving Unit at the Kenya Ferry Services 
Limited to help rescue efforts during accidents and disasters as well as Honorable M embers 
privilege while pass ing through the Likoni Ferry crossing.  
       The Committee met the Managing Director, Mr. Bakari Ali Gowa and his manag ement team 
and was able to air M embers’ grievances and concerns and were given the required replies 
accordingly.  
2. Observations and Findi ngs 
 
2.1 The purpose of the site visit was to establish the following:  
 
a. Separation of women and children as a vulnerable group to prevent harassment by 
men and sex pests.  
 
b. Status of/establishment of a Diving Unit at the Kenya Ferry Services Limited to be 
stationed at the Likoni Ferry Crossing to assist rescue passengers in the event of 
accidents/disasters.  
 
c. Status of M embers privilege  i.e ease of access and passage when crossing the Likoni 
Ferry crossing with their spouses.  
 
2.2 The Kenya Ferry Services Limited man agement team under the leadership of Mr. Bakari Ali 
Gowa who was recently appointed to the position of Managing Director responded to 
members queries and concerns as follows:  
 
a. The Kenya Ferry Services Limited appreciates that this problem exists and has ta ken 
measures to address it.  
 
The separation of women and children on board ferries would pose a challenge in the 
sense that where a man and his family were crossing together separat ely might not be 
feasible.  
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 At the same time allowing only women and child ren to board ferries first would lead 
to delays in ferry operations and exacerbate the congestion at the Likoni Ferry 
crossing.  
 
However,  there are security cameras at the Likoni Ferry crossing which the 
management uses to monitor movements of people and criminals and sex pests once 
identified, appropriate action is taken to arrest them.  
 
The national government has allocated Kshs.250 million for the security cameras 
enhancement project and the project will be fully rolled out by the end of the year.  
 
b. On the matter of safety of commuters and establishment of a Diving Unit at the 
Kenya Ferry Services Limited,  the management replied that they have already taken 
measures towards establishing one and by December 2016 a fully -fledged unit would 
be in place.  
 
As a stop -gap measure,  the company has in co -operation with the Kenya Navy,  has 
rolled out a programme to train a group of employees how to dive. The company has 
also acquired ISO certification on disaster preparedness and management. This 
means the company  has put safety of commuters as a priority.  
 
c. The Kenya Ferry Services Limited re cognizes the special status of H on. Members 
since the Likoni Ferry crossing i s in Mombasa County and once a M ember is 
identified as on the vehicle queue he/she is facilitated a nd given priority of 
access/passage.  
 
The management would appreciate if they will get identification documents and 
passport photos of all MCAs so that they make/ -process special passes/identification 
to enable them get priority access/passage at the Liko ni Ferry crossing.  
 
2.3 In addition the Managing Director informed the Committee as follows:  
 
a. The Kenya Ferry Services Limi ted had a plan to partner with County governments at 
the Kenya C oast to establish water transport as a mainstream mode of transport to 
ease congestion on the terrestrial front.  
 
In Mombasa,  the C ounty government managed to convince the national government 
that it will take up the water transport programme but ever since they have not had 
further information on the progress towards that fr ont. 
 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 b. The Kenya Ferry Services Limited appreciates the assistance given by the County 
Government Department of Inspectorate in direction of traffic at the Likoni/Shelly 
junction and Nakumatt Likoni roundabout to ease congestions to and from the Likoni 
Ferry crossings.  
 
They sought further assistance for county government askaris to remove hawkers 
along alley ways towards the Likoni Ferry crossing and for some to be stationed on 
board the ferries to monitor criminals and sex pests.  
 
3. Conclusions  
3.1 The site vis it was successful as M embers got useful information about ferry operations.  
 
3.2 The Committee was pleased with the responses by the Kenya Ferry Services Limited 
under the stewardship of Mr. Bakari Ali Gowa.  
 
The management of Kenya Ferry Services Limited gav e very positive replies to the 
Committee’s queries and concerns and gave indications of will ingness to co -operate 
with the C ounty government to improve ferry services and on matters of water 
transport.  
 
This was a remarkable improvement from the last site  visit to the company on 
Wednesday,  3rd June 2015 when the then Managing Director Mr. Has san Musa who 
failed to address M embers ' concerns.  
 
3.3 The Committee learnt that the ferries would need to be supplemented with other modes of 
transport and crossing such as water transport and a tower bridge as alternatives to the 
present modes of crossing.  
 
3.4 The Committee welcomed further co -operation with the company on various matters of 
mutual interest ; including training of more divers and working together during 
accid ents/disaster rescues.  
 
3.5 The County government needs to forge a close working relationship with the current 
management of Kenya Ferry Services Limited to assist them give better services to the 
public and ensure security and safety of ferry users at the Mto ngwe and Likoni Ferry 
crossings.  
 
 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 4. Recommendations  
 
4.1 The Department of Transport and Infrastructure to meet with the management of Kenya 
Ferry Services Limited to discuss matters of mutual interest such as the 
operationalization of ferry services at Mtongwe  ferry crossing, the building of a bridge 
at Likoni Ferry crossing, the planning and operationalization of water transport in the 
county, the removal of hawkers from roundabouts and junctions near the crossings to 
ease traffic jams, the removal of hawkers in the alleyways leading to the c rossings, co -
operation between C ounty diver s and ferry divers and how the C ounty government 
could get a share of the revenue at the two ferry crossings.  
 
4.2 The County Assembly Service Board to make arrangements for M embers to  get special 
priority passes for MCAs from Kenya Ferry Services Limited.  
 
4.3 The Committ ee be hereby authorized by the County A ssembly to benchmark with other 
cities  
I urge th e County A ssembly to consider and adopt this report, thank you  Mr. Speaker. I urge 
Members to support this M otion.  
(Applause ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili Makarani?  
       Hon.  Mwalimu:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika,  hoja hii iliyoletwa mbele yetu ni hoja nzuri ; 
tume ona yale mazuri Kamati hii imetuletea na  Bunge letu limes ikia na mimi ni mmoja kati ya 
wale ama mimi niliuliza swali hilo la kina mama wananyanyaswa katika Ferry ile. 
       Na pia ni mmoja katika Mwanakamati wa K amati hii na naomba  Waheshimiwa wenzangu  
watuunge mkono kwa kazi nzuri Mheshimiwa S pika ambayo tumeifanya na tumeona . 
       Kwanz a  mabadiliko ambayo yamekuwa wakati ule wa mwanzo hata  kutambulika Kamati  
haikuweza kutambu lika lakini tumeona mabadiliko K amati imeenda na usimamizi wa  Kenya 
Ferry umebadilika  na ukatupokea vizuri . 
       Ndani ya ripoti hii ya Ferry tumeona kuna shida kidogo ndio kwa sasa hivi kutata tulika 
itakuwa ni taabu kuweka kina mama na watoto kando kwa hali iko pale katika kivuko kile cha 
ferry . 
       Lakini kupitia K amati h ii waliweza kutuhakikishia seri kali kuu ime toa pesa nyingi kuweza 
kufanya mam bo ya usalama Kamera  za usalama ziweze kuongezeka na tuweze kuzidi 
kushirikiana na wao ili kuangalia tatizo kama hili . 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8        Mheshimiwa S pika tutaweza kutatua namna gani ndipo p ia wakatuambia Mheshimiwa S pika 
kwa K iinger eza wanasema challe nges ili tukiru di kwao tuwe tumepata njia gan i mwafaka 
zinaweza kufany wa ndio maana wakatuambia ikiwa yawezekana twende tuso me katika miji 
ambayo inatumia F erry kama hizi miji ambayo uvukaji kidogo umestawi . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika kupi tia kiti chako ikiwa utaruhusu W aheshimiwa wote ama wawili , 
watatu wa hiyo Kamati waende wasome hata K isumu iko ferry watu wana weza enda w akaona ni 
vipi ferry zinaenda…  
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika iko nchi jirani,  Tanz ania mji wa D ar es Salam kunayo F erry yafanya 
kazi, tujue je mambo kama ya le yanatokea ama ni hapa kwetu tu!  
       Na wamefanya nini kuweza kut hibiti hizi shida hatutaki tuone kina mama wakinyany aswa 
tumeona wanawake wakichuku a nyadhifa kubwa katika nchi yetu na ulimwengu mzima na ikiwa 
tutaa cha itakuwa ni kuwafanya wawe watumwa wa akili haileti taswira nzuri…..  
(Applause ) 
       Kuona nchi zingine wakichukua n yadhifa kubwa kubwa hapa kwetu Mheshimiwa S pika 
huwa inanyanyaswa njia nyingine . 
       Sasa Mheshimiwa S pika twaomba kupitia kwa  Bunge  hii na waheshimiwa wenzangu 
tukubaliane na wa ipitishe ripoti hii na tuunge mkono Kamati ambayo  imefanya kazi hii na 
ikiwezekana K amati ipewe nguvu ili waweze kufanya kazi zao zaidi na Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :You have one minute remaining.  
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Mheshimiwa S pika tuelewe kwamba ni mara pili ya Kamati kwenda  pale 
na K amati imeweza kupokelewa iko haja K amati hiyo kama Bunge  itambue meneja huyo 
ambaye yuko pale kwa kumtambua jinsi ali vyopokea K amat i.  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Na Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa … 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : One second.  
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Mheshimiwa S pika ahsante.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Patrick Simi nyu.  
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker I can see ….. In this report I would like to first of all 
congratulate the committee,  the new Management D irector Mr. Bakari Ali Ngoa ….  
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 (Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon . Stephen Wang udi? 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker as you are seeing members are up on their feet 
making contributions while the report was not seconded ….  
(Loud consultations ) 
       Hon. Wangudi:  After the C hair read the report it was not seconded.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : The report was seconded yes H on. 
Siminyu? 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Hon. Speaker the M ember was sleeping….  
(Laughter ) 
        Mr. Speaker I was saying ...  
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : What is it Hon . Wangudi?  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Hon. Speaker the H on. Member is referring that I am sleeping , is he in 
order?  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Patrick Simi nyu can you use a proper 
language not an offensive one ...  
(Loud co nsultations ) 
       Hon. Simi nyu: … (Inaudible )….but I think it is not an offensive word , sleeping is a good 
word, Mr. Speaker Mr.  Bakari Ali Ngoa the new Managing Director has brought a lot of 
changes….  
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswab ah Rashid) : Yes Hon . Wangudi?  
       Hon. Wangudi:  There is no quorum in the H ouse. 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes can you as certain whether there is 
quorum … 
(Loud consultation ) 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10        Hon. Mwalimu:  Mr. Speaker the matter in front of  us does not need voting .  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I am just asking the C lerk whether there is 
quorum or not ?  
(Clerk counted M embers  and confirmed lack of quorum)  
       Can you ring the quorum bell?  
(Quorum bell r ung) 
(Members wa lked in) 
(Applause ) 
      Chief Whip (Hon. Omar  Ebrahim) : Mr. Speaker I think there is quorum in the H ouse. 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Mr. Speaker that is not the procedure , the C lerk should confirm 
quorum . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Clerk confirm whether there is quorum . 
(Clerk  confirmed quorum)  
       Yes Hon . Patrick Simi nyu. 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker , now that the Majority L eader is here there is  
quorum ... 
(Applause ) 
       Mr. Spea ker Mr. Bakari Ali Goa the new  Managing D irector I have note d a lot of changes 
even as we are going to the other side , there a re a lot of changes that have been implemented 
towards the Likoni  Ferry .  
       Mr. Speaker as the C ommittee we were pleased by the w ay we were welcomed by the  new 
Managing Director; during our meeting  and subsequent  discussion s we discover ed that there's a 
lot that the government is planning and there's money almost shs 250 Million already set aside 
for installment  of CCTV  cameras so that the pick pocketing whi ch is going on around ferry is 
addressed . 
       Mr. Speaker even we were told that there are greater plans of this side of the island so that 
people can be more comfortable ; this cannot be achieved in a single day but it takes time but we 
as Members of Co unty Assembly are going to see whether there are promises or the plans are 
going to be done.  
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11        Mr. Spe aker what we urge as the C ommittee the government should speed up the installment  
of the se CCTV  to stop this harassment , it should be done with spee d because we need these 
cameras now to stop these harassment.  
       Mr. Speaker we also discover ed that we have not utilized  the water transport , it is the co olest 
and the meeting with the C ommitte e is planning to have both the I nspectorate plus the ferr y 
there's a need to address that so that we can utilize  our water transportation from here to Lamu 
and other centers  which require the water transportation . 
       Hon. Speaker  and where we have terrorist challenges ; where we have water transport has 
trans form ed Mombasa as a region and it will be a plus in our tourism attraction in upcountry and 
abroad . 
       Mr. Speaker i would like the Hon . Members to support this and to transform Mombasa. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswaba h Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Serah Nyamvula . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity i would like 
to congratulate the Committee on T ransport for the work done .  
(Applause ) 
       I just want to pick out two things because t hese are the notions which are in this Honorable 
House and which seems to be implemented . 
       I just want to refer you from page (4) 2.3 , in addition and then follow that paragraph (a) , 
"The Kenya Ferry Services Limited had a plan to partner with County  governments at the Kenya 
coast to establish water transport as a mainstream mode of transport to ease cong estion on the 
terrestrial front".  
       And in the same paragraph in Mombasa, the C ounty government managed to convince the 
national government that  it will take up the water transport programme but ever since they have 
not had further information on the progress towards that front.  
       Mr. Speaker am sur e that the Hansard have it; the M otion about th e water transport, had the 
Motion  awaiting for implementation and now it 's coming out that the Kenya Ferry is willing to 
do and the County government has indicated but unfortunately something has been inquired.  
       Mr. Speaker if the C ommittee is to be allowed to go further to f ind out what the dep artment 
of County government is doing it will be very eas y for us to do this and maybe the channel that 
we are talking about . 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 12        The Tudor and Mwakirunge and i think it was Hon . Zainab Darwesh who came up with this 
idea after a visit from Zanzibar and Mr. Speaker it is also interesting to see that Kenya Fer ry are 
implementing two of our M otions which have passed here.  
       Some of the organizations  or companies operating in Mombasa we seem to be on the same 
page but different venues Mr. Speaker , i congratulate and i hope it can be further followed. 
Thank you.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Zainab Said Ali . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab Said Ali:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii . 
       Mimi pia naunga mkono h uu mswada  amba o umeletwa hap a na Mheshimiwa Amir Thoya 
amba o ni mzuri sana na tulienda feri kumuona Mkurugenzi mkuu na akatukaribisha vizuri na 
akatupa maneno mazuri ambayo tulitoka pale tukawa kuna furaha . 
       Kwa hivyo sisi twaomba tufanye kazi vizuri  pamoja na wao kwa sababu pia nilileta m swada 
wa speed boats ambazo zitasaidia wagonjwa kuvukishwa haraka...  
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon . Fadhili what is it?  
(Laughter ) 
       Members Order! Order!  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Thank you Hon. Speaker.  Hon.  Speaker  is the Hon . Member in troducing 
another Motion on top of the Motion?  Hon. Speaker  the Hon . Member is introducing a M otion 
that i think it has passed in this Hon . House , Mr. Speaker the M otion of the speed up ...  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : I think she is contributing or do you want  to 
introduce a Motion?  
       Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab Said Ali:  Mimi nachangia Mheshim iwa Spika na pia nimeona Kenya 
Ferry wameongea kuhusu m swada w angu na ndio maana nat aka tufanye nao kazi pamoja na sisi 
tuwaambie kuwa pale twataka kufungua mahali pa watu kupumzika , mambo haya yanatendwa 
na M kurugenzi mkuu  wa sasa . 
       Kwa hivyo twataka tumpe barua nzuri na manufaa mazuri sana.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy and then Hon. Okoth 
Opeya and then Hon.  Saad Faraj .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni kweli nasema hii ripoti ni nzuri .  
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 13 (Applause ) 
       Kuna kitu ambacho kimekosekana Mheshimiwa Spika ; tunaona Kenya Ferry ni kampu ni 
ambayo ni ya kibinafsi sasa kampuni binafsi itaingiliana vipi na serikali....  
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili what is it?  
       Hon. Mwalimu : Mr. Speaker should understand that the Hon . Mem ber should un derstand 
that the C ommittee meeting was not to go and investigate about the company …  
(Laughter ) 
       Whether  it is a private company or not? The purpose of this meeting was different so the 
Hon. Member should tell us if he  is opposing or proposing this Motion Mr. Speaker.  
       Mr. Sp eaker first he should read the M otion and understand it , he should understand the 
Motion. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Ndanda Chiro . 
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda:  Mr. Speaker on the other fact I was asking , can a private 
company join hands with the government ? I think we should have public private partnership , 
discussion s can go on a nd it is there in the constitution …  
(Applause ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika Public Private Partnership  haim anishi hivi 
anavyosema; aende aka some vizuri aielew e. 
       Hii kampuni sisi hatutaki kujua kwanza kuhusu huyu Mkurugenzi Mkuu kwa sababu hii 
kampuni yenyewe hat ujaijua Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Kwa hivyo inaweza kuwa Mheshimiwa Spika waende wakafanye uchunguzi …  
(Applause ) 
       Wapate  kujua kwa sababu tutaona Rais Uhuru amechagua Mkurugenzi Mkuu kwa hiyo 
tunataka kujua kweli kwamba hii kama ni kampuni iko Momba sa na inatakikana iwe kwa Kaunti 
sio ushirikiano na kampuni ya kibinafsi , how are the directors of this company Mr. Speaker?   
(Interruption)  
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 14        Hon. Mwalimu : Point of information . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) :  Who do you want to inf orm?  
       Hon. Mwalimu : The House .  
(Laughter ) 
       Mr. Speaker I just want to inform the Hon . House and the Hon . Member who has brought a 
very good issue and I as the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee am not aware and I 
will take it in to consi derations . 
       Mr. Speaker with all due respect I will take a delegation in Nairobi to go and investigate this 
issue because I don't understand  whether  it is a limited company as it has been said by the Hon. 
Member , the president appoints the C hairman , the president ap points...  
(Interruption ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Fadhili you are repeating what Hon.  
Hatimy was saying and the purpose of you standing is to inform the House and now you are 
asking the same question , same  thing  that Hon . Hatimy was saying … 
(Laughter ) 
       What are you informing?  
       Hon. Mwalimu: I was informing the House that I will take the Public Accounts Committee  
to Nairobi  to investigate this issue , thank you Mr. Speaker . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Kuongezea Bwana Spika  yeye kama  Mwenyekiti  wa PAC aje 
atuambie kama hii kampuni ni limited by guarantee  ama shares  na kuwa shares ni ngapi na nani 
anathibiti hizo  shares . 
       Kwa hiyo kampuni  kusudi tupate kujua la ukweli Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu sis i 
tunavyojua ilikua iko chini ya serikali na sasa imebadilikia kuwa ni limited company . 
       Sisi twampongeza huyu Bakari Ali Goa kwa kazi yake nzuri ambay o anafanya lakini sisi pia 
kama serikali lazima tujue ukweli pengine sisi haya ni mali yetu lakini twadanganywa 
tukiwekwa huku na huku , hii ni mali ya Kaunti  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Kwa hivyo nataka yeye aje na r ipoti ya kuja kueleza Nyumba hii atu ambie kuwa hizi shares 
zimetoka kwa njia gani , ziko chini ya nani na Mwandishi  wa hii kampuni twataka kumj ua ni nani 
kwa sababu Mwandishi  atakua lazima awe na jibu akienda kwa msajili  akienda akifanya 
uchunguzi atak ua amepata hizi zote alafu atulete e sisi hapa.  
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 15        Nimepongeza na nimesema na unga mkono  lakini mpaka ikachunguzwe, a hsante sana . 
       The Depu ty Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Okoth Opeya, Yes Hon.  Jimmy Odari why  
are you standing?  
       Hon. Odari:   To contribute . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes well its Hon.  Okoth , then Saad then 
Jimmy Odari . 
       Hon. Opeya:  First of all i would like to thank the Committee led by Hon. Amir for giving us 
a comprehensive report ; it has answered all the questions t hat Hon Mwalimu had asked about , in 
page 2.3 . 
2.3 In addition the Managing Director informed the Committee as follows:They sou ght 
further assistance for county government askaris to remove hawkers along alley ways 
towards the Likoni Ferry crossing and for some to be stationed on board the ferries to 
monitor criminals and sex pests.  
I think it is something that we can implement as  soon as the report is passed...   
(Applause ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Saad Faraj . 
       Hon.  Faraj:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii ; nimesimama kuunga mkono 
Kamati yangu ya Uchukuzi  kwa kazi nzuri ambayo wamewe za kufanya na kuona furaha ambayo 
iko kwa N yumba hii n i kutokana na mapokezi mema na mazuri ambayo kwamba Mkurugenzi 
Mkuu alioko sasa ameweza kupokea . 
       Kwa heshima Kamati  zetu za Bunge , Mhe shimiwa Spika maana ya kutanguliza kuzungumza 
maneno haya ni kwa sababu tuliku a na M kurugenzi Mkuu ambae kwamba alikua akiongoza 
Kenya Ferry wakati ule na ilikua heshima yake kwa serikali ya Kaunti  ni chache al ikua dharau 
ndio ameweka mbele na ni lazima mahali ambapo pafaa kushukuriwa tuweze kufikisha shukrani 
zetu za dhati . 
       Mimi pia ningeenda kwa njia ambayo M heshimiwa Fadhili ameend a  ya kuwa ni lazima sisi 
kama K aunti ya Mombasa ni lazima tumuandikie barua ya shukrani kwa mapokezi yake mema 
juu ya kuwa ni haki yetu . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri swala am balo liko leo kidogo mimi nina t ashwishi kwa upande 
mmoja peke yake na mimi sio kuwa natofautiana na ripoti lakini t ashwishi zangu ziko katika ile 
hali ya kuwa tumeshindikana kuweza kupata mahali ambapo kwamba patakua ni ka ndo na wale 
wengine ili kuweza ku wathibiti dada zetu , ndugu zetu na watoto . 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 16        Nafikiri kupitia kwa M wenyekiti wetu haya ni mambo ambayo  tutaendelea kuyajadili katika 
Kamati ili kuweza kupata suluhisho bora kwa sababu ripoti imeweza kuongea  kuhusu ile milioni 
mia mbili hamsini ambazo  zimeweza kutengwa na serikali yetu kuu . 
       Ni serikali ya kusema na kutenda kwa s abab u wanatenda lakini hatuoni matumizi yale  yako 
vipi, kwa hivi sisi kama K aunti ya Mombasa ni wajibu wetu tuchukue majukumu yetu kama 
yanavyostahili tujaribu kutafuta m uundo msingi na njia mwafaka kuweza kutupitisha sisi 
kuhakikisha mpaka ule wakati utapatikana zile Kamera hata hatujui lini kwa sababu  vipakatalishi  
vilichukua  zaidi ya miaka minne kuja hatujui itachukua miaka zaidi na saba tena . 
       Kwa huu mda ambao t uko nao lazima tukae na M wenyekiti wetu tuweze kujadili namna 
gani twa weza kufanya ili kwa huu mda tuweze kuwa weka chini hawa vijana na kina mama 
kuwaepusha na hawa watu ambao k wamba tabia zao sio nzuri pale F erry. 
       Mimi nimeshukuru kazi nzuri ambayo  Mwenyekiti wangu wa  Uchukuzi  kwa uchun guzi 
ambao amefanya na K amati yote nzima kwa sababu ripoti ambayo imekuja ni ya kueleweka . 
       Nataka kumshukuru pia Mheshimiwa Zeinab Sa id Ali kwa kuweza kuleta na kuona mbali 
kutuletea msw ada ambao umeonekana wak ati huu umuhimu ambao amel eta na sio huu peke e 
yake ; hata ule mswada mw engine ambao kwamba ni wa ambule nsi, ya T uk tuk pia umefaidi 
Kaunti hii . 
       Kwa hivyo wat u wazima ambao tuko nao katika N yumba hii ni heshima na mimi 
namshukuru sana Zeinab Said Ali  kwa kazi nzuri na nashukuru  Nyumba hii na K amati yangu, 
ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
(Applause ) 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Hon. Jimmy . 
       Hon. Odari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii na  mimi kuchangia 
mswada h uu ambao umeletwa na Mheshimiwa Amir Thoya na umeungwa kik amilifu na 
Mheshimiwa Zeinab Dh arwesh ambae anao na mbele kwa sababu haya masu ala ambayo 
tunayajadili leo . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ni mas uala ambayo Mheshimiwa Dharwesh alileta miaka miwili 
iliyopita ...  
(Applause ) 
       Na tunashu kuru hivi sasa inatimia, kuna su ala tumeulizana hapa l akini kabla sijalijadili hilo 
suala nata ka kupongeza K amati yote kwa kuja na shu ghuli hii na pia nataka kumpongeza 
Mkurugenzi Mkuu  mpya wa Kenya Ferry Bakari Goa ambapo leo ameon yesha tofauti katika 
uongozi kulinganisha na.......  
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 17        The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Mheshimiwa  Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu: Sijui Mheshimiwa anatoa vote of thanks  maana nas ikia shukuru nyingi ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Hon. Odari:  Waju a mkosa la kusema husema...   
(Laughter ) 
        Anasikia raha akiongea ili watu  wapate kumuona ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Kuna swali ambalo limeulizwa na Mheshimiwa Hatimy kuhusiana na kuwa  ni nani mmiliki 
wa Kenya Ferry , ukiniruh usu nitasoma kidogo hii google  hapa... 
(Laughter ) 
(Interruption)  
        Hon. Mwalimu:  Point of order . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : What is it Hon . Fadhili, he wants to take 
your safari ? 
(Laughter ) 
       Hon. Mwalimu:  Haijaruhusiwa ndani ya B unge  hili Mheshimiwa Spik a uanze ku google  na 
hali K amati iko ...  
(Laughter ) 
       Ni kazi yetu tuna haki kufanya ile kazi, mimi naomba Bunge  hili lisiruhusu Mheshimiwa 
Jimmy afanye yenye anataka kufanya ndani hapa ... 
       Hon. Odari:  Mheshimiwa Spika inaruhusiwa mtu kufanya utafiti kwa manufaa ya Bunge  na 
mimi utafiti nimefanya ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Lakini haimaanishi kwamba namzuia M heshimiwa kwenda safari ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Kama yeye ana mikakati ya kuomba kiti chako kwenda safari mruhusu ... 
(Laughter ) 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 18        Naomba nisome Kiingereza ... 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Soma kidogo . 
(Hon. Odari  read)  
       In 1998 the Government formalized  the ownership of the company that is Kenya Ferry 
through a Sessional  paper number three of 1998 by transforming the co ntributions  of both the 
Kenya Ports A uthority into equity shares . 
       Capital was thus increased from shs 2 million to shs 500 million ; the company is now owned  
80% by the Government of Kenya and 20% by Kenya Ports A uthority . 
(Hon. Odari ended reading)  
       Kwa hivyo hii kuon yesha kwamba kampuni ni mali ya serikali kwa kuwa Kenya Ports 
Authority ni ya serikali.  
       Lakini kama alivyosema Mheshimiwa  Hatimy ni vizuri tufahamiane vizuri ili tushirikiane 
nao na jambo lengine katika katiba yetu ya Kenya Fourth S chedule  Part 5b  inazungumzia  kuwa 
Ferries and H arbours  ni majukumu ya K aunti . 
       Kwa hivyo F erry ni yetu na mas uala ya Ferry iletwe K aunti tushir ikiane tulete maendeleo 
Kenya, ah sante . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa nashukurru Mheshimiwa Jimmy kwa taarifa  
aliopeana isipokuwa sisi twajua kuwa huwezi kuchukua pesa za raia ukaenda ukaanza limited 
company . 
       Hiyo haiwezekani lakini naomba hii karatasi isipitishwe kwa sababu haina minutes , naomba 
ije na minutes  siku nyengine ndio ipitishwe, a hsante . 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : Yes Patrick Siminyu what is it?  
       Hon. Siminyu:  The C ommittee has to work and one of the recommendations is the issue of 
inspectorate  and if we don't pass this, if there is reason why it should stop.  
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : It's a good report but i think Hon.  Hatimy is 
right , we have to see the minutes of this report . 
       Okay this one has already been debate d so when you bring the minutes it will be put to 
question, is that okay? When are you going to table the minutes . 
August 2, 2016                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic v ersion of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 19        Hon. Thoya: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika minutes  ziko na ndio maana zili generate  
ripoti hii  na pengine kesho nitaweza kuleta ... 
       The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mswabah Rashid) : On thank you very much, this report is not 
going to be debated again we are just waiting for the minutes and then we pu t a question, thank 
you, yes C lerk? 
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Members , there being no o ther business the House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
morning, thank you.  
The House rose at  3:50pm.  
  
 