September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday,  18th September , 2019  
The House met at 10:50a .m. 
 
(The Speaker ( Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
  PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Members  you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON ENVIRONMENT , ENERGY AND WASTE 
MANAGEMENT HON. SHEBE ATHMAN  
 
Yes Hon.  Shebe Athmani, Chairperson Committee on Environment, Energy and Waste 
Management? Please respond to the Statement . Yes Hon.  Ali Shomari, are you a Member  of that 
Committee?  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Ndio Mheshimiwa, ningependa kuomba kuwa.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Where is your Chairman?  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Mwenyekiti  kidogo ana dharura hakuweza kufika, sasa ningeomba 
Bunge hili litupatie wiki moja ili tuweze kupata majibu  Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
  The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Ali Shomari . Next week please make sure 
you bring the response , thank you . Yes, Clerk next order?  
 

September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 RESPONSE TO  STATEMENT BY CHAIRPE RSON COMMITTEE ON EN VIRONMENT , ENERGY AND WASTE 
MANAGEMENT  HON. SHEBE ATHMAN  ON STATUS OF GARBAGE CO LLECTION AT SARATOGA AREA IN 
AIRPORT WARD 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, again Hon.  Shebe Athman . I think he  is not around . 
Yes, Hon.  Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
kumbukumbu zangu zisiponipeleka vibaya kabla y a kwenda likizo ya Bunge hili, H oja hii 
ilikuwa na Mheshimiwa aliyeleta Hoja hii alisimama na akasadiki mbele ya Bunge hili ya 
kwamba  shughuli inaendelea ya uzoaji taka katika sehemu hii, kwa hivyo kuregelewa kwake 
swala hili Mheshimiwa Spika hatuna jawabu kwa sasa kwa saba bu tunajua kazi iliendelea na 
mhusika alisadiki katika J umba hili . Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : So you ar e responding on S tatement of the status of garbage 
collection at Saratoga area in  Airport Ward? O kay thank you Hon.  Mwamwiri.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Are you on a point of order?  
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Am on a point of information Mr. Speaker , am the one who brou ght the 
Statement . 
  
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes. 
  
Hon.  Omondi:  I wanted to react to what the Member  of Committee on Environment, 
Energy and  Waste Management has just said. Mr. Speaker S ir, you re member  this issue has been 
coming time and again and its  true, I do admit the reason why this issue ha s been coming time 
and again i s because as I said  we have been having a hide and seek situation whereby  you find as 
I bring this Statement a truck will come and that tru ck will carry two trip s and then disappe ar. 
When I bring it again, they bring a truck carrying two trip s and th en it disappears again and that 
is why you see my colleague was saying t hat this issue has been curving.  Mr. Speaker now I 
want to request for a permanent solution for t his because the  situation is very pathetic, the 
garbage is piling up Mr. Speaker Sir and it i s a very serious matter . Thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Member . Are you a Member  of that 
Committee? Hon.  Ibrahim are you a Member  of tha t Committee ? 
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Am not a Member  Mr. Speaker but am the one who brought the 
Statement.  
  
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : You are not a Member . 
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Am not a Member  Mr. Speaker.  
 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshim iwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika 
Mheshimiwa alisadiki kwamba kazi ilifanywa na kama kuna ulimbikizi wa taka ni kuma anisha 
watu wake waliregelea tena ku tupa taka mahali pasipo stahiki. K wa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika  
jukumu hili la kutafuta suluhisho la kudumu linaa nza na yeye mwenyewe, kwanza ahamasishe 
watu wake ya kwamba hawafai kumwaga taka pale kwa sababu sio mahali sahihi.  
Mheshimiwa Sp ika hatutakuwa tukipoteza rasilmali ya serikali G atuzi kwenda kuondoa 
taka mahali papo kwa hapo ambapo hapastahiki, na Mheshim iwa tunaye anafahamu na anakosa 
kuelekeza watu wake k uchukua hatua mwafaka ili rasil mali hii iweze kusaidia majukumu 
mengine ya kujenga serikali yetu. Mheshimiwa Spika namshauri Mheshimiwa akahamasishe 
watu wake tukichukua hatua iwe yeye ametangulia kuchu kua hatua ya kuhakikisha jaa lile 
limekufilia mbali pale mahali ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwamwiri . Yes Hon.  Ibrahim I think you  
have taken a note on that.  
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker but am not very  much interested in side shows . 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes? 
 
Hon.  Omondi:  As I speak Mr. Speaker am on point and I am speaking as a Member  of 
Airport W ard, a Member  MCA of Airport Ward am emphasising on that. .. Mr. Speaker Sir it i s 
me who feels the p inch and I fail to understand, a Member  from Likoni talks a lot and even if he 
talks a lot he even does  not know where the site is, he  is even saying that that place is not, 
actually that is a collection where the whole Changamwe Sub -County normally dump t heir waste 
not only Airport Ward, Changamwe Sub  - County dumps their waste and as we are speaking it i s 
now th e responsibility of the County government  to ensure that that particular garbage is actually 
removed from the place and taken to where it  is suppo sed to be.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Shomari are you on a point of information?  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Yes, am on a point of information Mr. Speaker. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika ningependa kumjulisha Mheshimiwa mwenzangu labda pengine amesahau, Bunge 
lililopita aliwahi kukiri yeye mwenyewe kwamba lile jaa limeondolewa, kazi imefanyika hivi sa a 
hii mimi mwenyewe kama Mwanachama wa Kamati ya Mazingira  nashangaa kumu ona tena 
Mheshimiwa bado analeta Taarifa hio hio. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Hamida.  
 
Hon.  Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker but Mr. Speaker I feel that we s hould take this thing 
seriously; e nvironment is the main key here in Mombasa but the garbage has become something 
of a norm for us here.  
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 When the Hon.  Members  start standing up and saying they do  not care how garbage is 
being collected I find it very hard but it is a  key issue for the Environment D epartment to know 
that this thing has become something that…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwa mwiri point of information.  
 
Hon.  Athmani Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kumtaarifu Mheshimiwa ya 
kwamba kwanza afahamu sijatoa kauli ya kwamba I don’t care . Pili mahali pa kutupa taka ama 
majalala ni sehemu ambayo lazima iwe gazzetted  katika serikali G atuzi ya Mombasa ; tuna 
sehemu mbili peke yake zilizokuwa gazzetted  kuhusu maswala ya taka, Mwakirunge na S honda  
Likoni, sehemu yeyote ni hatia kutupa taka pale na iwapo tutataka tuendeshane kisheria 
inavyostahiki, wananchi wake Mheshimiwa wa Airport wanafa a kukamatwa na kutozwa faini ya 
shilingi 50,000  kwa kutupa taka mahali pasipostahiki. Mheshimiwa hiyo ni kuleta uchumi kwa 
serikali kwa sababu tunapoteza ras ilmali nyingi kwenda kuzoa taka mahali pasipostahiki, apeane 
nasaha kwa watu wake Mheshimiwa, apean e nasaha kwa watu wake vyenginevyo tutaweka 
maafisa tukizowa taka tunakamata watu wake. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes thank you. Hon.  Nzai?  
 
Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker to have given me this chance to also air 
my views. Am a Membe r of Environment C ommittee and I want to comment or rather to talk as 
regards of what my fellow Honourable  of Airport has requested. The reason as to why Mombasa 
County through our Governor it was honoured at position  five in the implementation of all 
what ever is in all D epartments it is because  the job is seen done in the wo rld. Mr. Speaker if 
there is a D epartment which has really s hown its work is environmental D epartment…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Momba sa County is shining Mr. Speaker and it is shi ning because of t he combination of 
team work between the Environment C ommittee, Hon.  Members  and the executives. This 
particular garbage center which is at this Saratoga is not gazetted  area for those garbage, I think 
is up to my fellow Hon.  Member  to indeed advise his ele ctorates that Saratoga i s no longer a 
dumping site area. I think it i s high time for him to come up with self help groups or rather 
women groups to help him in collecting those garbage so that cleanliness can be seen in that 
area. Thank you very much Mr. S peaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Nzai.  Yes Hon.  Murfad.  
 
Hon.  Murfad  Amur:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni masikit iko kuona kwamba watu wanasema 
Wizara  fulani iwajibike, wakati kuna W izara ka dhaa zimezembea kupita kiasi;  ni jana tu saa 
nane hapa W izara moja ilizembea kupita kia si kukawa na fujo, leo twasema W izara ya 
Mazingira, ni W izara kadhaa katika Manispaa … 
 
(Interruption ) 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Prischilla . 
 
Hon.  Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N ataka kujulisha Nyumba kuwa tuko 
kweny e mjadala wa leo, hatuko kwenye mjadala uliopita kwa hivyo tulinde Mheshimiwa Spika 
na utulinde kikamilifu maana yake leo ni mjadala wa leo, mambo ya jana ni ya jana na mjadala 
wa leo na ni lazima Bunge hili li heshimiwe na kwenda na kanuni kulingana na Kanuni za Bunge  
ilioko hapa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Renson, yes are you on a point of information 
Hon.  Renson?  
 
Hon.  Thoya:  Naam , Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nataka kuwa katikati sababu naona 
Mheshimiwa Bomoa  ni mtu wa kung’a ra ndani ya Bunge lakini…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So you are not on a point of information? B ecause the Hon.  
Member  was still on the floor Amur, are you on a point of information to Amur, wacha amalize  
Honourable . Yes Hon.  Amur?  
 
Hon.  Murfad Amur:  Mheshimiwa Spika s ikusema hoja ya jana, nimesema Wizara 
zilioko katika K aunti ya Mom basa zimezembea tusitaje moja, W izara kadhaa  zimezembea na 
wakati tukisema W izara zimezembea, tusisem e ati W izara ya uchafu na takataka na ukusanyaji 
zimezembea  wakati W izara nyengine zimezembea zatoka uvundo. Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Renson?  
 
Hon.  Thoya:  Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika . Mimi nasema ni vyema kwamba Mheshimiwa 
Ibrahim Omondi alikiri kwamba ka zi inaendelea na ni vizuri kwa Kamati hiyo tuwape kongole 
mahali inastahili, hata hivyo ameonyesha tena katika Nyumba hii kwamba lile tatizo limerudi 
pale na pia iko majukumu ambayo ukiangalia kuna watu ambao wanatakikana kufanya hamasa 
ama hata zile taka zinapoondolea inakuwa ni vyema idara husika inaweza nunua hata  kama ni 
waya wa sen g'eng'e pale mahali wakapafunga kabisa.  
Kwa hivyo mimi ninaomba nikiwa kat ikati ya Mheshimiwa Ibrahim na K amati ya 
Mazingira  ambao wanafanya kazi nzuri, waende pale takataka zizolewe, hiyo hamasa wote 
wachanganyike na Mheshim iwa wa pale na wawaambie kabisa safari hi i twaja washika 
tuwapeleke ndani ili wale wananchi waweze kupata maanake tatizo liko pale pale . Ule ukweli 
Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi hana magari, hana nini sasa shida iko pale pale ikiwa tutaend a 
huku na huku tutakuwa hatujasaidia lakini k ungekuwa na majukumu ya pamoja K amati hiyo na 
Ibrahim zile taka wakazizoa na wale wananchi wakaambiwa kabisa ikiwezekana wakiwa 
wanataka maaskari wa Kaunti wawekwe pale permanent  kwa muda fulani ili ile elimu ya  
kwamba pale mahali haparuhusiwi liwaingie ndani ya akili, hilo ndio ombi langu.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Renson. Y es Hon.  Ibrahim.  
 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 Hon.  Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir  first of all I want to echo the sentiments of the Hon.  
Member  who has just s poken ; indeed he has spoken as an e lected Member  of this House…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir let us sometimes look at things o bjectively but not subjectively;  when we 
come to this House let us have independent decision s on every Member  and that is why we a re in 
this House.  We are in this House to deliberate on  the matters which comes and these  matters are 
very serious and they touch on various issue s which concerns the electorate  of Mombasa County. 
Mr. Speaker Sir am sorry to say that you were not in this H ouse yesterday and there  is an is sue 
which came up in this House;  I remember  yesterday I was warned by a Member  from this House 
and the Member  told me…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Bwire, are you on a point of information? Yes ? 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker Hon.  Prischillah Mumb a has just 
reminded this House not to discuss the past events, the issue that was discussed yesterday am 
hearing again the Hon.  Member  from Airport Ward is still referring to the matters that  was 
discussed yesterday , can he refrain from discussi ng what was discussed yesterday?  Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Under which Standing Order?  
 
Hon.  Bwire:  Under Point of Information, I was giving him information that a Member  of 
this House has just reminded us not to discuss issues that were discussed yesterday…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : But Hon.  Bwire maybe I  know you are in the Speakers’ 
Panel maybe you can explain to me under which Standing Order is that a Member  cannot discuss 
something…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Which was discussed yesterday ?! 
 
Hon.  Bwire:  Mr. Speaker if you are fair enough then the same question will have 
directed to the first Member … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : But you see you are in my P anel… 
 
(Applause)  
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  
So maybe explain to me so that I know it does  not mean that you heard Hon.  Prischillah 
saying that and you stand to say that so maybe you just tell me more about it . 
 
Hon.  Bwire:  Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : And I can see Hon.  Mwamwiri is coaching…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Yes Hon.  Mohamed Moha med?  
 
Hon.  Moha med Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker maybe I can help him , I think it is in the Standing 
Order 46…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Number?  
 
Hon.  Moha med Hatimy:  Number 46 . 
 
(Applause and l aughter)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Maybe just read for us you were about to say that, just read 
for us Standing Order 46 ... 
  
(Silence)  
 
Hon.  Bwire:  Standing Order 46 (1) ; No Motion may be moved which is the same in 
substance as any que stion which has been resolved … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Bwire maybe you can stop there, was there a Motion 
yesterday…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Bwire:  Mr. Speaker am still reading;    
(1) No Motion may be moved which is the same in subst ance as any question which has 
been resolved ( Either in the affirmative or in the negative) during the preceding six months in the 
same session ;  
(2) Despite paragraph (i )- 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 (a) A Motion to rescind the decision on such a question may be moved with the 
permissio n of the Speaker ; 
(b) A Motion to rescind the decision on a question on a Special Motion shall not be 
allowed ; 
Now I come back on Standing Order 46 (1) ; No Motion may be moved which is the same 
in substance as any question which has been resolved  (Either in ) ... It was resolved Mr. Speaker 
and th at is where I will to stick the issue , it was not a Motion yes but it was a Statement that you 
were not here yesterday that...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : What is the title of that Standing Order? Maybe you start 
with the title . 
 
Hon.  Bwire: But we are not limited to Motions ; if something was discussed even if it 
was not in a position of a Motion but it was discussed yeste rday even if it was a Statement  we are 
not limited to a Motion and that is why we ne ed so many amendments of these Standing Orders. 
Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Kibwana?  
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh: Thank you Hon.  Speaker I think...  
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
Can you just protect me . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Members  please ! Yes Hon.  Kibwana?  
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh: Hon.  Speaker I think apart from what my colle ague has 
read about the Motion, yesterday there was a bit of confusion on a ruling tha t was 
supposed to be read today. O ne of the issues was that if a Member  raised a St atement is it 
the interest of a person who has raised that Statement to be satisfied or is it open to be 
debate by everybody . So Hon.  Speaker  it is the same issue if the Member  is not satisfied 
with the reply , is it the one who is suppose d to raise again o r the Members  can defend 
that is what we expect today…  
 
(Applause)  
 
For the ruling so that you can give the ruling  which  will guide us on future debate 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Yes I think Hon.  Ibrahim you are on the 
floor you can continue.  
 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 Hon.  Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Although Mr. Speaker Sir I have 
heard some ... a bit of statements when I was discussing about the matter which I wanted 
to bring to your knowledge that yesterday indeed there was an issue here  and I was 
warned by indeed the Member  that they are going to gang up…  
 
(Interruption)  
(Silence)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Renson Thoya? Are you up on a Point of 
Information ? 
  
Hon.  Thoya: Point of Information  Mheshimiwa Spika ! Nafikiri nilipota ngulia  
kusema ya kuwa nimetumia njia ya katikati, nafikiri Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi 
angekuwa amepitia hapo tungekuwa tumemaliza na nafikiri njia anayojaribu kuenda nayo 
ni njia ambayo tutakesha nayo hapa. Mimi nimeomba Kamati ya Mazingira waende 
wakatoe z ile taka ikiwezekana waweke waya kama vile waliweka kule Chaani, walifanya 
kitu kama hicho.  Mheshimiwa Ibrahim pitia upande wangu tumalize hii, huko unakoenda 
hawa waungwana watakuandama na tutafika saa sita, wamejipanga Mheshimiwa Spika…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Renson. Yes Hon.  Ibrahim are you done 
with your…  
(Interruption)  
Hon.  Omondi:   Okay Mr. Speaker Sir I will go straight to the point. Mr. Speaker I 
brought this particular Statement and the reason why I brought this St atement is for the interest 
of the people of Airport Ward. And indeed Mr. Spea ker the Statement is very clear; n umber two, 
some of the Members  of Environment have alleged that I have been bringing this Statement, I 
have already explained and I have already  said why  this Statement keeps on coming, a nd I want 
to disagree with Members  who said that indeed that garbage was collected from the area, it was 
not collected 100  per cent . What I said I re member  very well, I sai d Mr. Speaker Sir in this 
House.. . 
(Inter ruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : But Hon.  Ibrahim…  
Hon.  Omondi:  Yes Sir!  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : The Member  said very clear ly there are on ly two dumping 
sites in Mombasa;  I think you should go back and see it is that area a dumping site or it is not a 
dumping site?  
(Applause)  
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Because if it is not, then I think your question has been answered.  
Hon.  Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir anything that we bring to this House will be on record, 
because there will be a Member  who will bring again the same issue and I will be the one who 
will stand to shoot down that because if today I cannot be a llowed to talk about this issue  I am 
talking about the garbage that has been dumped from that  seven years.  I said this and I am on 
record, it had never been collect ed for a long time Mr. Speaker and what has been happening is 
that when I bring this Statement…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mary Naliaka.  
Hon.  Naliaka:  Ahsante Bwana Spika kwa kunipa hii nafasi. Ningependa kutoa taarifa 
yangu kwa hii  Nyumba maana yake hio nafasi ama hilo jaa la Saratoga  limekuwa ni jaa ambalo 
limetumika kwa muda mrefu halijaanza leo. Kwa hivyo ningependa kusema si kazi ya 
Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Omondi kufanya uhamasisho maana yeye hana rasilmali hata za kufanya 
huo uhamas isho…  
(Applause)  
 Hio ni kazi ya Kaunti  ya kufanya mambo na uhamasish o kwa sababu ya watu wa 
Mombasa, n a hilo jaa ni sehemu ya ukusanyaji taka taka ya hio Sub -County ya Changamwe 
nzima ambapo taka taka haziwezi toka kwa nyumba zikapelekwa moja kwa moja kwa  Gazetted 
areas  kama Mwakirunge. N i lazima zitawekwa mahali fulani ndipo sasa magari ya Kaunti  
yachukue zile taka kutoka mahali pale ndio sasa zipelekwe kule Mwakirunge ama sehemu 
nyengine…  
(Applause)  
 Kwa hivyo ni lazima kuwe na mahali pa ukusanyaji. Than k you.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri?  
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Naomba kumtaarifu Mheshimiwa…  
(Interruption)  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I have a point of Order Hon.  Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes.    
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  (Technica l hitch) . 
(Background consultations)  
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Na nani? Serjeant-at-Arms  msikilize Mheshimiwa hapa 
anasema…  
(Background consultations)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa  Spika ningeomba 
kumtaarifu Mheshimiwa aliyetoka kuzungumza ya kwamba kanuni zipo na kutokua na ufahamu 
ama wataalamu wanasema , “Ignorant is not an excuse in law”.  Kwa hivyo ina aminika ya 
wakaazi wote wa Changamwe hususan maeneo ya Saratoga kama sijakosea ya kwamba ni hatia 
kutupa taka mahali pasipo stahiki. Jukumu lao wasubiri siku ambayo Serikali Gatuzi inapeleka 
gari la taka upande ule wapeane taka taka zao ziwek we moja kwa moja ndani ya gari, h akuna 
lugha katika sheria inayoitwa kama collection point  hakuna, hio anapotosha Jumba hili 
Mheshimiwa Spika.   
Pili, hakuna mtu aliyemwambia Mheshimiwa akaweke Public Participation ; jukumu lake 
ni kuhamasisha, kuhamasisha haimanishi ni kuweka elimu nasaha ama kuweka Public 
Participation  ya kuokota maon i. Sheria ziko hatuhitaji maoni yao isipokua watwii na kufuata 
sheria inavyostahiki na Mheshimiwa watu wake ni watu wazima watumie akili ya kibinadamu ya 
kwamba hawastahiki kutupa taka pale na kama wamekua wakifanya hio ni hatia. Tatu, b ajeti 
tulio nayo ka tika Idara hatuna b ajeti ya kwenda kuweka waya ama seng 'eng'e katika sehemu ile, 
bajeti haipo ya jukumu hilo. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa ni jukumu lake na sisi Mheshimiwa Spika 
nakuahidi na tunaahidi Jumba hili tutawajibisha Idara, tutaenda tutazitoa tena lakini na yeye 
ahakikishie Jumba hili ya kwamba yeye na watu wake hawataregelea kutupa taka pale. Haitakua 
tukipoteza rasil mali kwa yeye peke yake Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwamwiri. Hon.  Ibrahim I think just 
maybe…  
(Interruptio n) 
Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker, as I wind up…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Just wind up, maybe what you have to do is to make sure 
that area is been advertised as a dumping zone. Maybe that is the best solution you can have.  
Hon.  Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker. And again I want to inform the Member  who has just 
spoken that he seems not to know the functions of an MCA ; It is very sad indeed that today a 
Member  in this House even does  not know the functions of a Member  of the County Assembly , 
let me elaborate.  One, it is legislation, two is oversig ht and three is representation…  
(Applause)  
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  Now when a Member  purports to say that the work of an MCA is to go and do Public 
Participation or Public awareness that is not part of my function, I thi nk I have elaborated but 
Mr. Speaker let us bring this thing to an end. I just want the concerned…  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri . 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Naomba kumtaarifu Mheshimiwa asipotoshe Jumba hili. 
Katika majukumu matatu ametaja jukumu la uwakilishi ama representation  ambayo kwa hilo ni 
kuleta taarifa za watu wake hapa na kuchukua majibu kutokana na Jumba hili na Serikali Gatuzi 
kuwapelekea watu wake hio ni elimu nasaha tosha…  
(Applause)  
 Na ni jukumu la representation  kama yeye hajui majukumu Mheshimiwa Spika najitolea 
nimfanyie tuition  ya bure nimfunze jukumu la MCA.  
(Applause)  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim?  
Hon.  Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir , what I can term this is drama ; he has turned this kind of 
thing  as a drama , what I would like to tell him I do not need tuition, I am educated enough, I am 
a teacher and I have a degree…  
(Applause)  
 And another thing, I just wanted to inform the Member  who stood that he wanted to 
tuition me, I want to tell him that I  have not asked for tuitioning  from him. Two, I am educated 
enough, as I speak I hold a degree…  
(Applause)  
 Three, Mr. Speaker I want to inform the Member  that it is only through your ruling that, 
that information can now go back, not just a Member  hecklin g.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 What he was doing was just heckling and he wanted me to take his information official 
and go and act on it. It is you who is supposed to rule and inform me that I am supposed to do 
that, that when the information becomes official from th is House but Mr. Speaker Sir to end this 
matter because we now…  
 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 (Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Omondi : To end this matter Mr. Speaker Sir  it is just to ask th e concerned 
Department, when are they really g oing to remove this particular garbage?  A Member  who has 
just spoken is a nominated Member  from Airport Ward and that Member  is very serious on what 
she said. She has not just come here to speak. She knows what I am talking about. Mr. Speaker 
sir I am wait ing for your ruling, thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Ibrahim. I think the ruling is going to be 
very simple. Hon.  Mwamwiri may be you can bring the statement reply in hand writing so that 
Hon.  Member  can have it which…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Sorry?  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Because he has just enquired that he wants to know when?  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : No! What we can do is…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  So I can tell him when we are going to do it?  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : You sit down with your Committee and come with that 
resolution and you can bring it here. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  We are ready Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : No! No! Just bring it. I think it is enough fo r today.  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
 Bring it in writing by afternoon , and then moving forward Hon.  Members ... I think just sit 
Hon.  Shomari, are you in a point of information?  
 
 
(Hon.  Shomari off microp hone) 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  
 Under which Standing Order?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Standin g Order 42?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 read for me?  
 
(Loud consultations)  
 
 Can you read for me Standing Order 42?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kukujulisha kwamba nimesahau 
miwani yangu leo...  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 But nitai…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Amur mpatie miwani?  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa lakini hiyo haingiani na macho yangu.  
 
(Laughter)  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Okay, Hon.  Shomari what do you want to tell this House?  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ning ependa kusoma Standing Order 
number 42…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Just tell us what you wanted to say?  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Kidogo nimefikichafikicha macho nikaona naziona spelling,  sasa 
afadhali niendelee kusoma. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Shomari just leave that Standing Order tell us what 
you want to say to this House.  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Okay, committal to committee.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri): it is fine I have seen that Standing Order so just tell us as 
you were in a point of information.  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi yangu nilikuwa ninasimama 
kama Member  wa Environment  ningeomba Bunge hili litupe nafasi kidogo atleast  Chairman aje 
tuweze kukusanyikana kama Member  wa Environment tuweze kufik a kwa Mheshimiwa 
mwenzetu Bomoa ili tuone hili tatizo sugu tutalisaidia vipi.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you.  
 
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Kwa sababu sisi sote ni  waheshimiwa na tatizo likiwa kwa mwenzetu 
ni lazima Kamati  ikae pamoja ione ita tatua vi pi tatizo lile.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Honourable.  
  
Hon.  Ali Shomari:  Kuna njia nyingi za  kuweza kutatua tatizo lile…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon.  Mohamed Mohamed?  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika ningepen delea kwenye Taarifa , yule 
anayeuliza  Taarifa  anaweza kuhudhuria kikao cha  Kamati  kwenda kupeleka na kusiki za na 
kuuliza kama ana maswala lolote ndani ya ile  Kamati  ili apate kusaidika na ikiwa atakuwa na 
jambo lolote ataweza kurudi ndani ya Nyum ba hii aeleze kuwa yeye hakuridhika  lakini kama 
atapatiwa nafasi  hiyo Kamati  ikae na yeye aende  mbele ya Kamati  wakae wayazungumze hayo 
maneno Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante . 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mohamed. Honourable Members  just pi ece 
of advice to you so that you know everything is going to be in record here and today we are here 
tomorrow we are not going to be here. The way I can see the mood of this House of what I have 
heard of what was happening yesterday, I think most of thing s people here are taking it personal 
and there is nothing personal here.  
So please Members  do not take it personal ; if a Member  comes with a Statement and he 
or she wants to know somethin g it is your duty to take that Statement and take it to the 
Department . Let the Department to answer , you don’t have to come to this House and pretend 
that you want to defend the Department or you want to, so please Hon.  Members … 
September 18 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  
(Applause)  
 
 So Honourable Members  let us be sober in this House ; let us know what are our duties , I 
think with those short remarks we can all move forward and tomorrow we will be accountable 
not only in this House or not only in Mombasa even in God when we go tomorrow everyone will 
be accounted of what you have done to your people.  
So Hon.  Members , if there is any Statement or any issue I urge you as Members  or the 
Chairmen or Chairladies; please do  not take it personal. Hon.  Amur please! Just take it or take 
the Statement the way you were asked  and I am sure before even the Statement comes to this 
House it passes through all the channels whereby the Clerk and myself and we see that this 
Statement is viable and peopl e want to know what is going on , you know ! So Hon.  Members  do 
not take things t oo personal here not unless may be there is something else. Yes Clerk , next 
Order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon.  Members  this House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 18th September , 2019 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11:30 a.m. 
  
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  