August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 4th August , 2021  
The House met at 2 :38p.m. 
 
[The Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Raphael Bwire)  in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire ): You may be seated Members,  once again 
welcome to our afternoon session. Yes , Clerk?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Clerk, kindly confirm if there is a quorum.  
 
[Lack of quorum confirmed]  
 
The Serjeant -At-Arms ring the bell for five minutes . 
 
[Quorum Bell r ung]  
 
Clerk  please confirm if there is quor um? 
 
[Quorum confirmed]  
 
Thank you. Next Order please . Clerk?  
 
PAPER  
BUDGET PREPARATION G UIDELINES FOR THE FI NANCIAL YEAR BUDGET 2022/2023  
 
Yes Honourable  Hamisi Mwidani, the Leader of Majority Party?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker , thank you fo r giving me this 
chance to lay Paper on b udge t preparation g uidelines for the Financial Year Budget 2022/2023. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
[Paper L aid] 
 

August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you.  
 
[Silence]  
 
 Honourable  Members , the budget prepa ration g uidelines for the Financial Year 
2022/2023 stands committe d to the Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations . Yes, 
Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
APPROVAL OF LOAN FAC ILITY FOR PAYMENT OF  SALARIES AND OTHER R EMUNERATIONS FOR 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT EM PLOYEES  
 
Yes Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg 
to give  the following Notice of Motion:  
 
THAT AWARE that Section 142 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 allows 
short -term borrowing by the  County g overnment on the approval by the County 
Assembly;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that the County g overnment of Mombasa like all other Counties in 
Kenya is yet to receive any disbursement of equitable share to date for the Financial Year 
2021/202 2; 
 
Mr. Speaker , CONCERNED that the delay in receipt of disbursement and the low 
revenue collection due to the adverse operating economic environment may adversely 
affect the operations of the County Assembly and the County Executive including 
payment of m onthly salaries and remuneration;  
 
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
 
1. THAT, Pursuant to Section 142 of the Public Financ e Management Act, 2012, 
County g overnment including the County Assembly be and is hereby authorized 
henceforth whenever necessa ry to borrow funds from financial institutions to enable 
payment of monthly salaries and remuneration for County Gover nment/County Assembly 
employees;  
 
2. THAT, the loans received from financial institutions for payments of salaries and 
remuneration be repaid  from disbursements received from the National Treasury.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you , the Majority Leader. Yes Clerk?  
 
 
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON , COMMITTEE ON LANDS P LANNING AND 
HOUSING , HONOURABLE AHMED SALAMA  ON THE  
OWNERSHIP AND STATUS  OF DISPUTED PLOT OF LAND IN JOMVU MISHEN I 
 
Yes Honourable  Ahmed Salama, Chairperson Committee on Lands, Planning and 
Housing?  
 
[Silence]  
 
The Vice Chair Hon ourable  Aran?  
 
Hon. Aran: Thank you Mr. Speaker . We have not yet receive d the response from the 
Department  and we humbly request for an extension of two weeks  when  we are back for the 
recess Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : But Honourable  Aran we agreed last week that 
we will be c losing th e business es of  the response s this week and you did promise  that you will 
bring the response today, you asked for one week which elapse s today! W as it not among the 
responses that you were to report last week?  
 
Hon. Aran:  Not this one Honourable  Speaker . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Okay. Yes Hon ourable  Athman Shebe?  
 
Hon. Athman Shebe:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker , it is of great sadness that I 
stand before you because this  matter is of great, great significance . People in Jomvu are  being  
jailed for this reason , others are with machetes and pangas  Mr. Speaker ; I just, you know this 
issue I brought it here last two weeks and I was promised that this matter is going to be given 
priority . Mr. Speaker , I do not know what is happeni ng to my distinguish ed Honourable  Member  
here togeth er with the Chairman I need your indulgence Honourable  Speaker on this matter  
pleas e it is of great significant or else you are going to hear Jomvu Kuu Ward people have been 
slashed and cu t with the machetes and it is of great importance that I need your input on this . I 
know today we might be going to a recess and that means two weeks time  Mr. Speaker  and I do 
not know whether to request or rather to arrange a special Committee to get to the bottom of this 
matter I need your indulg ence.  Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Honourable  Aran for  how long has 
this b usiness be pending before your Committee ? 
 
Hon. Aran:  One-week  Honourable  Speaker . 
  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Okay. Hono urable  Members now that we do not 
have the response with us today and that the Committee is for the first time asking for the 
extension  there are  rumors  that we might be heading for a recess Honourable  Member , the author 
of the Statement can you just be ki nd enough to allow the Committee to bring the response in the 
next two weeks immediately after the recess .  
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 Hon. Athman Shebe:  I am going to give them a benefit of doubt Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Come again?   
 
Hon. Athman  Shebe : I am going to give them that opportunity  that is what I meant . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you so Hon ourable  Vice Chair Committee 
on Lands you are hereby given two weeks so immediately after the recess the first Wednesday of 
the week  that we will be reporting here be ready with that response , so make use of this recess to 
either go down to the affected area or pressurize the department so that immediately we resume 
you also bring the response.  
 
Hon. Aran:  Most ob liged Honourable  Speak er. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Is it on the same issue?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  No Honourable  Speaker  niko na Point of Order ! 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) :  Yes. 
 
Hon. Kitula:  Standing Order 96 Mheshimiwa Spika katika vikao vyetu vya Bung e sijui ni 
lini Bunge letu limeruhusu tembo la mnazi kuingia katika Bunge hili kwa sababu nikiangalia 
meza ya Mheshimiwa Mary Osongo kuna tembo la mnazi katika meza hiyo . Sasa sijui kama 
amepitia security checks  kwa sababu maji ambayo  yako katika meza yake  ni tofauti na yetu…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Order! Order Honourable  Kitula , are you sure it 
is what you are alleging ? 
  
Hon. Kitula:  Serjeant-At-Arms anaweza ku tuhakikishia  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu ni 
tofauti na maji yetu…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : It was for the S ergeant -At-Arms to ascertain 
because those are grave claims Honourable  Member; if  it is water kindly just take it back to  the 
owner the Serj eant once you have ascertained  it is water no n eed t o take it away from her but 
Honourable  Member you see the already senti ment s have been captured that Honourable  Osongo 
has mnazi  in the chambers . So you could have just first asked the  Serjeant to confirm whether it 
is water or something  that you are alleging? Yes Honourable  Osongo?  
 
Hon.  Osongo:  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  I think the Honourable  Member I do not know 
what is wrong with him, you cannot judge something before knowing what is there so he should 
withdraw that . 
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Kitula those are grave a llegations 
considering that Honourable  Osongo is a staunch Christian she believes in  the Lord , so kindly 
withdraw and apologize to that . 
 
Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika sijapinga hilo hata Yesu  Kristo pia aliweza  
kunywa wine na tukizingatia kwamba tembo la mnazi halijapigwa marufuku wameweza kuwa ni 
tembo wao wenyewe wanalipenda binafsi…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable ! Again you are misleading the 
House, the Jesus himself never too k the wine, he changed water into wine but he never took it so 
you are still misleading the House, kindl y apologize and withdraw those s tatement s. 
  
Hon. Kitula:  Mheshimiwa Spika ningetoa samahani kwa Mheshimiwa Osongo lakini 
kutokana  na muonekano wangu na  utaalamu  wangu inakaa kam a mnazi lakini kuthibitisha 
Serjeant ningependa kutoa samahani sana. Ahsante sana.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. The matter has been withdrawn and 
the Member has apologized. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY C HAIRPERSON COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH  SERVICES  
HONOURABLE KIBWANA S WALEH ON THE REPAIR OF FAULTY RAMP AT SH IKA ADABU HEALTH 
CENTER  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Honourable  Kibwana Swaleh, Chairperson 
Committee on Health Services?  
 
[Silence]  
 
The Vice C hair?  
 
[Silence]  
 
But hav e seen the Chairperson. Yes Honourable  Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Honourable  Speaker thank you since we have not gotten a response for this…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Make use of your microphone Honourable.  
  
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I think we have not gotten a response for this one yet .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So when will you be ready?  
 
Hon. Noor:  I think when we come back from the recess .  
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So specifica lly you are asking for two weeks . 
 
Hon. Noor:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Okay per mission granted. What is it Honourable  
Mwalimu?  
 
Hon. Hamad M walimu : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri wiki iliyopita Bwana 
Spika ulitoa  uamuzi w ako kw amba leo niweze kupata h ayo majibu,  kwa hivyo naomba usaidizi 
wako Bwana Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Actually we made an announcement on this 
pending issues last week, Members I do not know what is wrong with the Committees because 
this needs just an assurance from the department, a commitment in fact for how long or after how 
long will they repair ? I think it was an issue to do with a ramp right , so once again Committees 
let us wake up we are doing injustices to the people whom we are represen ting and th e Members 
who are bringing the s tatements on behalf of the people they represent. So becaus e we do not 
have a response Honourable  Mwalimu let us kindly again allow them to bring the response in the 
next two weeks and I think that will be the las t time failure to which we will look for another 
alternative . So kindly allow the Committee because the Chairman is not  in... the Member has 
requested for two weeks and I also request the author of the Statement to g ive the Committee 
two weeks Honourable  Mwalimu so that we they will bring the response immediately after 
recess. Are you in agreement?  
 
Hon. Hamad M walimu : Sawa Mheshimiwa Spika  nitasubiri . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. So Honourable  Hamida kindly pass 
the information to the l eadership of the Committee .  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I will . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes , Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON EDUCATION , INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY AND MOMBA SA VISION MV 2035  HONOURABLE IB RAHIM OMONDI ON  
STATUS OF BURSARIES IN THE COUNTY  
 
Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi, Chairperson Committee on Education, Information 
Technology and Mombasa Vision (MV 2035) any response?  
 
[Silence]  
 
The Vice Chair?  
 
[Silence]  
Any Committee Member?  
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 7  
[Silence]  
 
Yes Honourable  Osongo?  
 
Hon. Osongo: Thank you Mr. Speaker for now we do not have a response so we are 
requesting for more time.  
 
[Silence]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes, what is it Honourable  Athumani Shebe?  
 
Hon. Athmani Shebe:  Mheshimiwa Spika niko chini ya himaya yako nikitaka unipatie 
fursa j apo si e nili eweza kuleta taarifa hii lakini nafikiri kila Wodi takriban 30 za katika maeneo 
kata ziko na changamoto kubwa za watoto wetu wanaohitaji kwenda shule na songo  mbingo hii 
ambayo imeweza na uzemb e wa hii Kamati . Kwangu mimi naweza sema ni uzembe kwa sababu 
mimi kusema ni uzembe Mheshimiwa Spika saa hii watoto wanatakikan a kurudi shule na kila 
Mheshimiwa Mwenza hapa atakubaliana na mimi hapa hana takriban chini ya fomu 200 ambazo 
ziko katika ofisi zao ambao wanatarajia watoto waende shule . Kwa hivyo niko chini ya himaya 
yako Mheshimiwa utupe muongozo katika hili suala manake naona kuwa ni aidha Kamati 
imeweza kushindwa kutekeleza ama kusukuma executive  kuhusu hili suala  sijui utatupa njia 
gani ya k uhakikisha kuwa watoto wetu wameenda shule na Kaunti imewezesh a. Nikikupa mfano 
Mheshimiwa Spika katika mfumo mzima wa eneo Bunge la Kimataifa wamekuja na mikakati na 
watoto wamepata hizi basari;  je Kaunti tuna mikakati gani , tunasema elimu kwanza chini ya  
himaya yako. Ahsante.  
 
[Silence]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : So Honourable  Osongo are you sure in the next 
two weeks you will be ready with the response?  
 
Hon. Osongo: Mr. Speaker Sir , we are going to try  our level best to make it . 
 
The Temporar y Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Have you ever tried because the issue is not 
coming for the first but the second time, have you tried that level best maybe as a Committee?  
 
Hon. Osongo:  The Statement I think was issued last week but we will do the follow up, 
give us the two weeks .  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : It is okay because the issue comes up across all 
Members , you are also the interested party you must also be feeling the same pinch from the 
parents . So kindly also work on it as a Committee and bring  the response in two weeks’ time . 
Thank you. Yes , Clerk?  
 
 
 
MOTION  
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 APPROVAL OF LOAN FAC ILITY FOR PAYMENT OF  SALARIES AND REMUNER ATIONS FOR 
COUNTY GOVERNMENT EM PLOYEES  
 
Yes Honourable  Majority Leader?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Sp eaker.  Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg 
to move the following Motion on a pproval o f loan facility for payment of salaries and other 
remunerations for County government employees:  
 
THAT AWARE that Section 142 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 allows 
short-term borrowing by the County g overnment on the approval by the County 
Assembly;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that the County g overnment of Mombasa like all other Counties in 
Kenya is yet to receive any disbursement of e quitable share to date for the financial y ear 
2021/20 22; 
 
Mr. Speaker ; 
 
CONCERNED that the delay in receipt of disbursement and the low revenue collection 
due to the adverse operating economic environment may adversely affect the operations 
of the County Assembly and the County Executive including payment of  monthly salaries 
and remuneration;  
 
I, therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
 
3. THAT, Pursuant to Section 142 of the Public Financ e Management Act, 2012, 
County g overnment including the County Assembly be and is hereby authorized 
henceforth whenever nece ssary to borrow funds from financial institutions to enable 
payment of monthly salari es and remuneration for County g overnment/County Assembly 
employees;  
 
4. THAT, the loans received from financial institutions for payments of salaries and 
remuneration be rep aid from disbursements received from the National Treasury.  
 
I call Honourable  Junior to second the Motion.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Honourable  Wambua second the Motion . 
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Wambua ): I second Mr. Speaker.   
        
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Honourable  Members , I now propose 
a question that the Motion moved by Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani on approval of loan 
facility for payment of salaries and any oth er remuneration for the County government 
employee s be considered by this Honourable House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to ] 
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  
Yes Hamisi Mwidani?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Bwana Spika ningependa kulielekeza Bunge 
kwa ufasaha kw amba tumetuma haya maombi  kwa sababu  ya ile delay  ambayo inatokea pesa 
kutoka Nairobi. Bwana Spika ni kama unavyojua sasa hivi tayari tuko tarehe nne mwezi wa nane 
na mshahara wa Julai  hatujauo na h ata harufu yake hatu jauona dalili.  Kwa hivyo ningeomba 
Mheshimiwa Spika na waheshimiwa wenzangu  ya kwamba turuhusu watu wetu wa fedha  
waweze ku -negotiate  na hizo financial institutions  angalau tuwe hatutaweza kuchelewa kwa 
muda mrefu kwa kupata mishahara. Bwana Spika , kwa ukweli tunazidi kuwa kwa hali ngumu 
sana; kwa hivyo ningeomba Bunge hili kwa h eshim a na nidhamu tupitishe kwa kauli moja  
angalau uso wetu kule mitaani u weze kufunguka  kwa sababu ni vile tu Assembly hakuna ma-
rooms  lakini wengine tungekuwa twalala humu humu kwa sababu imefika waka ti pia umesema 
mpaka pia h ujui utumie Kiswahili gani n a kila siku mtu anakusikia wewe Mheshimiwa lakini  
wamuambia ni kweli lakini sina na unajua mwana nchi aliyepiga kura akiona ni tarehe nne na 
bado wamuambia huna anajua unamnyima maanake tarehe nne huwa wazi kila mtu ashapata 
mshahara! lakini ni mambo ya uk weli kwamba hatuna.  
Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika na waheshimiwa ningeomba tupitishe hii Hoja kwa manufaa 
yetu pamoja na wale wal iotuchagua kwa sababu unapokuwa nacho na wewe ndio unaweza 
kusaidia lakini ukiwa  huna inakuwa sasa y ule hana na wewe al iokuwa na  matu maini yako nawe 
pia huna sasa mnakuwa nyote sina ! Sina! sina. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika na waheshimiwa 
ningeomba hii hoja isichukue hata dakika 20 ndio tuw eze kuona hali itakuwa imeweza 
ikubadilike  tuwe kwenye hali nzuri. Bwana Spika hali ni mbaya. Hivi sasa na kuambia hata 
hatuna haja ya  kusema mengi; i kiwa mtu ana elfu kumi basi huyo ni mwanamke wa kisawasawa 
au u mwanam me wa  kisawasawa na hakuna. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika naomba Bunge  hili  kwa 
unyenyekevu, najua Faith anazo maanake najua kwa nini anazo maanake b osi wake alikuwa 
hapa juzi  hivyo basi  alifungiwa kitu sisi wengine mabosi wetu hata hawajakanyanga.  Kwa hivyo 
Bwana Spika tunaomba Bunge lipitishe hii Hoja kwa unadhifu kwa ma nufaa yetu na wale 
waliotuch agua, a hsante Bwana Spika.  
 
[Applause]  
 
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you . Yes Honourable Members , the floor 
is open for contribution. Yes Honourable Athman?  
 
Hon. Athuman i Shebe : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nachukua fursa hii 
kwanza kuingia kwenye kumbukumbu ya historia ya Bunge la pili k uchangia hoja ambayo nina 
imani asilim ia mia kwa mia yaweza kupita katika Bunge hili.  Yangu tu Mheshimiwa ni  kusema 
kuwa napenda kutia uhai hoja hii ambayo imeletwa mbele na Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa W engi  
na yangu ni kusema kuwa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti naf ikiri Mombasa K aunti ya Mombasa kwa 
jumla tuna historia kubwa ya watu kuweza kucheleweshewa marupurupu yao, mishahara yao na 
hata kutia donda chumvi Mheshimiwa Spika hata zile pesa wafanyi  kazi wa umma wanapaswa 
kukatwa pia Kaunti ya Mombasa ina historia kubw a kuwa haipeleki mikato hii katika sehemu 
husika aidha kwa serikali, kwa NHIF . Kwa mikopo kwa wale watu wengine waliochukua  
mikopo kwa hivyo na pesa tunaju a saa nyingine Mheshimiwa Spika wakati mwingine 
zinachelewa si makosa . 
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 Nitaekelea katika blanketi zim a la Kaunti ya Mombasa , pia Serikali Kuu ina d esturi hii ya 
kuchelewesha pesa, k wa hivyo  hoja hii imepata uhai japo kuchelewa kwa wakati huu itaweza 
kusaidia japo kiduchu kwa wale Waheshimiwa na pamoja na wafanyi  kazi wote kwa umma 
ihakikishe kuwa leo Bun ge hili inapitisha hoja hii na itawezesha kuwa Waziri  wa sarafu  aweze 
kukaa na yale mashi rika husika ya  kuweza kukopesha sarafu  ili waheshimiwa na wafanyi  kazi 
wa umma wa Kaunti ya Mombasa watakuwa wanapata mishahara yao Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. 
Manake ni  desturi kawaida huwa wafanyi  kazi wa umma  tarehe 25,24 na 28 huwa watu 
washaramba mishahara Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Lakini  hapa kwetu haijawahi kutokea labda 
ikitoke a basi kwa hoja hii iliyoletwa mbele yetu na Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa W engi wa Bunge 
hili. K wa hivyo ningependa waheshimiwa wenza chem belecho Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa W engi 
dakika ishirini ni nyingi ikichukua sana ni dakika 10 Mheshim iwa Mwenyekiti lakini kuwe na 
msukumo kuhakikisha kuwa hili linafanyi ka. Kweli kuna uvumi hu enda tukaenda mapumzikon i 
takriban wiki mbili.  Wiki mbili hizi kwangu n i kinaya Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti manake ni 
takriban miezi sita  kwa sababu wiki mbili  tukienda mashinani b ila shilingi inakuwa ni mtihani . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti afadhali hamna hamna tuweze tupitishe hoj a hii 
kuha kikisha itawezesha serikali ya K aunti kuweza kukopa katika yale mashirika ya kifedha 
waheshimiwa wa wafanyi  kazi wote wa umma waweze kupata tahfifu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , 
naipa uhai  sana Mheshimiwa hoja hii. A hsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you Hon ourable  Shebe Athman.  Yes 
Honourable  Faith Boniface?  
 
Hon.  Mwende : Thank you Mr . Speaker . I stand to support the Motion, and how I wish it 
would have come back in 2017 because once you are employed you are very sure by the end of 
the month you are receiving your salary but in our Assembly you wait for 40 something days so I 
appreciate and I request the concerned people to push it to be effected by Friday every person 
should have the salary. Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you.  Yes Chief Whip? Yes you are up!  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Wambua) : Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika  hoja hii 
imekuja kwa wakati mzuri sana kwa sababu sisi Waheshimiwa wa Mombasa tumeumia sana kwa 
mish ahara hata huwezi kupang a na mtu ikifika mwisho wa mwezi ukaweza kumpatia chochote. 
Kwa hivyo ukiona hoja kama hii Bwana Mwenyekiti wa Fedha amekuja nayo sisi tunashukuru 
sana na tunaona u hai mbeleni,  tunaona tunaweza kupangilia hata c hochote tunaweza kupata na 
tunaweza kuendelez a mambo yetu.  Nasimam a kuiunga hoja hii.  Ahsante sana.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you Chief Whip.  Yes Honourable Nzai?  
 
Hon.  Nzai : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker to have given me this chance also to air my 
views.  It is said in our mother t ongue ; a good lady does not deserve much make up. This Motion 
does not require much discussion , five minutes…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : You said that is in your mother tongue?  
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  
[Laughter]  
 
Hon. Nzai : What I am trying to tell you M r. Speaker is that let us pass this Motion without 
much discussion as in it is good as it was made. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Honourable  Mem bers, let us hear 
from Honourable  Solomon Ngugi for the first time. Honourable  Solomon Ngugi? Yes , the 
Members also want to hear from you. You see we have never heard anything from you even a 
maiden speech.  
 
Hon.  Ngugi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi pia nataka kuipa uhai hiyo hoja kama vile 
waheshimiwa wenzangu wanavyoipa uh ai. Ni ukweli itatusaidia maana twazihitaji hizo pesa. 
Kama tunavyoona hiyo karo ya shule inapiga watu chenga mpaka watot o wetu wenyewe 
kuwasomesha pia ni balaa. Sasa hoja hii mimi nai pa uhai mara tatu ya wengine. A hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Honourable  Majority Leader , kindly 
reply?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Basi natoa shukrani kwa Waheshimiwa 
kuweza kupitisha hii hoja na pia nataka kuwaongezea kwamba chelewa lakini ufike. Kwa kweli 
hii ndio ilikuwa yatakikana kuifanya mapema lakini ni kama unavyojua  kwa mazingira na 
mambo yalivyokuwa tumechelewa kidogo.  Ndiyo tunaambiwa chelewa chelewa lakini ufike. 
Waheshimiwa hili ni jambo ambalo sasa litatusaidia sasa sababu tutakuwa sisi hatuangali ani tena 
na ile pesa ya kutoka Nairobi tukishakubaliana na hii benki na ile tarehe ambayo tunataka benki 
itakuwa wanatupa sisi mshahara wetu kwa ile tarehe benki ikingoja ile pesa sisi tunalipa. Kwa 
hivyo Mungu akipenda sasa tutakuwa kwenye usalama mzuri m anake tutakuwa na uhakika ya 
kwamba tarehe ikiwa ni tarehe 22 ni 25 huo mshahara mtu ataupata. Hayo mengine itakuwa kati 
ya system  wakileta pesa wao ndiyo wanal ipa huku kwa benki . Kwa hivyo waheshimiwa 
nimesh ukuru sana kwa kuelewa hii hali tuli oko na tume weza kupitisha kujinasua tuwe katika 
hali nzuri. Nawash ukuru sana na Mungu atulinde sote.  
 
[Silence]  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Members , before I put a question I 
just want to bring to our attention that the Motion is good as you have  suggested, Majority 
Leader the Motion is very general ; it indicates whenever the Executive works or sees that there is 
a problem with finance  they can approach financial institutions for assistance . But again I  also 
want to question M embe rs that let us n ot open that l oophole  whenever they want any financial 
assistance they should be bringing the Motion . This is for the current financial crisis and it is not 
a leeway  for them that they will be now borrowing every time they feel like borrowing whenever 
they feel there is a financial crisis they bring a Motion we pass it to allow them to go and borrow 
the loans,  so it is not a leeway.  
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 We are not opening that gap whenever they feel like they should be going for those loans. 
This is for the current situation and when it arises in the near future they will also come for 
approval by the Assembly , I think we are together. Thank you.  Honourable  Members , I now put 
a question that the Motion moved by Hon ourable Hamisi Musa Mwidani be approved by this 
Honourable H ouse in the same terms as moved.  
 
[Question put and a greed  to] 
[Applause]  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT  OF THE  COUNTY  ASSEMBLY  
 
 Yes Honourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani , the Majority Leader ?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr.  Speaker . Let me take this 
opportunity on Procedural Motion.  
 
THAT, pursuant to Standing Order No.23 (3) and the County Assembly Calendar 
adopted by this House on Wednesday,17th March , 2021 this Assembly adjourns for recess 
and to resume regular sittings on T uesday,17th August , 2021.  
 
 That is a period of two  weeks. Thank  you Mr.  Speaker, I will request Honourable  Junior 
to second the Motion.  
    
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Yes Hon ourable  Junior?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Wambua) : I second Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Members I now propose a questi on 
that the Motion moved by Hon ourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani on the County Assembly for 
recess to  be considered  by this Honourable Ho use in the same terms as moved ? 
 
[Question proposed an d agreed  to] 
 
 Yes Hon ourable  Hamisi Musa Mwidani? Your contribution please?  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr.  Speaker . I think I will not take 
much time because we have already passed the calendar of this House and it is not something 
very new to the Members ; mine is to say that we use that time for recess in our areas so that we 
can do some issues with the elector ate. So Members what I ca n just say that we just go for two 
weeks recess but please remember to take care on COVID  -19 it is now ve ry strong rather than 
any other time and I will request that God willing that we all meet after recess when we are very 
safe and I assure Members that as a Chairman for Finance I will also push so that we do not stay 
very long before the money has come in your pockets. Thank you very much.  
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Bwire) : Thank you. Members you can cont ribute to this 
Motion at least two people. Yes Hon ourable  Chef Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Wambua) : Bwana Spika hoja hii imekuja pia wakati mzuri 
twend e tukaonane na watu wetu  ambao walituleta katika Bunge . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Make use of you mic rophone . 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon.  Wambua) : Kwa sababu wengine pia Bwana Spika wanaweza 
kuona tuko mbali k uona kwenda kufika muda wa uchaguzi lakini wakati umefika  na tunahitajika 
sana kwenda mashinani kuendeleza siasa zetu pole  pole. Nafikiri Motion hii hata haina haja 
kuongelewa sa na kwa sababu ni kwa uzuri wetu ; tumekuwa hapa katika muda huu ambao 
tumekuwa , tumechangia yale ambayo tumechangia hapa tunataka sasa tuipeleke kule mashinani 
tuweze kuendeleza watu wetu waweze kujua ni kitu ambacho tunafanya katika Bunge. A hsante 
sana Bwana Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwire) : Shukran Mheshimiwa Kiranja w a Bunge . Yes 
Mheshimiwa Mwaka M walundonda?  
 
 Hon.  Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Hata mimi pia naunga mkono 
kuweza kwenda nyumbani kwa sababu ni kalenda  ndiyo imeturuhusu lakini kama si kalenda   
mimi ningesema tusiende nyumbani, kw a sababu ni kalenda  na wakati umefika hatuna budi 
kwenda nyumbani japo tunaenda shingo upande kwa sababu mimi binafsi kama Mheshim iwa 
Mwaka na nimechaguliwa naju a saa hii shule zimefunguliwa.  Wanafunzi wanataka msaada 
lakini tumekubaliana nalo kwa sababu  kama Mheshimiwa Kiongozi wa Wengi wa Bunge hili 
amesema tusicheze mbali pesa zitatoka kwa hiyo tumekubali kwenda , nashukuru sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
Temporary Speaker (Hon.  Bwir e): Thank you. Yes Hon ourable  Bernard ? 
 
Hon.  Ogutu: Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika. Naunga sana hoja hii japokuwa huwa tuko 
na wananchi wetu kila siku na kama alivyosema Mheshimiwa Mwaka ikiwa kweli kuna h iyo 
mipango kabambe manake naju a serikali ina mipango kabambe ya kuha kikisha kwamba  
tukienda kule mashinani unaweza kukaa ha po nyumbani Mheshimiwa Spika  manake tukienda 
hivi hivi  kutakuwa moto  kuliko kukaa huku kwenye Bunge . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Thank you. Yes , the Motion mover to reply.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Bwana Spika ni 
kweli ile hali iliyoko si hali nzuri vile lakini kwa vile tushajiruhusu kisheria ni kwamba twende 
tukakutane na wananchi wetu na tutakwenda. Sisi wengine ni mapumziko  lakini mimi hata 
nitabaki mpaka nione kwamba yale nil iyoyazungumza yametimia.  Sitaki Waheshimiwa wako 
huko wiki zote mbili  mpaka zimeisha wamerudi bado wako hali ile  ile. Mimi  naona itakuwa si 
sawa . 
August 4 , 2021                        COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           81 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be ob tained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 Kwa hivyo ni jukumu  langu  na naelezea jinsi mumepitisha huu Mswada nitauf uatilizia  
Mungu akipenda k uanzia kesho tuo ne kwamba mambo mengine yote yamekuwa saw a. Ahsante 
sana Bwana Spika.  
 
The T emporary Speaker (Hon. Bwire) : Honourable  Members I t hink we have exhausted 
on that.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
  
Honourable Members , also allow me to wish you well during your stay during this recess 
make good use of it. Make good use of your Mashinani  offices , serve your people diligently and 
stay safe. There having being no ot her business this House stands a djourned until Tuesday 17th 
August , 2021 at 10:00a.m.  
 
The House r ose at  3:25p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 