October 31, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 31st October , 2023  
Third Assembly – Eighty Third  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:40p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Temporary  Speaker ( Honourable  Hamisi Nyota ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
        The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Members let us get seated.  Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ISSUANCE OF TITLE DEEDS TO LEARNING INSTITUTIONS AND HEALTHCARE FACILITIES IN 
MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
         Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogutu, MCA  Changamwe Ward please move the Motion . 
  
   Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity . Mr. Speaker Sir , I 
beg to move the following Motion;  
 
AWARE THAT , Mombasa  County is a home to numerous learning institutions and 
healthcare facilities that play a pivotal role in the development and well -being of our 
community;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT  a significant number of these institutions despite their 
substantial contr ibution to our society  do not possess valid title deeds for their properties ; 
 
COGNIZANT THAT , the absence of title deeds has resulted in encroac hments on their 
land, leading to security concerns and hampering their ability to operate efficiently;  
 
NOTING THAT , the Task Force on Healthcare Systems established by the Governor has 
highlighted these issues in its report, emphasizing the urgent need for action to protect and 
secure essential healthcare facilities.  
 
Therefore, I urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that;  
 
October 31, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 2 The County government through the departments of Lands, Housing and Urban Pl anning 
in collaboration with the National Land Commission to ensu re that learning institutions 
and healthcare facilities within the County are issued with title deeds.    
 
         Thank you, Mr. Speaker . I ask Hon ourable Frankline to second?  
 
         The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga?  
 
         The Temporary Speaker  (Hamisi Nyota) : Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga?  
 
 Hon. Makanga:  I second Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hamisi Nyota) : Okay. I now stand to propose the question 
that the motion by Hon ourable  Ogutu , on Insurance of Title Deeds to Learning Institutions and 
Health Care Facilities in Mombasa County be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same 
terms as moved ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
 Yes, Honourable  Bernard Ogutu MCA Changamwe Ward? Please make your 
contribution to the Motion.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika hoja hii ni muhimu 
sana kwetu kama w awakilishi wa Wadi tofauti tofauti ; kwangu Changamwe niko na shule tatu 
ambazo tuko na kesi kortini  kuhusiana na mambo ya hati miliki. Shule ya Msingi ya 
Changamwe , Gome na Magongo mpaka sasa Mhe shimiwa Spika  hawana hati miliki na kuna 
mabwenyenye amba o wameweza kunyakua sehemu kubwa tu ya hizo shule.  Pia kwa jirani 
yangu Mhe shimiwa Frankline Makanga kuna Shule ya M singi ya Chaani  ambayo sehemu kubwa 
imeenda na mabwenyenye. Hizi ni baadhi ya zile shule ambazo zimeweza kunyakuliwa. 
Tukirudi katika hospitali zetu ; Coast General mpaka sasa kuna watu ambao wanasema kwamba 
ile ardhi ni yao Mhe shimiwa Spika , lau tungekuwako na hati miliki shida kama hizi zingekuwa 
hazipatikani . Kliniki ya Kongowea  Mheshimiwa Spika hakuna nafasi tena ya kufanya upanuzi 
manake ardhi yao imechukuliwa karibu asilimia 30 na hata kuingia kwa hospitali hio ni ngumu 
sana, pia vile vile Maweni na M tongwe. Mhe shimiwa Spika tukiendelea namna hii huko mbeleni 
tutakosa nafasi ya kupanua hizi hospitali zetu ndio maana nikaona ni muhimu Wizara  ya ardhi 
waangalie kwa haraka sana, waweze kupeana hizi hati miliki ili hizi shule zetu na Kliniki  zetu 
ziwe ziko safe Mhe shimiwa Spika. Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika na naomba Wenzangu 
waunge h io ho ja mkono  ili tuweze kuzuia unyakuzi wa hizi facility zetu . Ahsante Mhe shimiwa 
Spika.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Bernard Ogutu . Yes, 
Honourable  Ibrahim Bomoa ? Please make your contri bution.  
 
 Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , as I strongly stand to support the 
Motion that has been brought to this House by my brother Bernard Ogutu, the Member of 
County Assembly representing Changamwe Ward. I would strongly urge the collaboration of the 
County government of Mombasa, the Dep artment of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning with 
the National Land Commission . 
October 31, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 3  This is  because there is no way Mr. Speaker one side can work alone  they have to 
collaborate with national government and t he County government , so I urge for that strong 
collaboration. This collaboration , Mr. Speaker will ensure the learning institutions and health 
facilit ies within our County are granted crucial stability and the security of the teams or title 
deeds . Mr. Speaker , schools and healthcare centers ; these  ones are the backbone of our 
community because they provide education and even nourishes talent and also, they safe guard 
the healthcare of our people by empowering them with a safe o f ownership or self ownership we 
also pave way to long term sustainability and development.  Mr. Speaker , this Motion is not just 
about legal document but this Motion also is about fostering an environ ment where education 
and health care can flourish and independent. It is about providing a so lid foundation for our 
children to learn and also contribute meaningf ul to the society . Mr. Speaker , this ensures that our 
healthcare facility can operate efficiently in delivering  good services to thos e concern, i strongly 
urge each  Member of this Honourable House to run behind this particular Motion by recognizing 
the positive impact that will come with it. Mr. Speaker , I stand to support this Motion. Thank 
you. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi for 
your contribution . Yes, Honourable  Sylvester Kai, MCA Junda Ward? 
 
Hon. Kai:  Thank you for giving me opportunity. I do full support this Motion because it 
is for the public interest having in mind that all what have been ment ioned with these public 
facilities ; with it schools or health facilities for me it is something to be taken with a very good 
concern because I can imagine if it will be difficult for the government to facilitate the title deeds 
of public institution, how will it be for the individuals who still depend  on the same gove rnment 
to facilitate them with title deeds? Therefore , I urge the Honourable Members to full y support 
this essential move. Thank you.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Sylvester Kai 
for your contribution. Yes , Honourable  Frankline Makanga, MCA Chaani Ward?  
 
 Hon. Makanga: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the Motion moved by 
Honourable  Bernard Ogutu, Member of County Assembly Changamwe and an advocate on land 
issues in Changamwe. Mr. Speaker , for record purposes and as stated by  the mover of the 
Motion the y need to have our institutions to have title deeds has not only basis in law according 
to the Constitution in Article No.60  (1) of our Constitution it say s, ‘that land in Kenya shall be 
held, used and managed in a manner that is equitable, efficient, productive and sustainable and 
in accordance with the following principles: equitable access to land, security of land rights, 
sustainable and productive management, transparent and cost effective administration and all 
those other issues . Mr. Speaker , that had  been highlighted ; Article 61 (1)  states that , there is the 
land classifications according to the Constitution which classifies land as public, community or 
private . Mr. Spe aker now on public land it says, this land is owned by the State and the Land 
Commission which has been mentioned in this Motion by the informed and learned Member who 
is an advocate on land issues . Mr. Speaker , with a history that while he was fighting for the 
rights of a school t rying to do away with the private de veloper who was grabbing public land 
meant for Changamwe Primary which is within Changamwe Constituency and in Changamwe  
Ward to be precise , the Honourable Member whom we referred him  as a hero on land issues was 
arrested and arraigned in court a nd therefore as he move s this Motion , he moves it because he 
believes the Constitut ion should be followed to the l etter.  
October 31, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 4 Mr. Speaker as he has stated, in my own Ward also one of my primary schools which is 
Chaani Primary School h as lost a piece of its land to a private developer and one of the issues 
that gives this people to grab or an opportunity to grab the land is because the government has 
not been ke en to issue title deeds to the institutions. Further Mr. Speaker, as Honourable has 
stated right now we cannot do any development in any health institution in Mombasa because of 
lack of title deeds ; even when you go to a well wisher or a philanthropist who is ready to support 
development in those institutions,  they will always ask for title deeds . Mr. Speaker , so there is 
nothing that can happen without a title deed and therefore I urge this House, that by the fact that 
this Motion has been moved b y Hon ourable  Ogutu we as a House we proceed to support and 
have it adopted and thereafter the Committee on Implementation Chaired by our able Chairman  
Honourable  Samuel Mwaura of Kongowea to procee d further and ensure that this is effected and 
implemented within the shortest period of time. Thank you so much Mr. Speaker and I  stand to 
support.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Thank you so much Hon ourable  
Frankline Makanga for your contribution. Yes , Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri, the Leader of 
Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Ma jority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker I am up on a point of order for the purposes and efficiency of this House to be noted 
Standing Order No. 85 . 
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota) : Yes, proceed.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : It States Matters  Sub Judice  or 
Secret. 85.(1) Subject to paragraph 5, no Member shall refer to any particular matter which is a 
sub judice or which , by the operation of any written law , is secret.  (2)A matter shall be 
considered t o be sub judice  when is refer s to active  criminal or civil proceedings and the 
discussion of such matters is likely to prejudice its fair determination.  Mr. Speaker , there is a 
Member wh o has been referred , we all understand he  is our hero yes but the matter which entails 
is a matter which is under proceedings that t he locals with this Standing Order we are not 
supposed to mention it or discuss it before the House. So, for purposes of reference and guidance 
Mr. Speaker it  is worth if such a matter ca nnot be heard in this House until it  is determined . 
Thank you Shair.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. H amisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Athman 
Mwam wiri, Leader of Majority . Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi you are up on a point of 
Standing Order …? 
 
Hon. Omondi: Yes Mr. Speaker I stand on order of information . Mr. Speaker I  would 
like the Member and if not the Member , the who le House that this H ouse has the jurisdiction of 
the same as a high court  and therefore  I do not see the reason why we cannot be  able to 
deliberate on such matters that are taking place . Thank you .  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. H amisi N yota) : Honourable  Ibrahim Bomoa  this H ouse 
is headed by our Standing Orde rs; if our Standing Orders have res pect very clearly that this 
should be followed and that should not be followed then as a House  of record  this is a House of 
reference , this is a House  of just so we cannot go against our own Standing Order .  
October 31, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 5 So, when a Member  stand s up on a Standing Order which is there in our Standing Order 
of this H ouse then we cannot say we are going against our own Standing Orders . Please be 
guided Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi . Yes, Honourable  Frankline Makanga , are you up on a  point 
of order ?  
 
Hon. Makanga: Mr. Speaker it  is a point of information ; that I acknowledge the 
information from the Leader of Majority however for clarity and r ecord purposes we have not 
discussed that issue on the floor ! What I did was a simple information that such a thing happened 
and therefore it has not been discussed , we have not even mentioned th e case number , we have 
not mentioned the parties and therefore whoever  has just walked in cannot even tell who the hero 
is and who the parties are for Mr. Speaker we are as clean as we are . Thank you , Mr. Speaker.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Khamisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Frankline 
Makanga . Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri , I stand to think Hon ourable  Frankline Makanga he 
just made a reference but no discussion on the case , he just applauded Hon ourable  Benard Ogutu 
being a champion and he just mentioned a past history . So, it is not for  the discussion for this 
House , I think he  is okay . Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri  do you want to a dd something 
Leader  of Majority?  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri ): Thank you Chair and I appreciate 
the Hon ourable  Member for acknowledging and to my understanding I was just giving a 
precaution Mr. Speaker because since he has already mentioned i t could open up and maybe a 
discussion can start out of it , so it was just a precaution . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. H amisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Athman 
Mwamwiri , the House stands g uided as a precaution . Yes, Honourable  Hamis i Mbaya MCA 
Timbwani Ward please make your contrib ution.  
 
Hon. H amis i Mbaya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii kuweza 
kuchangia katika hoja ambayo imetolewa na Mheshimiwa mwenza . Mheshimiwa Spika , sitakua 
mwingi wa maneno bali nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja hii kwa asilimia 85. Ahsante sana.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Khamisi Nyota) : Thank you Hon ourable  Hamisi 
Mbaya . Yes, Honourable  Samuel Mwaura MCA Kongowea Ward .  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for g iving me this opportunity to contribute 
to this very important Motion . I stand to support the Motion and thank  the Hon ourable  Member 
for bringing such a good Motion to this House . Mr. Speaker … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Mr. Speaker , prote ct me from Hon ourable  Majority leader?   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Honourable  Members , let Hon ourable  
Mwaura be heard in silence please.  
 
Hon.  Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker , this County is at a risk of losing all its public utility land, 
we are at a risk of losing all the schools to the greedy grabbers of this County.  
October 31, 2023                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 6 Mr. Speaker , we are at risk of losing all the hospital and all the clinic lands, that is why 
we as a House must all stand to support this Motion and as well ensure that this Motion is fully 
implemented . Mr. Speaker , as I stand to support the Motion you have already heard that 
Kongowea Cli nic is one of those has been grabbed, totally grabbed. Someone is already claiming 
that the Hospital is in his own land. Mr. Speaker , Kengeleni primary School in Kongowea and I 
know this is across  the whole County, every other publi c utility, every other School , every other 
clinic has been grabbed and so I stand to support this Motion and a lso to commit to the House 
that this is one Motion that we will all and especially I being t he Chair of the Implementation 
Committee we have to stand and ensure that we ar e following up on this matter to ensure that all 
public utility land in the County has been given their title deed. Thank you , Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Ho nourable  Samuel 
Mwaura. Yes , Honourable  Benard Ogutu , please reply to the Motion.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika, nichukue nafasi hii 
kupongeza  Waheshimiwa wenzangu kwa kuwez a kuchangia kwa hoja hii na pia niweze  
kumshukuru Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Utekelezi kwa kuchukua jukumu kwamba hoja hii 
itaweza kuf uatiliziwa baada ya kupita hapa. Pia niseme kwamba ni jukumu letu kama 
wawakilishi Wadi tofauti tofauti kuhakikisha kwamba ardhi hizi zimeweza kulindwa. Ahsante 
sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Hamisi Nyota ): Thank you Hon ourable  Benard Ogutu. I 
now stand to put a question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Benard Ogutu on issuance of title 
deeds to learning institutions and Health facilities in Mombasa County be adopted in this 
Honourable  House in the same term s as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
 
The Motion by Hon ourable  Benard Ogutu on Issuance of title deeds to learning 
institution s and health facilities in Mombasa County is now adopted by this House. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
The House rose at 3: 09p.m . 
 
 
 