October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 17th October,  2018  
The House met at 9:33a .m. 
 
(The Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members  you may be seated . Yes Clerk . 
 
NOTICE OF MOT ION  
 
COUNTY TO PUT STRATE GIES TO ADDRESS INCI DENCES OF GENDER  BASED VIOLENCE  
 
Yes Hon. Milka Moraa is not around , is there anyone to. .. 
 
(Consultation s) 
 
Yes Hon. Aran?  
 
Hon.  Aran:  Mr. Speaker Sir I beg to give  a notice of the following M otion;  
 
(Hon. Aran  moved  the Notice of Motion ) 
 
THAT AWARE THAT the right and fundamental is well stipulated in p art two of 
Chapter four of the C onstitution of Kenya , 2010 which places a significant.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire?   
 
Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I re member  the other day.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Are you standing under what ...Point of information or ? 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Yes.  

October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So which S tanding order are you standing on?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Point of information Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : What is the S tanding order number point of information?  
 
Hon. Bwire:   Mr. Speaker I am standing on a point of information .  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker I would just want to inform this House that for a  Member  
to stand in for any Member  who is absent  he/she ought to  have a letter address ed to Speaker 
stating why  she/he is absent and whether a Member  who is intending to stand in for that 
Member  is allowed. Thank you . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you want to enquire if I have that letter or?  
 
Hon. Bwire :  Of course Mr . Speaker  because it happened to me the other day and I 
would wish to see the same repeating itself.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay yes , Hon. Moses Aran you can continue . 
 
Hon.  Aran : Thank you Mr. Spea ker. 
 
(Hon. Aran continued)  
  
Mr. Speaker , FURTHER AWARE that the S ustainable Development G oals include a 
specific target to eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls in the 
private  and public spheres ; 
 
CONCERNED THAT , the phenomenon of Gender Based Violence is rampant within 
our County , and with no specific dedicated body to address the complexities of 
Gender Based V iolence , no safe houses or shelters, no specific budget or basic he alth 
care services. This means many victims don’t get much needed services;  
 
I therefore URGE this Hon orable  House to resolve that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya ? 
 
Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika nafikiri likiwa ni J umba la sheria ni vizuri 
sheria iwe itaf uatwa na pia J umba hili lisiwe sh amba la wanyama kwamba wengine 
Waheshimiwa wengine ni bora zaidi ya wengine. Tuliona kwamba Mheshimiwa Bwire 
alisimama kama hivi hivi na ulikuwa wewe ndio Spika wa siku hiyo na ukasema pas i na 
barua rasmi kutolewa haiwezi  endelea hoja hiyo. Nakuomba tusitengeze kwamba kesho 
sheria ni hii kesho kutwa kama ni Thoya itabadilika…  
 
(Interruption)  
October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Mheshimiwa Thoya wewe unafanya  kazi ofisini 
kwangu? Wewe una  hakika kama hiyo barua haik o kwa ofisi yangu?  
 
Hon. Thoya : Hiyo ndiyo tulikuwako tunataka tujue kama barua imetoka rasmi.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Utajua basi wewe kaa. Endelea Moses.  
 
Hon.  Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker s ir for protecting me and for protecting this 
House.  
(Hon. Aran continued)  
 
Mr. Speaker sir therefore I urge this House to RESOLVE that;  
 
1. The County g overnment provide adequate resources and enhance partnerships for 
comprehensive response to incidences of Gender Based Violence.  
 
2. There is need for our  County to have a technical Gender Working Group to 
address issues concerning Gender Based Violence in our County to do home 
visiting programs to combat this issue;  
3. Gender violence responsive unit at Coast Provincial General Hospital should be 
open 24/7 ; 
4. The Health Department to have trained nurses who can be on call to carry forensic 
exams to collect evidence for possible prosecution of the offenders and most 
importantly Mr. Speaker provide psychological support treatment for possible STIs 
and refer them to social services to help get resources for continued counselling;  
 
6. The Health Department needs to do collaboration  with other more established 
health facilities within and outside the country for greater achievement.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Moses Aran, yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi please move the Motion?  
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker I would like to move the following Motion;  
 
That this House adopts the report on the vetting of Mr. A nwar Ahmed , a nominee for 
County Chief Officer for Information Technology laid on the table on Tuesday 16th 
October , 2018. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Ibrahim who is seconding it?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I would like to request Hon. Mwamwiri MCA for  Likoni Ward to 
second it . 
 
October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
(Hon.  Athman  Mwamwiri bowed)  
 
Thank you.  Hon. Members  I now propose a question that the Motion on adoption of 
the report on the vetting of Mr. Anwar Ahmed , nominee for County Chief Officer for 
Information Technology by Hon. Ibrahim Omondi be considered by this Hon orable  House in 
the same terms as moved.  
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi? The floor is open you can debate . 
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker sir once agai n thank you for the opportunity. Mr. 
Speaker s ir first of all I just want to inform the Members  where the mandates have come from 
for us to be mandated to do this particular vetting.  Mr. Speaker sir the Committee on 
Education, Information  Technology and Vision 203 5 is mandated under Standing Orders 42 
(2) and 185 (4) to hold approval hearings and make recommendations to the Coun ty 
Assembly for appointment of C hief officers to the County.  Now Mr. Speaker Sir I want also 
to consider or what we really considered for u s to approve or to recommend this particular 
nominee.  Mr. Speaker sir having considered the credentials, suitability, capacity an d integrity 
of the nominee and p ursuant to section  9 of the Public Appointments ( County Assemblies 
Approval) Act , 2017  S ection  35 (2) of the County Government Act , 2012 and Standing 
Order 42 and 185 (4), the Committee at its meeting held on 9th October, 2018 at 3 :00p.m at 
the Mombasa County Assembly Buildings at 10 :00a.m resolved to recommend that the 
County Assembly approves the  appointment by His Excellency the Governor of Mr. Anwar 
Ahmed to the position of Chief Officer for Information Technology in the County 
Government of Mombasa.  Mr. Speaker sir indeed we interrogated the nominee and we found 
out that the nominee had a lot o f competence to assum e the particular office so the 
Committee was impressed by the nominee educational achievement s and wide experienc es 
serving in various senior positions in the public and private sector . Therefore Mr. Speaker s ir 
I want to request the Members  in this particular House to approve this nominee to that 
particular position. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim Omondi. Y es Hon. Hamisi 
Musa Mwidani , do you want to contribute?  
 
Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mw idani ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kunipatia hii fursa na mimi kuunga mkono hii nafasi  ya Chief Officer for Information 
Technology . Bwana Spika ni kama unavyojua saa hii mambo yote yanaenda na mambo ya 
hali ya teknolojia na tusipokuwa na mtu kama hu yu vitu vingi vitakuwa vinakwama na 
Bwana Spika kama unavyojua lengo letu na Gavana wetu ni kwamba 2035 tuwe tumetimiza 
mambo mengi sana ambayo yataeleweka na katika kutimiza hayo mambo ni kupitia hiyo hali 
ya teknolojia.  Kwa hivyo mimi ningependa pia Waheshimiwa wenzangu tuweze kui unga 
mkono  hii hoja kwa sababu ni muhimu sana huyu Chief Officer  kuwepo,  hivyo basi  
ningependa sana Bwana Spika hoja hii iweze kupita tuweze kupata mafanikio yetu ya 2035. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Moses Aran?  
October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 Hon.  Aran:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi pia nasimama kuunga mkono na 
vile Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bunge  wetu amesema kwamba mambo na teknologia  ni kitu 
muhimu sana kwetu haswa watu wa Kaunti ya Mombasa kwa hiyo  mimi naunga mkono na 
nawasihi W aheshimiwa wenzangu tuipitishe hii hoja ili aanze kazi haraka. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili , the Deputy Speaker?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika baada ya kupitia 
ripoti hii ya Bwana Anwar Ahme d kupitia kwa Kamati husika tumeona kuwa taratibu zifaazo 
zilifuatwa , tunaona ya kuwa ilitangazwa kwenye jarida la The Star tarehe tatu mwezi wa 
kumi mwaka wa 2018 na baada ya kutangazwa hakuna ulalamishi wowote ulioletwa 
kuhusiana na Bwana Anwar Ahmed kut okana na masuala ya ufisadi ama masuala mengine 
ambayo yangeweza kumnyima Bwana Anwar Ahmed cheo hichi na kulingana na umaarufu 
wake katika nyanja hii inadhihirisha wazi kuwa anaweza na anaweza kuboresha Kaunti yetu 
ya Mombasa iweze kusonga mbele.  Mheshimi wa Spika twafahamu dunia tulio  nayo sasa ni 
dunia ya mtandao na Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa kwa hakika tumefanya mambo mengi lakini 
tukienda mitandaoni hatujioni ; nina imani kutokana na kazi alizofanya Bwana huyu na 
umakinifu wake kama walivyotuelezea Kamati ni na imani ataweza kuendesha ama kui inua 
Kaunti ya Mombasa iweze kuonekana zaidi ya pale ambapo tumefikia na nina imani kama 
hivi sasa kuanzia leo kama sikukosea kuna kongamano la Skal ambalo liko linaanza ndani ya 
Mombasa.  Mheshimiwa Spika nina imani baaday e baada ya ndugu yetu kama huyu kuanza 
kazi tutaweza kuuza Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa kupitia mitandaoni katika nchi tofauti tofauti 
ambazo zitakuwa zinatufuatilia kutokana na kazi zile zetu nzuri ambazo ziko na makazi 
mazuri ndani ya Mombasa na mauzo mazuri ambayo yatakuwa ya naweza kutembea katika 
mitandao. N awasihi na nawaomba ndugu zangu tuunge mkono ripoti hii iliyoletwa na Kamati 
ya elimu na tuhakikishe ndugu yetu nae ameanza kazi na vilevile tum usukume ili aweze 
kuinua jina la Mombasa lisonge mbele, a hsante. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Fadhili . Yes Hon . Hamida Noor.  
 
Hon.  (Ms.)  Hamida Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir for giving me this opportunity 
to look at the credentials of this nominee Anwar Ahmed. By looking at his credentials I can 
see that he is fit for the job because his IT is very good and this is the kind of pe rson we need 
to hold such kind of offices so that our County in Mombasa we can go ahead, thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon. Ahmed Salama.  
 
Hon. Ahmed S alama: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika,  nashukuru lakini kwa vile 
nimeingia sasa hivi ungenipa m uda kidogo nikashika yale yanayoendelea kisha niyajibu, 
ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, n asima ma kuunga mkono 
ripoti ya K amati nikitangaza msimamo . Mimi pia ni M wanakamati katika idara hii na kwetu 
ni furaha ya kwamba idara yetu imehudumu kwa takriban mwaka mmoja bila kuwa na afisa 
mkuu katika kitengo hiki cha maswala ya kiteknologia, na tu mepitia changamoto nyingi 
kama K amati na idara kwa jumla kwa sababu kulikuwa na mkusanyiko wa majukumu 
ambayo yalisalia kwa afisa mshikilizi . 
October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6 Lakini kwa kupata afisa muhusika wa kitengo hiki tuna imani na tunaahidi ya 
kwamba K amati itawajibika kupitia kwa afisa mk uu na huduma za maswala ya kiteknologia 
zitapatikana ba rabara tukijua pia hata katika B unge letu tuko  na changamoto ya maswala ya 
kiteknologia lakini sasa hivi tungekuwa na afisa mkuu haya yote yatanyoroka . Vile vile 
Mheshimiwa  Spika mbali na vig ezo ambavy o anavy o ndugu yetu huyu vilivyomuezesha 
kufuzu katika nafasi hii mbali pia tunatambua na kuheshimu ile ya kwamba jamii kwa jumla 
baada ya kuweka matangazo tarehe tatu mwezi wa kumi ya kuulizia kama kuna mtu ana 
dukuduku kuhusiana na maswala ya viongozi na  uwajibikaji na maadili ya ndugu yetu huyu 
hakuna malalamishi tuliopokea k atika jamii na kwetu sisi kama Kamati na B unge tunaomba 
tuafikie ya kwamba jamii iliungama ya kwamba ndugu yetu yule anayo tajriba ya kuwa afisa 
mkuu na sisi tuweze kumuafiki na kump itisha kisha aweze kuwajibikia majukumu na 
kusukuma mbele azima ya Mheshimiwa  Gavana ya riwaza ya mwaka 2035, a hsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Y es Hon . Mwaka Zahoro.  
 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Zahoro:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika kunipa fur sa hii , pia mimi 
ningependa kuunga mkono katika uteuzi wa Anwar Ahmed . Kulingana na tajriba na uzoefu 
wa kazi zake anaonekana ni mtu ambae anaweza endesha hii idara kwa hivyo ningependa 
wenzangu tumuunge mkono Ahmed ili kazi yake iweze kuwa sahihi, vilevil e kulingana na 
Kamati kama wameridhika na kazi yake hivyo basi sioni kama kuna kuwa na pingamizi 
yoyote yeye kupitishwa na hili Bunge, shukran Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Yes Hon. Mwalimu?  
 
Hon. Mgwisho  Mwalimu : Ahsante sana Bw ana Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii nami 
niweze kuchangia . Nataka kuchuku a fursa hii kuwashukuru wanakamati ambao walikaa na 
kumhoji bwana huyu na pia tumechelewa sana kuwa nae katika shughuli  ambazo huyu bwana 
yuko nazo za IT, lakini chelewa lakini ufike . Tunashukuru sana ni muhimu sana kuwa na 
kitengo hiki cha IT katika B unge letu kwa sababu kama tulivyoona mambo yanavyokwenda 
kisasa sio kama zamani, hivyo basi sina budi kuunga mkono Ka mati iliomhoji huyu bwana na 
kumuung a mkono huyu B wana Anwar ili aweze kuanza kazi yake haraka iwezekanavyo . 
Kwa hivyo mimi ni miongoni mwa wale ambao wanamuu nga mkono bwana huyu na naomba 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu tusichukue  muda mrefu kujadili swala hili kwa sababu ni swala 
ambali liko wazi na ni muhimu tupitishe haraka iwezekan avyo, a hsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwalimu . Yes Hon . Kitula you want to 
contribute?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
Thank you, yes Hon. Ibrahim you can reply.  
 
Hon. Omondi : Mr. Speaker sir, I just want to take this humble opportunity to  thank 
all the Members  for actually supporting this particular nominee and I am very sure that this 
nominee will not let us down , particularly the County of Mombasa in this particular 
Department , I just want to assure the Members . And just to add on that s omething that was 
not mentioned which is very important Mr. Speaker this particular Department of Technology 
is very important also when it comes to paying rates in our County . 
October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 You will find that one (Technical hitch) Mombasa County the levies are not paid  on 
time therefore coming up with this particular department the people or even the organization 
will be able to get information at the right time and therefore they will be able to pay their 
levies at the right time , like for example when you talk about t he Mombasa Coast General 
whereby the patients can be able to pay the bills online and get information at the right time. 
Thank you very much and May God bless you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank Hon. Ibrahim Omondi. Hon.  Members  I now put 
the qu estion t hat the M otion on adoption of the report on vetting of Mr. Anwar Ahmed 
nominee for Count y Chief Officer for Information  Technology  (IT), by Hon. Ibrahim 
Omondi be adopted by this House in the same terms as moved ? 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
(Applause)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
Hon.  Members , Hon. Mwam wiri please move the M otion . 
 
Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Si r, I beg to move 
the following M otion;  
 
THAT AWARE that Mombasa County has been grappling with high rate of 
unemployment ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili ? 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank yo u Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker the 
Motion that Hon. Mwam wiri is moving has already been moved in this Honorable  House and 
debated what we are supposed to get from Hon. Mwam wiri were the amendments to this 
Motion.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwam wiri, I think that is what you are doing?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Yes Mr. Speaker I am moving this M otion with…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Since Hon.  Members  had already m ade their 
contributions to the M otion, so I will call you to reply to the Motion then , so you can just 
reply to the M otion then I will put the question.  
 
Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Ok, thank y ou Mr. Speaker. I reply to the M otion  which 
was debated last week . 
October 1 7, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     83 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 I thank all the Hon.  Members  for their contributions , there were some suggestions for 
the amendment which was supposed to be on prayer number one but going through it I did 
not see any reason to amend that one because the issu e here was to adhere to the 30  per cent 
Procurement Act  that is there in the Constitu tion so it was upon our County government and 
all the p rocurement departments to adhere to, to make sure that the 30  per cent is reserved to 
the y ouths, women, and People Living with Disabilities (PLWD’s ) and whoever who was 
contributing or having some issues with the issue on 30  per cent  or I suggest he  had some 
personal interest may be he is benefiting from those 30  per cent  and he is not a youth. So the 
rest of the Member s who had contributed and accepted the issue that we give our priority to 
the 30  per cent  to those who a re meant to benefit from it I agree with it and as it is Mr. 
Speaker I ask this Honorable House to adopt the M otion as it is without putting the prayer 
which the other Member  has suggested on the issue of 30  per cent . So I do not see the reason 
as to why I should put any amendments to me I leave it as it is and I ask Hon.  Members  to 
adopt as it is. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.   
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Than k you Hon. Mwam wiri. Hon.  Members  I now put 
the question that the M otion on y ouths, women and P LWD’s empowerment and wealth 
creation by Hon. Athman Mwam wiri be approved by this House in the same terms as moved ? 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
(Applause)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon.  Members  this House stand s adjourned until Wednesday, 17th October , 2018 at 
2:30 p.m.  
 
The House rose  at 9:58a.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 