October 17, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
   
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 17th October,  2018  
The House met at 2:45p .m. 
 
(The Speaker  (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated. Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM  THE CHAIR  
 
Hon. Members I have letter from the Governor ’s office . 
  
REF: INVIT ATION  TO THE 79th SKAL CONGRESS OFFICIAL OPENING  
 
Mombasa County will be hosting the 79th Worlds' Skal Congress from 17th to 21st 
October, 2018. Skal is an International Associa tion that brings together all 
hospitalities , tourism owners and managers and forms the single largest decision 
makers, influencers and the world travel partners.  We hereby invite all Hon. Members 
of the County Assembly of Mombasa to the welcoming dinner of  the delegates hosted 
by the County g overnment on 17th of October, 201 8 at Fort Jesus starting from 
6:00p.m, the dress code is preferably Swahili attire.  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
 
Yes Hon. Kibwana?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . Hon. Speaker bei ng the Chair o f 
Committee on Health Services I wish to lay a report which comprises of amendments as per 
the Governors' reservations on the Mombasa County Health Bill, 2017 for consideration by 
this Hon orable  House. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana , yes Clerk?  
 
 

October 17, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2 COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members the House will now dissolve into the 
Committee of the Whole House . 
 
(Serjeant -At-Arms lowered the Mace)  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) left the Chair)  
 
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
 
IN THE  COMMITTEE  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
Chairperson:  Hon. Members have you r seats . 
 
(Silence)  
 
Hon. Members welcome to the Committee of the Whole House , we are amending the 
Mombasa Co unty Health Bill, 2017 through a Memorandum from His Excellency the 
Governor and am sure each and every Member has a copy of the said amendments of the 
Mombasa County Health Bill, 2017. Yes Clerk proceed . 
 
Clerk:  PART II  - ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF HEALTH 
SERVICES  
 
Clause 3. THAT  the word , ''public'' be inserted in Clause 7 (1) (b) to read as follows;  
Ensure  equitable distribution of resources to all public health facilities . 
  
Chairperson:  I propose a question that the amended Clause 7 (1) (b) to b e part of the 
Bill. 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Any input Hon. Members before I put a question? I now put a question that cla use 
7(1) b be part of the Bill.  
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
Clerk:  That clause 7(3) b be deleted and the following words b e inserted therefore ; 
3. The County health management may appoint special or ad hoc  Committees to deal with 
urgent matters relating to hospital operations when necessary to assist the board in the 
management of some of its responsibilities.  
 
Chairperson : I now propose a question that the new clause 7(3) be part of the Bill . 
 
October 17, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 (Question proposed)  
 
Yes M embers I am waiting for any input on the deletion of the clause 7(3) and the 
introduction of the new 7(3)?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
Having there no input I now put a quest ion that the new clause 7(3) be part of the Bill . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
Clerk:  That clause 9 be deleted . 
 
Chairperson:  I propose a qu estion that clause 9 be deleted.  
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
I now put a question that clause 9 be deleted f rom the Bill . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
Clerk : That clause 10 be deleted . 
 
Chairperson : I now propose that clause 10 be deleted from the Bill . 
 
(Question proposed)  
  
Any input M embers?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
I now put a question that cla use 10 be de leted from the Bill . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
Clerk:  That, clause 11 be deleted.  
 
Chairperson:  I now propose that clause 11 be deleted from the Bill . 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
Any input Members on the deletion of clause 11?  
 
October 17, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 (Silence ) 
 
I now put a question having there no input it seems the Members are satisfied with the 
deletion , I now put a question that clause 11 be deleted from the Bill . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
 
Yes Clerk . 
 
Clerk:  That clause 35 be deleted and the following words be inserted therefore;  
 
35 (1) The County Executive M ember for finance shall facilitat e the opening, closing and 
maintenance of a bank account for purposes of;  
 
(a) Operationalizing conditional grants, donations and any other monies for every health 
unit and faci lity in the County according to the public financial management laws.  
 
(b) For all money raised and received by the health unit and facility to be retai ned by the 
health unit and facility  to be retained by the  health unit and  facility  to defray its 
expenses in  accordance with section 109 (2) b) of the Public Finance M anagement 
Act, 2012 ; 
(c) Operating an account for the p urpose of use as Appropriation in A id and shall account 
for such mon ies in the County Annual Budget;  
(2) The department of health may open an  account for purpose of use as A ppropriation in 
Aid and shall account for such monies in the C ounty annual budget.  
  
Chairperson:  I propose a question that the new clause 35 be part of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
Any input M embers on deletion of clause 35 and introduct ion of clause 35 in other 
words?  Yes Hon. Leader of M ajority.  
 
Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Chairperson I think on clause 
(b) for money raised and received by the health unit and facility to be retained by the unit , I 
think  it has been repeated again the same word facility to be retained by the unit I think there 
should be some correction there.  
 
Chairperson : Thank you the Leader of M ajority for alerting the secretariat on these 
typing errors which will be corrected when we  are going to gazette the Bill, but thank you for 
raising that concern, Hon . Members I now put a question that the new cl ause 35 as read be 
part of the B ill. 
 
(Question put and agreed  to) 
 
Yes C lerk? 
 
Clerk:  THAT Health  technology in the interpretation cla use be defined as follows;  
October 17, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5 "Health technology refers to the application of organised knowledge, skills, 
information and innovation in form of devices, medicine, vaccines, procedures and system s 
developed to solve a health problem and improve the quality of  life". 
 
Chairperson:  I now propose that the interpretation  on health technology as  read be 
part of the Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
Yes Hon . Members any input on  the interpretation on health technology . 
 
(Silence ) 
 
Members it seems you are sa tisfied with t he interpretation.  I now put a question that 
the interpretation on health technology as  read be part of the B ill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to) 
 
Clerk:  THAT the year of the Bill be changed from 2017 to 2018 hence the title of the 
Bill be amended to read , “Mombasa  County Health Bill, 2018.  
 
Chairperson:  I now propose that the amended title of t he B ill as read be part of the 
Bill. 
 
(Question proposed ) 
 
Yes Hon. Chairman, do you have any input on changing of title of the Bill? Hon . 
Members any input? The Bill was to read 2017, now it will read 2018. I can see the 
Memorandum from the Governor the Hon . Members are reading from the same page . I can 
see M embers are satisfied with the Memorandum and now question that the title  of the Bill be 
amended as read.  
 
(Quest ion put and agreed to)  
 
Yes Chairman Health Committee?  
 
Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Chair.  I would ask that the Bill that has been 
amended I would like to report back to the County Assembly. Thank you.  
 
Chairperson : Hon. Members I now put a question tha t the Bill as amended be 
reported back to the House ? 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
(Applause)  
 
PLENARY RESUMED  
 
(Serjeant -At-Arms raised the Mace on the Table)  
October 17, 2018                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                     84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  (The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) took the Chair ) 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be  seated. Yes Hon. Swaleh 
Kibwana?   
 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I would like to 
report back to the p lenary that we have done a mendments on the Bill that the M embers also 
agreed with all the amendments that we have brought for ward to this House. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fadhili ? 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Mr. Speaker all what that has been 
reported by the Chair in charge of the Bill is what transpired in the Committee of the Whole 
House. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members the Assembly stands adjourned until Thursday, 18th October , 2018 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House r ose at 3 :12p.m. 
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
 
 