September 24, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the H ansard Edito r Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 2 4th September , 2019  
The House met at 2:46p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M walimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Have your seats?  
 
(Consultations)  
 
 Yes Cler k? 
 
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE  TO STATEMENT  ON PAINTING OF TUSKS  ALONG MOI AVENUE  
 
Yes Hon. M embers Order , number 7 came to the floor of the House in the morning 
session and the Chair concerned clearly said that the issue was not supposed to go to his 
Committee and the Speaker of the day made a ruling to follow up on this Statement . So Hon. 
Members the status of the tusk s came as a result of the status of implementation of Motions 
passed by the County Assembly of Mombasa and this Statement was brought by Hon. M ohamed 
Hatimy of which the Department concern ed were notified and the subject issue was also sent to 
the Department of Environment , Waste Management and Energy and they responded as follows;  
‘As a department we are mandated to ensure the be autification i .e gardening and cleaning the 
tusks area ; we can confi dently confirm that we have green flower beds and streets around are 
swept on daily bases. ’ So the issue of painting  was not supposed to be responded by the 
Department of Environment and  I will let the Chair of Implementation to follow up on what was 
raised by Hon. M ohamed Hatimy on the Status of Motions pas sed and bring back  the response 
concerning this subject issue of the painting of the t usks. Yes Hon. Chief  Whip? 
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti taarifa ambayo niko nayo 
kwamba kuhusian a na upakaji wa rangi katika pembe za ndovu ziko sehemu ile ilifanywa chini 
ya Public Private Participation (PPP)  Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti .  

September 24, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the H ansard Edito r Page 2 Kwa hivyo si  bora zaidi kwa sababu kila mmo ja ambaye aliuliza  Taarifa  hii ana weza 
kwenda kuishuhudia pale ushirikiano baina ya mashi rika ya kijamii na serikali ya K aunti 
Mheshim iwa M wenyekiti lakini tayari rangi isha wekwa na taa ziko sawa na pia maua yameweza 
kupandwa katika sehemu ile. Ahsante . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwali mu): Thank you Chief Whip  for the information and 
the Implementation Chair will liaise with the office of the Ch ief Whip and the office of the 
Majority L eader to bring back  a response concerning the same b ecause the issue came in the 
morning and the Speake r ruled that a proper follow up should be foll owed because the Hon. 
Chair Ath man Shebe clearly said it was  not supposed to go to his Department . So the Chair for 
Implementation will liaise with what Hon. Chief Whip as advised the House and reply back after 
Hous e business sits and will allocate when the C hair will respond  on this issue . Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON HEALTH SERVI CES HON . KIBWANA 
SWALEH ON BOKOLE DIS PENSARY  IN AIRPORT WARD  
 
Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?   
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Hon. Kibwana you were supposed to reply on the Statement concerning Bo kole 
Dispensary in Airport Ward.  
 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker . Hon. Speaker the Status of Bokole 
Hon. Speaker is working ; the facility in Bokole which is in Airport Ward  there is a lot of 
improvement at the moment and there is another structure  that is a  facility that was built just 
recently which about to be opened . Hon. Speaker the only issue that is remaining is that I 
consulted my colleague that is Hon. Ibrahim (Bomoa ) and the issue  which was only missing  on 
that fa cility, I mean the old facility  is only the painting because we were only dealing on the 
issue of w hether it is working or not working . The issue of bound ary wall we discussed  it when 
we were told that the Department in conjuc tion with Mombasa Cement and they are also 
consulti ng in putting the boundary wall s o may be the issue of the painting Hon. Speaker for the 
old facility , that is the only thing that is challenging at the moment Hon. Speaker .  
So I think it will be very fair for me an d also request my colleague I think the issue of 
painting is not all that it does  not have a big impact in terms of the service s that are b eing offered 
there . I think he should give us time so that even  he himself as an area MCA with me as the 
Chair of the H ealth Committee we can foll ow it so that we can get a face lift as the Hon. Member 
has requested Hon. Speaker. Thank you . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I kindly request that I react on what the Hon. Member … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Be audible! Use your microphone . 
September 24, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the H ansard Edito r Page 3 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I kindly request that you give me permission so that I 
react on what Hon. Chair has said on Health concerning t he facility at B okole Health Centre.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Proceed . 
 
Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir indeed it is true that generally there is a  new facilty that 
has been put on the site , but my concern was not really that, o kay my question was not general it 
was not about the status of Bokole.  
Mr. Speaker Sir even when you look at what the statement said , specifically talking about 
actually the painting part of it in the old building is very filthy  as we speak the palce is very 
pathetic Mr. Speaker Sir and that is why my concern was if they can organize so that they can 
give it a face  lift Mr. Speaker,  I think to me I will be satisified .  
So what I would also like to ask f rom my fellow C hair if he can give us the time line 
when actual ly that one be done Mr. Speaker Sir, because  as we speak His Excellency the 
Governor wanted to come and launch the new building that has been put in place . Mr. Speaker 
Sir but we felt that it  will be very bad and it will be very bad  for h im to do that if the other old 
building is not taken care of  because when you look at the two building and you compare them  
there is a very big differen ce. S o I request if he can give us the time line when can that old 
building be painted an d given a face lift. Mr. Speaker Sir t hank you . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chair Health respon d as per the Statement 
from Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . 
 
Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think Hon. Speaker my colleague 
who i s a friend of mine should have appreciated that there is something tha t has been done 
within that faci lity. Hon. Speaker if somebody says it is in a pathetic condition  he is only 
referering to painting , so pathetic is a  big word meaning that th e place is cond emned or is a p lace 
that can not offer services . 
Hon. Speaker my col league is also comparing a new building with a n old building ; I 
think that is very unfair because the other one is a new building  which is about to b e opened , so 
what I can say I c annot commit  myself Hon. Speaker . The issue of  paint ing I think I have said it 
earlier is something that we are  going to consider but he should also appreciate that the re is  
something big we have done , we are looking at the big ger picture n ot only the painting Mr. 
Speaker . The perimeter wall for security purpose Hon. Speaker which is a big ger issue in that 
facility so I think the face lift that my colleague is looking for we are going to do it but I think 
commiting myself at this  stage it will be fi xed because we have to do some  bit of budget for that 
face lift . So I think he should just appreciate  then as earlier said that  being the area MCA with 
me as the  Chair we can do some follow up , that is an administrative i ssue which  we can deal 
with it Hon. Speaker . Thank you . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes Clerk?  
 
September 24, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           84 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the H ansard Edito r Page 4 ADJOURNMENT  
 
There being no other business the House stands adjourn ed until tomo rrow Wednesday on 
25th September, 2019 at 10: 00a.m.   
       
The House rose at 3:00  p.m. 