August 16, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        85 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 1 6th August  2016  
The House met at 2. 29pm. 
(Hon. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Rashid Mswabah) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Hon. Deputy Speaker: Members you may sit down . 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
Hon.  Members  of this First  Assembly of Mombasa, welcome to the third and last part of the 
fourth session of the Assembly.  This third part marks the end of a short recess which 
commenced on the 5th August 2016 and ended yesterday the 15th day of August 2016.  
       It is my hope that the one week recess  period enabled you to take a break from our 
normal busy schedule and that you were also able to be with the electorate in your various 
wards and for the Nominated members, with the groups that you represent so that you are 
now able to brin g to the attention of this Assembly any challenges that they may be facing in 
terms of service delivery by the County government so that as a House we may collectively 
offer a solution to the issues that you may have noted that need to be addressed.  
       I urge  the various Committees with pending reports to fast track their finalization. We as 
an Assembly have limited time and we must ensure that we utilize it properly for the benefit 
of the people of Mombasa.  
        Hon.  Members , we look forward to processing of more legislation in this third part of 
the session.  
       There are a number  of legislative proposals which the Clerk has received from the 
Department of Education and E nvironment and the Inspectorate ; and o nce they are published 
they will be brought before the Assembly for  passage.  
       I believe that the able Chairperson of Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation 
is already working on the Finance Bill, which, by law, must be passed by 30th September of 
each year.  
       In a nutshell we have a lot of business to tackle for the remaining part of the year and let 
us fold our sleeves and get to work.  
       Hon.  Members , welcome once again to the last part of this session and I believe that we 
are all ready to effectively dischar ge our constitutional roles of making legislation, oversight  
and representation.  
August 16, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        85 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 
 (Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Members there being no other business this House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
morning . 
The House rose at 2:34pm.  