September 2 5, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           85 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wedne sday, 2 5th September , 2019  
The House met at 10:15a.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M walimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may be  seated.  Yes Clerk?  
  
MESSAGES  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Noor:   Actually Mr. Speaker ...! 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hamida.  
 
 Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . We were waiting for communication from your  
office , I do not kn ow why the Clerk has moved to Messages , we were waiting for 
communication  from the office . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Hamida . Hon. Hamida as far as 
the Order Paper is concerned  there is no communication ; if there was a letter of communication 
then it would appear on the Order Paper of today, so I have no communicati on to communicate 
to this House . So for now as far as the Order Paper is concer ned there is  no communication  and 
if there was one I could have stood and communicated to this House . Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPE RSON COMMITTEE ON LA NDS, PLANNING AND HOUSING HON. 
AHMED SALAMA ON GRABBING OF PARKI NG SPACES IN KIPEVU WARD  
 

September 2 5, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           85 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Yes, Chairperson Committee on Lands. Hon. Members we have a challenge on the 
Hansard so please move forward  and communicate from the Leader of Majority's  position , so 
just move forward please. Hon. Chair please move forward.  
 
 Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Nafikiri swala hili la Mheshimiwa 
Faith  tulilijibu na tukasema kwamba Kipevu ni kubwa zaidi kwa hivyo tukam wambia 
Mheshimiwa atutajie ile sehemu ambayo ana wasi wasi nayo ambayo imenyakuliwa ili Kamati 
ipate kufuatilia ijue ni ukwel i ama uw ongo lakini Mheshimiwa Faith mpaka dakika hii hajajibu . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Chairman . So it is upon  Hon. Faith  to 
sit with the C ommittee on Lands and identify the p arcel  of land that she alleged that has been 
grabbed for the Committee  to work on the said issue.  Yes Clerk?  
 
REQUEST FOR  STATEMENT BY HON. SHEBE ATHMAN TO THE LEADER OF MAJ ORITY HON . MWIDANI 
ON WHEN THE SGR  REPORT WILL B E IMPL EMENTATION  IN MOMBASA  
 
 Yes Hon. Athman Shebe? Hon. Mwamwiri are you are up on behalf of Hon. Athman 
Shebe ? 
 
 Hon. Athman  Mwamwiri:  Yes, thank  you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker am up  on behalf of 
Hon. Shebe Athman ; I seek to know from the Leader of Majority Party when will the report 
commissioned by H.E the Governor on the implementation  of the SGR to the resident s of 
Mombasa conducted by the Universit y of Nairobi be tabled in this  House for the Hon . Members 
to go through it . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes, Leader of Majority?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwida ni): Thank  you Mr. Speaker . Well it has been 
requested for report on  the SGR , which was done by Nairobi University. Mr. Speaker that was a 
report to be validated and in fact  it is now in the position of validation, after it  has been validated 
Mr. Speaker I promise this Assembly  that I will table it . Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Leader of Majority as far as the statement 
is concerned and I think it has been validated, so the Hon.  Member  who wanted to know fr om 
you, when are you tabling it to the Assembly  because it has been validated.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidan i): Mr. Speaker in fact it  is me who aske d 
yesterday and actually I was  given an  answer  that we are waiting for the validation of the report , 
which it has to go  to Public Participation  and after that  is when now it  is going to  be the proper 
record of the report  of whatever  has been discussed  there . In fact  Mr. Speaker it is not an issue 
that can be just hidden,  it is a very open issue and when it is ready I will just bring it to the 
Assembly. I just request some  time, if they  have finished for all the position s which are  neede d I 
will bring it to the Assembly, it  is not something to be hidden . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
  
September 2 5, 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           85 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwamwiri move forward please .  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  to my understanding 
this was  a research conducted by the University of Nairobi and reported back with its findings 
and its recommendation s, so am wonderin g who is supposed to do the validation and it is  a 
study conducted , completed and submitted with its recommendation . It is through which  
recommendation on what to be done , be it recommended  for further studies on  the same , be it 
there is 1,2,3 to be done , to acknowledge  or confirm what has been going through .  
 So for the Hon. Member to tell us that there is validation  through public participation  and 
the study was conducted in the field, views were collected , people were given question naires to 
fill and come up wi th the report , so for us to tell us it is a validation to be conducted with Public 
Participation , maybe  we are reading different chapter s or maybe he is talking about other issues 
and not  the report which  was already  submitted because it was validated befo re it was submitted 
to H.E the Governor .  
 So the report is ready,  so it is upon him,  or maybe if he was told the validation will be 
done by this person or by this other group maybe he can tell us to know that the r eport was 
forwarded to another Department , to a specific group to do further research on the same to come 
with the deliberation . Thank you Mr. Speaker .  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri . Hon. Leader of 
Majority I think what the Hon. Members want is the report that was commission ed by the H.E 
the Go vernor to be tabled in this Hon ourable  House , so liaise    with the office of the Governor 
and in the afternoon sitting Leader of Majo rity you will communicate to when you  are going to 
table that report . Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
  There be ing no other business the House stands adjourned until on Wednesday 
25th September , 2019 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10:28 a.m. 
 