October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 18th October,  2018  
The House met at 2:44p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  we may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
 Yes Hon. Moses Aran can you please give the response.  
 
RESPONSE ON THE STATE MENT ON  THE CENSUS AND MAPPING FOR  PEOPLE WITH DISABILI TY 
(PWD S) IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Hon. Aran : Thank you Mr. Speaker , like I promised last week that this week I will 
give a detailed r eport on the statement that was asked in the previous week.  Mr. Speaker I 
wish to give the following statement on People with Disability (PWD’s) census and mapping 
in the County in response to concerns raised by Hon. Ramla Said in the House on 79th sitting  
seeking to know from the Committee when this information gathered will be made available 
for public consumption.   
 Mr. Speaker sir, the d epartment successfully carried out a disabi lity mapping across 
all the 30 W ards within the County.  The exercise w as g eared to establishing an in depth 
understanding of PWD’s status, education institutions for PWD’s and both private and public 
buildings and infrastructure compliance and ease to access to PWD’s. This exercise would 
lead to development of a disability mainst reaming policy with specific and measureable 
outcomes to empower ment  of PWD’s in social, economic and political participation.   
 Mr. Speaker sir, the data that was collected is in the process of analysis and compiling 
to deduce conclusion from the insights  in which will be observed from it for development of 
the policy where the first draft is almost ready before it is forwarded for further discussion 
with stakeholders , among them Members  of the County Assembly and a final copy be 
adopted.  Thank you Mr. Spe aker. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Aran.  Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE ON THE STATE MENT  ON  PLANS BY THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT TO REMEDY  POOR 
STATE OF  THE MOMBASA MUNICIPAL STA DIUM  

October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Yes again Hon. Moses Aran  please give the response on the  statement of the  
Mombasa Municipal Stadium . 
 
 Hon. Aran : Once again tha nk you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker  I wish to give the 
following statement on the state of  the Mombasa Municipal Stadium in response to concerns 
raised by Hon. Ali Shariff in the House on the 79th sitting se eking to know fr om the 
Committee if the County g overnment has any plans to remedy the poor state of the stadium.  
Mr. Speaker sir, the Department appreciates the urgency of rehabilitation of the County 
stadium and in this regard they are keen to ensure the facility is ready for utilization within 
the shortest time possible.   
 Mr. Speaker sir, it is important to note that after the initial rehabilitation of the pitch it 
was found that the facility was too d ilapidated  and therefore this informed the need to ha ve an 
overhaul of the stadium. The Department has already advertised for a FIFA standard iconic 
modern stadium with a capacity of 15,000 seats, a n IAAF 4000 seats indoor multipurpose 
arena, conference hall, restaurant, media zone, mini museum, VIP and VVIP  sections 
changing rooms, gym among other modern amenities.  
 Mr. Speaker sir, January 2019  God willing  is the anticipated ground breaking, where 
the entire completion period is pegged at 14 months.  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Moses Aran. Yes, Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE BY THE CHAIR PERSON LANDS , PLANNING AND HOUSING  COMMITTEE ON THE 
NOTICE OF EVICTION T O TENANTS OF CHANGAM WE OLD ESTATE  
 
 The Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing, Hon. Ahmed Salama I th ink he is 
not around any other M ember? Yes, Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu ? 
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I am up on 
behalf of my able Chai rman to give a response on the n otice of eviction to tenants of 
Changamwe old estate.  
 Hon.  Speaker, on Thursday  4th October , 2018 during the 79th Sitting Hon. Bernard 
Ogutu who I think  is the area  MCA of that W ard rose on the floor of the Assembly and 
requested for  a statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Lands, Planning and Housing 
regarding the notice of evi ction issued to the tenants of Changamwe old estate.  Hon.  Speaker, 
the Committee wrote to the Department of Lands, Planning and Housin g. The Department 
responded  as follows: - 
 
1. The Department of Lands,  Planning and Housing issued a vacation n otice  Mr. 
Speak er not as the way it was stated by the Hon.  MCA  from that W ard that it was an 
eviction n otice ; it was not an eviction notice , the vacation n otice implies a pre and 
post r elationship between the County g overnment and the residents as opposed to the 
mere ter mination of the tenancy agreement.  
In this arrangement, the County g overnment will offer relocation facilitation to the 
affected residents prior to them vacating the houses. It is important to note, as 
indicated in the vacation notice that no tenants will  be asked to vacate from their 
houses before this facilitation amount is paid  in full . Mr. Speaker further, reasonable 
time will be given after payment of the facilitation amount to allow them to identify, 
make arrangements and move to alternative accommod ation for the duration of the 
construction.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 And Mr. Speaker u pon completion of the project, the residents will be offered first 
priority to buy the units while those who will opt not to participate in purchase of the 
units will be given allocation priorit y in the rental units to be retained b y the County 
government.  
 
2. The entire housing project consists of 12 lots, all at different progression level s. These 
are their timelines  Mr. Speaker even though the notice was just for Changamwe 
residents but we saw as  a Committee to at least bring to light for the Hon.  Members  to 
understand the progression of the other estates in the County ; 
 
(a) Phase 1: Comprising of Mzizima Estate, Changamwe Estate and Likoni Customs 
is planned to break -ground before the end of the year;  
(b) Phase 2: Comprising of Likoni Flats, Tudor Estate, Buxton Estate and Khadija 
Estate is set to com mence latest by end of 1st quarter 2019;  
(c) Phase 3: Comprising of Kaa Chonjo, Nyerere and Kizingo is set to s tart by latest 
end of June , 2009;  
(d) Phase 4: This is from Miritini , Jomvu Constituency. The Miritini  Green Site is set 
to start by 3rd quarter of  2019 subject to completion and acceptance of the Maste r 
Plan by the County g overnment putting in consideration these are new structures 
to be built in that site Mr . Speaker.  
 
3. The County g overnment has already set out a relocatio n plan and package. The 
County g overnment has proposed to facilitate the affected residents by paying for 
relocation equivalent to two (2) times the amount of their monthly rent as at July , 
2018 for a period of 24 months i.e. (2x monthly rent as at 30th July, 2018 x 24) for 
two years Mr. Speaker. This amount will ho wever be paid on a consolidated basis and 
before relocation. The residents then will be expected to vacate from the houses 
within 30 days after payment of this amount. Payment will be made to those with 
current tena ncy agreements with the County g overnment , we understand they are 
others who do not have tena ncy agreements that is why the d epartment have 
emphasized on only those with a greements Mr. Speaker . It is important to note that 
the relocation facilitation amount is not mandatory as per the  tenancy  agreement 
between the County g overnment and the affected residents but has  been brought by 
the County’s concern for their welfare and  tough negotiations with the respective 
developers. This amount is not applicable in Nairobi where a similar project is also in 
planning stages.  
 
4. Finally, the Department has been engaging the respective residents association on a 
regular basis on behalf of  all the residents and indeed held a meeting with them befo re 
issuance of the notice where  they suggested some amendments  to the wording on the 
vacation notice that were included. Further the Department also did engage the 
Assembly Committee in mid April , 2018 where a progress report on the project was 
given. In addition to these and as the ground breaking gets closer, a sensitization 
workshop for all Assembly Members  had been planned in September but was 
cancelled and is now being rescheduled within the ne xt two weeks . Mr. Speaker, all 
the Hon.  Members  in this House will be taken to an induction for them to know more  
about the plans of the County g overnment concerning these estates in Mombasa 
County  and a similar exercise is also planned for the Executive, Resident Association 
and interested  Civil Societies for them also to have knowledge on what is going on.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Mr. Speaker this is a response from the County Assembly Committee o n Lands, 
Planning and Housing a nd I think the Hon.  Member from that Ward and the Members  who 
reside in these Wards or areas that comprise the said estates are all supporting the response 
from my Committee because it is a good response and I wish the County to prosper in 
whatever that it is intending to do for their residents. Thank you.   
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili I think the Clerk should 
facilitate the copies of your response to all others Members … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
(Clerk confirmed availability of copies for Hon. Members)  
 
 You have them , yes? S o Members  can go through and if you have any other questions 
you can bring the statement again and you will be answered. Yes Hon. Bernard Ogutu ? 
 
 Hon. Ogutu: Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Bwana Spika ningependa kupongeza 
Kamati hii kwa kuleta ripoti hii mbele yetu. Mheshimiwa  Spika shida yangu inakuja katika 
relocation plan and package ; ukiangalia haya maelezo yote yanalenga relocation package  
peke yake h awajatuambia kwamba hawa watu wetu watatoka namna gani na watarudi namna 
gani? Ambapo katika ile tenan cy agreement  na katika  ile memorandum  ambayo wale  
wapangaji  na idara ya a rdhi walifanya hiyo imeelezwa pale na tunaomba waangalie hiyo. Pili 
katika hiyo relocation package … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Ogutu I think the Hon. Member has stated very 
clear ly how it will be done not unless may be you wanted it to be included there or should 
have a sepa rate paper pointing out all these  issues, is that what you’re trying to say? Because 
in his statement you can see the Hon. Member has replied very clearly how it is  going to 
happen and how they are going to be given a priority when they come back they are the first 
ones who would be given a priority to buy those propert ies or to be rented by the County, 
because the County will own their own as well. I think it is cle ar there if you look.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri ingekuwa ingetajwa ma anake sijaiona ikiwa 
imetajwa , inasemekana asilimia 40  ya hizo nyumba zitakuwa za Kaunti  na asilimia 60  
zitakuwa za yule private developer  mpaka ile siku ambayo kwam ba atama liza ile pesa yake 
ambayo amefadhili a huo mradi. Pili katika relocation package  katika hao watu ambao 
wanatoka hawaendi kuishi tena katika nyumba za serikali wanaenda kuishi katika nyumba 
ambazo zinapangishwa katika market rate  ambapo hivi sasa  kodi ya mwe zi mmoja ni shilingi 
800/= katika zile nyumba zetu za serikali.  Tukiongeza mara mbili itakuwa s hs.1600 mara 24 
Mheshimiwa Spika ambayo haiwezi kubeba hata ile mizigo ambayo wale watu wako nayo . 
Pale k atika ile tenan cy  agreement  ilisemekena wazi kwamba wat atumia market rate  ambayo 
tunaelewa pengine nyumba ya one bedroom…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Ogutu to be fair on that issue, hivyo ukiangalia basi 
hao wapangaji wanaumiza serikali ikiwa walikuwa wanalipa shilingi 800/= ? 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia Millennium Development G oals we are 
talking about…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You know I am talking this in general because as a 
government you cannot serve  mtu mmoja halafu mwengine umuangalie kivyengine kama  ni 
wao wanapata. Hiyo ni rasilmali ya serikali na K aunti nzima ya Mombasa inafaa pia ipate 
kusherekea hiyo rasilmali kama kuna ninio kwa hivyo kama mtu analipa shilingi 800/= kwa 
mwezi na ona hiyo wanaumiza serikali ya K aunti!  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spik a katika Millennium Development G oals tunaambiwa 
kwamba serikali italeta nyumba ambazo ziko affordable … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
            The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Affordable.  
  
 Hon. Ogutu:  Yes if you talk about affordable  in Changamwe shs 800/= is not even 
affordable to  them Mr. Speaker. Kwa hivyo ukiangalia hata huko wanadaiwa, hiyo 
inamaanisha kwamba hiyo shilingi 800/= is not affordable to them  na ukiangalia te na hizi 
nyumba ziko kila mahali  Mheshimiwa Spika na bado tutajenga nyingi ili hata wale ambao 
hawajapata hizo watapata hizo nafasi. Kwa hivyo  huu mradi ni mzuri wameukubali l akini 
isiende katika hali ambayo itafanya ianguke maanake ni mradi ambao nafikiri ni Legacy 
project  ya G avana wetu na sisi tunataka tui unge mkono. Tunataka zile sehemu ambazo 
zinashida idara watuhusishe maanake pia ni makosa sisi ni wadau kama Bunge hatujawai 
kuitwa hatujawa hi kukaa. Sisi tunasikia notisi zinapeanwa hata idara ya ardhi walikuwako 
hawajui mpaka juzi tulipo itisha taarifa Mheshimiwa Spika,  hatujui tunaenda namna gani?  Ili 
huu mradi ufaulu sisi tuanaomba wale wawakilishi ambao wameathirika tukae na idara hiyo 
tuangalie those contentious  areas na tuzi-iron out  huu mradi uanze kwa ile njia ambayo 
haitaleta shida . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Ogutu kwa k uongezea ; kumbuka 
hizi nyumba vile ninavyoona saa hii vile ziko zikivunjwa zijengwe nyengine pengine it will 
triple up the times  zile sehemu ambazo ziko, maanake I think they’re going high rise 
building . Kwa hivyo nina  uhakika kutakuwa na more vacant house s, so when you are talking 
about 40  per cent  the Government will hold, I think the government should hold a certain 
percentage  ambayo ita-cover  hao watu wote ambao walikuwa hapo ndani. So I think 40  per 
cent,  I mean you can look at that; which I think the CEC M ember was planning to have  a 
workshop with Hon. Members  to explain to you what is happening t hen I think after that if 
Hon. Members  are happy about it, it is fine and if you are not happy you can bring your 
petition or something in th e House t hen we c an see how we will go about it. So I think the 
most importa nt now is to make sure the CEC M ember facilitate s the workshop as soon as 
possible so that the Hon. Members  can understand what is this project is about.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika . Nafikiri hiyo ingeanza hata mwanzo 
ili angalau tuelewe ukiulizwa maswali kule mashinani uweze  kujibu, l akini hakujaharibika 
jambo . 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  Tunaambiwa hapa katika taarifa yao kwamba kwa muda wa wiki mbili zijazo na kuna 
mambo yanaendelea n otisi imep eanwa jumamosi watakuwa na mkutano C hangamwe na 
wataendelea. Kwa hivyo mimi ningeomba…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : We will try all our bes t and we will speak to the CEC 
Member to do the workshop immediately. Thank you, yes Hon. Maimuna?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna  Salim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi mwanzo 
naiunga mkono hii ripoti ilioletwa Mheshimiwa Spika na halafu yatakikaniwa tujue katika 
jumba hili kuna mambo ambayo yalikuwa yamefanyika nyuma kukiwa ni last regime  ambapo 
naona sisi tun aendelea kupitwa na wa kati k wa sababu Nairobi wamefanya imefa ulu na watu 
wamefurahiya. Mimi sijui ni kwa nini ikifikia hapa  tumfikirie tu yule mwananchi ambaye 
anahitaji huduma kuhu dumiwa na sisi k wa sababu tukiangalia mambo ya  mataa ya barabarani  
yametuan dama sisi mambo ya maba rabara kwa hiyo mimi kulingana na mimi naona hii 
upgrading  zile slums ni muhimu t utaanza siasa kwa jambo kama hili halitakwenda . Kwa hiyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika mimi najaribu kuzungumza ya kwamba siasa tuzi weke kando hili jambo 
lilipitwa n a likaf uatia njia zote hivi sasa ni kama ambaye tunafanya reverse  kwa sababu kuna 
wenzetu ambao wako hapa walikuwa hawalijui. Hivyo basi  sioni sababu gani ya kwamba hili 
jambo tulizungumzie sana , cha muhimu ni  Waziri tukae nae wapate tu  taarifa  na hili jam bo 
tuliunge mkono tupate kupata  mapato  na watu wetu waishi katika mazingira mazuri.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Maimuna , ahsante sana na mimi 
ninavyoona hapa sioni kama kuna watu wanajaribu kupinga bali wanataka kufahamu…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 So I think Hon. Maimuna the right word is people want to understand this project. 
Wanataka kujua ni kitu gani, mazao gani italeta? W ananchi wao watafaidika na nini?  Kwa  
hivyo hilo ndilo jambo muhimu ambalo nafikiria , wana haki kwa sababu wanawawakilisha 
watu wao na wanataka wajue. Yes Hon. Moses, I hope you are  not repeating again this thing, 
yes Hon. Moses Aran?  
 
 Hon.  Aran:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na nakushu kuru sana kwa hekima yako 
kwa kusema kwamba hili jambo lisionekane kama ni siasa . Mhes himiwa S pika mimi 
nasimama hapa  babu yangu toka 1965 ameishi kwa zile nyumba za Tudor DS8 D oor 1, 
babangu akaishi pale mimi mwenyewe nimezaliwa pale Tudor na kitu tunasema kwamba sisi 
eti hatutaki kwamba maendeleo yafanyike na hawa watu washakuba li wanataka maendele o 
yafanyike;  sisi pia twat aka kuona Tudor iwe kama Marina . Kitu iko ni kwamba ile taarifa  ya 
kwanza iliyotoka waliambiwa kwamba watapatiwa watahamishwa kulingana na standard 
rate yenye iko. Mheshimiwa Spika leo hii ile nyumba yangu  ya chumba kimoja ya Tudo r 
tunalipa shs 2,320/= unaambiwa walisema pale mwanzo kwamba ukitoka kwa  chumba 
kimoja  utakuwa relocated  kwenda vile vile kwa chumba kimoja;  kama ni B amburi ama wapi , 
sasa huwezi  isipokuwa  mimi nikalipe  shilingi  2,320/= huko B amburi. Kitu tunaomba 
Mheshimi wa Spika tunaunga mkono jambo hili , wananchi wamekubali hakuna mahali popote 
wanapinga , hata Tudor wamesema wanakubali maendeleo ije na hizi nyumba zitengenezwe 
ila wapatiwe ile standard  yenye iko kwa soko alafu vile imese mekana watakuwa na wakati 
yule ata kayerudi arudi  na yule atakaye kwenda zake nyumba aende zake nyumbani bara ama 
angalie mahali pengine.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Kwa hivyo i sionekane kwamba ni siasa wale W aheshimiwa wengine waingie hapa 
waseme kwamba ni siasa na  tushazoea hii N yumba kitu kikifanyika watu wengine  husema ni 
siasa si siasa Mheshimiwa Spika na nina uchungu mimi nasimama ili tutetee watu wetu na 
sisi inafaa tufanye kazi baina ya Bunge la Kaunti na Executive . Mimi nakuomba Mheshimiwa 
Spika kwa hekma hii ripoti wewe tunakupenda na uko sober  ili ripoti i rudi mpaka yule 
Executive M ember  atuite tukae chini tumuelezee vile inatakikana. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Moses for highlighting that issue . I even 
want to tell you Hon.  Members  mkiangalia hiyo issue  mkisem a mnataka ile bei ya rate hamjui 
kesho m kirudi pale hilo jambo ndilo mnataka mliangalie , muhimu mkirudi kodi yenu itakuwa 
ile ile ama mtachajiwa ile ile,  sasa msiangalie hii ya muda mdogo wa miaka miwili au mitatu 
sasa mkirudi pale kwa zile nyumba mtachaji wa kodi kwa ile pesa uliolipwa kama unataka 
kulipwa elfu 10 saa hii ukirudi pale utachajiwa hiyo hiyo elfu 10. ..  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 So you should look at it both way s don’t look at one side. Yes Hon. Samba ? 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. T he report itsel f is in good faith and as Hon . 
Member who is maybe affec ted and I will be also affected; y ou have been very categorical 
but I would request through your office to facilitate the meeting we meet urgently because the 
notice has already been given out but we are in support.  There are some issues we need just 
to iron out because we represent our constituents and re sidents ; whatever thing that we will 
have here that is what we will communicate to them. They trust us and that is why they 
elected us and whenever we have issues this is the best place where we can discuss it and 
here we discuss things when we are sober. When we are not or rise out of emotions  I would 
request you to enhance this meeting so that and at the same time I would also request if we 
can put on hold the notice so that at least we may come on the table we agree on the way 
forward. Otherwise I thank the C ommittee that took their time to bring us back the report and  
thank you so much Mr. Speaker s ir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Sa mba. Hon . Members  I think we 
cannot keep  on now talking about the same issue now and then and we know that we don’t 
have a solution to it. The so lution is to sit down with CEC M ember and he tells us what they 
have planned for us and then from there now you  will come up with . Whatever you guys 
want to be amended you will tell them what to amend but now if you keep on talking here 
everyone  will start giving out his grievancies about  his issue and we are not taking it 
anywhere. We wil l still again wait for the  CEC M ember to come and sit down with us and 
explain to us what they have planned. So as you said let us be sober Hon . Members  and when 
a Member has raise d or ri ses to say something  then we know what he has said you  don’t have 
even you stand ing again to say the same issue. Already amended you know…yes Hon .? 
 
 Hon. Wambua : Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa nataka kuongea hivyo na sasa 
umetuelekeza hakuna haja ya  kuongea.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
(Applause ) 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  Kwa sababu ile ukweli kila mmoja hapa ana  majukum u yake sasa tukianza kuongea 
kila mmoja ataongea na tunajua shida ni hiyo hiyo moja na tun ajua dawa yale ni kukaa na 
CEC M ember atueleze ile mipan gilio halafu nyinyi wenyewe pale  mukiwa kwa hiyo warsha 
mutamuambia hivi hatuoni kuwa hivyo ni sawa. Hapa tuna taka hivi na mwaweza kubaliana. 
Kwa sababu ba ado bunge ni lenu . Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE BY CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRUSTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC 
WORKS TO THE STATEMEN T ON LIGHT PROBLEM I N PORTREITZ WARD 
 
 Yes Hon. Priscilla Mumba Chairperson on Commit tee on Transport, Infrastructure 
and Public Works can you please give the response?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker first I would just like to ask because 
there are quite a number of statement s which have  come to this House and there were three  
rulings  and today if I reply for this one W ard then what of the rest? Now I don't understand 
whether I reply this one or the three ruling s which were before this...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Do you have the O rder paper with you?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So read whatever is on the O rder paper , stop 
complicating yourself . 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  In the O rder paper is this Port  Reitz Ward and whatever I have 
at hand...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Prischillah you kno w we are in this House and the 
Clerks are here and you know what are the procedures to follow , the C lerk mention ed very 
clearly ... 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : What did the Clerk mention order number 10 and it is 
the statement so stop complicating yourself , you know what is the statement order number 10 
it is regarding the light problem in Portreitz Ward so reply to that then we move on and if you 
feel like there's something which it is not in a proper manner  then we will talk about it but for 
now don't talk about that and I remember very well last week we told you to bring this 
answer today which is one week so reply on that, do you have the answer to that?  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mumba:  What I have in my hands does  not read one W ard, that's what 
am saying because what I have in this hand is the Installation of digital high mast streetlights 
and securi ty so it combines almost every W ard so that I can answer all together...  
 
(Interruption)  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But were you here last time when we gave the ruling ? 
Were you in the House?  
  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  No. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You see that is the problem , you do  not know what we 
were talking about, the Hon. Member was asking about...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  This was not the ruling of the last sitting, the ruling of the last 
sitting was about all the W ards that I reply about all the W ards on how the streetlights...it' s 
supposed to have be en mentioned to be in each W ard, how has it worked upon , that's why I 
have this report that is telling me how I can explain what they had started telling me . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So that is what I am telling you last week ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  But this one stands only for one W ard. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay Hon. Member last week  Hon. Fadhili talked about 
his W ard, Port Reitz and I gave the ruling that you or the Tr ansport Committee gives all 30 
Wards a tentative report when will they be going like examp le your W ard Shimanzi, the  other 
Wards give us the dates they will be there, is it for one day or two days, give  us all the reports 
for all 30 W ards and then if you were not here...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Then let me read what is here or what I have for now then if 
there's something lacking then you will guide me Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But were you in th e sitting the other day?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  I was given everything so that I could understand what went 
on. 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : By who? W ho gave you?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  The House . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Who? Who is the House?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  The C lerks . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Which Clerk? Who?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Mr. Speaker ... 
 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Which C lerk ga ve you, yo u said you have been given the 
instruction from the other places . 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  I have my Committee C lerk I have Abdallah who instructed 
me to do whatever I have done . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Did you go to the Hansard?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yes? 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Were you keen enough to know what the Member was 
asking?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  That's why am...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You know Hon. Members  if you are a Chairperson for 
that Committee you have t o be serious with your work, if a Hon. Member ask s something 
then you have to  go to the Hansard or ask your C lerk to give all the Hansard on what was 
happening . 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  That's why Mr. Speaker if you understand me very well the 
reply which is he re combines ev erybody not only for Fadhili's W ard, that's why I want 
everybody to understand it is not for only Airport W ard i mean Port Reitz W ard so please can 
I kindly just read then maybe we may make any remark on that after...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You started complicating yourself, you could have just 
read that response and then Hon. Fadhili and if he was not happy with that he could have told 
you but it seems you are getting instructions somewhere else you started to stand up a nd talk 
what you know...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:   I am just talking Mr. Sp eaker I wanted you to guide me....  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No. 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  That's why I was asking ...not asking that I do  not know what I 
was doing but I was just asking because there were three ruling s in this House that's why it 
become s complicated to me so...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So what are the rulings? Tell me what are the three 
rulings in this House?  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11  Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba:  The first ruling was given...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : By who?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  When Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu was the Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : When?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  By then .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : When w as that? When?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  That ruling?  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  I think it was last week . 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  When? Do  not say I think , when was that ruling? Tell us 
the ruling Hon. Prischillah . 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Mr. Speaker I do  not have all the specific s but I know there 
was a ruling, that  is why I was asking should I read all together but as long as you have 
guided me that I continue then let me continue to read . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Memb er just sit down , first Hon. Member relax, sit 
down. Hon. Member you are talking about something , you a re the Chair for that Committee 
and you are saying that there were three rulings and you have no knowledge about the three 
rulings, do you have the knowl edge  of what were the rulings about?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Street lighting of all the W ards. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But you see Hon. Member so that what am asking you 
what were the ruling s all about ... if we may start with that? S o Hon. Prischillah ju st tell us the 
three rulings, what were they about? Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker .  Mr. Speaker I think for us to save time just 
like you have directed allow the Hon. Member to read the response she has, you see she has a 
comprehensiv e report and I think this was a result of one mon th duration that you gave that 
Committee so she's confused because the one that she is suppose d to be replying is about 
Hon. Fadhili's a rea which is one but with her i s a comprehensive report that she has , so just 
kindly allow her...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay i have heard you Hon. Bwire but you see this 
House is guided by the rules and regulation s; when you go and read your O rder paper you do  
not just bring , there was that ruling, you' re just bringing it in the House.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12  Read the O rder paper it is very clear it is written regarding Port  Reitz W ard so then 
answer that, a nswer about whatever the O rder paper is saying and if I remember very well 
when Hon. Fadhili brought that I told you go i n general and bring the  schedule for all 30 
Wards, that i s what I said . So just reply about Hon. Fadhili , the one that you  have been asked 
about Port  Reitz Ward but if you start saying there were three rulings now you want to show 
us that you have done a m istake , you know that is not the right way to go Hon. Prischillah 
follow whatever is in the Order Paper and answer the statement.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker I think the response I  have is the 
installation of the digi tal high mast street lig hts, security during the...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Prischillah, did Hon. Fadhili ask about the high 
mast, is that what Hon. Fadhili asked about?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  That's why I was asking and that's why I was telling you that 
what I have is a combination from the first I was asking that, that's why I was asking if it is 
Hon. Fadhili's Ward then there's no report for only one W ard and this is a combination that's 
why I was telling you Mr. Speak er you are not understanding me.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It is included about Hon. Fadhili?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  It is also inside there after maybe reading everything will come 
up from inside, now this is what is written let me read then you will come and respond . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. K hatri) : Let's hear what Hon. Hamida has to tell us, yes?  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Noor : Hon. Speaker I think we should give the Hon . Member more  time, 
let her gather all her information together because it seems like most of the inform ation is not 
all together and it  she feels this statement is not quite complete for her. Thank y ou. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker am also in the same Committee with my Chair 
and I think what the Chair is doing you see the respon se comes from the Department not the 
Committe e so whenever we ask about one W ard or one person and the Department has a 
comprehensive report about every W ard so I think whatever she is giving is inclusive of 
whate ver Hon. Fadhili was asking for. I f they do n't have services for a particular W ard and 
they have services for all the W ards I think Hon. Fadhili should be satisfied with whatever 
the Chair is going to give because it is wha t is coming from the Department. T hey have plans 
to do everythin g or rather to do it for every W ard not specifically for himself alone so he 
should be satisfied with the fact that the Depar tment is going to do it in all W ards including 
Port Reitz so ther e is no specific report for Port  Reitz only we have for all the 30 W ards...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Nyiro he has his right to ask, Hon. Fadhili 
cannot come here and ask on behalf of all other Members .  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13  He is asking about his W ard, he has all the right s even you if you want to ask if you 
are satisfied w ith your W ard...that there are too many lights  I think during the night in your 
Ward is like day time, you have a lot of lights...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  It is true but Hon. Fadhili has not complained . 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are satisf ied in your W ard, so let Hon. Fadhili  if 
he is not satisfied in his W ard let him talk on his behalf...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  But he has not shown hi s displeasure with the report, he has to listen to 
whatever the Chair is saying and he is going t o say if he is satisfied or not.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But you see that was not what Hon. Fadhili was asking 
about high mast anyway ; yes Hon. Prischillah continue , you can continue Hon. Prischillah . 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . During th e Implementation of the 
2017/2018 budget the d epartment was taken aback when it was realised that there was no 
budget allocated for the street/public lighting, this anomaly was corrected when money was 
allocated in the supplementary budget and when works s tarted in June , 2018. A timetable of 
works was pre pared allocating date for each W ard. The D epartment is currently undertaking 
the repairs of all exis ting street lights and high mast  lights to have them functional. Upon 
compl etion of  the current exercise, the installation of additional lights will be considered as 
per needs assessment done on respective areas.The procurement process for biannual tenders ; 
street lighting/electrical works is currently on going which will enable the i nstallation to be 
done bet ter. A schedule  of the works executed in each Ward will be tabled shortly, a  
summary of the works executed in the 1st quarter  of 2018/2019  and the remarks the 
Department has planned site visits to all W ards and will give recommendations on 
improvement of l ighting across Mombasa County...  
 
(Power Outage ) 
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : The Hansard, we can continue?  
 
(Hansard Reporter nodded ) 
 
 Yes you can continue Hon. Prischillah . 
  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  We had no maintenance materials for  more than one year. 
Fortunately, we received some materials in June which we had three  programs cycles as per 
attachments. The li st of items allocated for each W ard is as follows;  
Phase o ne which was done 18th June to 12th July, they had 20 pieces Hps 15 0w bulbs and 10 
pieces of 150w ballast the same and 5 pieces I think that was done  on how they use to do in 
each W ard and 5 pieces 70 -400w igniters , 3 pieces 250w ballast, 2 pieces 50 Amps 2 Pole 
contactor, 1 pieces timer switch, 5 pieces circuit breaker . 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  So I think that was done per W ard during that Phase 1.  Phase 2, 20 pieces 150w bulbs, 
7 pieces 150w ballast, 15 pieces 70 -400w igniters , 3 pieces 250w Hps bulbs, 2 pieces 250w 
ballast, 2 pieces 50 Amps 2 pole contactor and I piece timer switch, 5 pieces c ircuit breaker 
that was phase 2 what they had indicated was done from 16th July to 10th August that w as the 
work which was done per W ard that is what they say according to the report.  Phase 3, I think 
they only indicated 3 which is 19th September to 16th October 15 pieces Hps 150w, 2 pieces 
70-400w igniters  and 3 pieces circuit break, that was phase three which I think is now 
undergoing which is indicated in a few remarks there.  So what I can say what they are saying 
is that challenges  such as  lack of enoug h maintenance materials, lack of technicians, lack of 
working and safety gears, lack of continuous working status of street lighting fleets , I think 
those are the challenge s which the ministry has stated. T hank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you H on Prischillah, yes Hon Kitula.  
 
 Chief Whip ( Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na ripoti iliyoweza 
kuletwa mimi naw eza kusema naipinga vikali sana;  sisi ni wa wakilishi twatoka katika kila 
Wodi na sipingi  bali ripoti inatoka kwa idara Mheshimiwa S pika ni kweli mataa hayawaki 
mashinani na kila tukisema kwamba katika supplementary budget   2017/2018 B unge 
lililopita hawakutenga bajeti itakuw a jambo la kushangaza wakasema supplementary budget  
June 2018 wa taenda kutazama kila Wodi igniter moja bulb tano. Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni 
Kaunti ya Mombasa Kaunti bulb tano kwa W odi itawasha nini ? Katika idara ya Uchukuzi  
kuna mambo yanaendelea sisi hatuwezi kufahamu lazima tuweze kuweka kila jambo wazi, 
kuna mambo yanaend elea katika idara hiyo na sisi W aheshimiwa tus ipokuwa makini kuweza 
kuzungumzia mambo  mengi yanaendelea pale lakini W aheshimiwa hawafahamu na kuna 
ulagh ai unaendelea katika idara hiyo. Tuzungumze wazi Mheshimiwa Spika, haiwezi kuwa 
ati katika W odi igniter mbili bulb tatu Kaunti ya M ombasa  alafu mtu an atoka kwa K aunti 
nyengine yuaja kutuw ashia sisi mataa katika K aunti yetu, lazima tuzowee kuongea mambo ya 
kuweza kustahili . Ahsante sana naongea na uchungu sana M heshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Mwam wiri. 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwa mwiri:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika, taarifa tuliosomewa iko na 
walakini mkubwa ; kwanza haijafikia viwango vya kuwa taarifa ya kuwakilishwa katika 
Bunge  kwa sababu wamezungumzia changamoto na mwisho hawakutuambia suluhisho ni 
nini. H uwezi kuwa na changamoto pa si ya mapendekezo  ya suluhu ya hizo changamoto, pili 
Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti wametutajia uhaba wa fedha katika bajeti ili yotangulia labda ni 
kweli wakatu ambia walipata sahali kwa bajeti nyongeza ama supplementary  ya kukimu hali 
waliokuwa nayo lakini hawajatu ambi a igniter moja iliyoletwa katika  Wodi yangu ilig harimu 
pesa ngapi na ni pesa ngapi  iliyokuwa imepangiwa kwa kila Wodi katika su ala la kupambana 
na shida ya mataa. M heshimiwa ukweli wa mambo na hili  tutalisema pasi na uwoga sisi 
Waheshimiwa kwa zile taa  zinazowaka katika W odi zetu tumekuwa tukig haramia na pesa 
yetu ya mifukoni...  
 
(Applause ) 
  
 Na tumefanya hayo k wa mapenzi kwa kujaribu kuokoa K aunti yetu kwa sababu aibu 
ile haiji kwangu peke yake ; sio jukumu langu mimi kuweka mataa ni jukumu la serikali  ya 
Kaunti.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  Ni jukumu la W izara ama idara husika katika serikali gatuzi yetu ya Mombasa lakini 
tuna hisia labda ndio  ni kweli kuna changamoto lakini haya masu ala lazima yaangaliwe 
kiundani je hizi igniter moja moja zilitengewa pesa n gapi na ni kima gani s isi kama B unge 
tuliwapitishia kuweza kukimu haja za w atu wetu hususan swala la mataa.  Ahsante  
Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Mwamwiri.  Yes Hon . Fadhili , Deputy 
Speaker.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Ahsante sana Mhesh imiwa Spika. M imi pia 
nasimama nik isema kwanza ya kwamba mimi ni Mwanakamati wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi 
lakini M heshim iwa nilisimama kuleta mbele ya Bunge hili ya kwamba ndani ya W odi yangu 
na nikasema haswa nilianza kusema kuwa usalama wangu uko vibaya maana w atembea 
mahali ambapo taa haziwaki na ndani ya Hansar d ipo kama tukitaka kufuatilia Hansard  yetu 
ilionyesha  kuwa M wenyekiti alisema wazi kuwa ratiba imepan gwa na Tudor imeanza na 
kilipofuatia kikao chengine M heshimiwa kutoka Tononoka na ye alis imama na kuth ibitisha 
mbele ya N yumba hii kuwa baada ya Tudor ilienda Tononoka. N diposa tulitaka tupate ile 
ratiba ya kuon yesha watakuja lini kwangu Port  Reitz na vilevile zile taa za kule kwangu 
zitashu ghulikiwa namna gani. R ipoti ya Mwenyekiti imezungumiwa K aunti kwa  jumla pasi 
na kutaja ni siku gani ambayo mimi nilieleta hoja yangu itaweza kushu ghulikiwa kama 
tulivyoona mifano ya  awali tulipoulizwa  kuhusu masu ala y a Changamwe wamejibiwa watu 
wa Changamwe, a hsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon Fadhili.  Yes Hon . Faith.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwende: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Tukiangalia vizuri tangu 
mwanzo hii idara imekuwa na changamoto si haba na ukiangalia W aheshimiwa wako kwa 
kweli tumeumia kule mashinani kwa sababu kama sio jambo hili unaambiwa ni lengine ; gari 
haina mafuta , sijui supplier  hajapa ta material  ilhali wametengewa bajeti. M heshimiwa Spika 
naona tukikaa hapa tukiongea tutaongea  mpaka kesho kutwa  lakini imefika wakati wa sisi 
kama W abunge ambao tunawakilisha wananchi wetu tuweze kutumia mikakati ile tutapata 
majibu kami li pasipo kuandikiwa makaratasi. Mheshimiwa Spika mahali imefikia ni W aziri 
wa idara ya Uchukuzi aweze kuja mb ele ya B unge  hili aweze kujibu haya maswali k wa vile 
bajeti tunapitisha lakini hakuna mambo ambayo yanafanyika.U kiangalia yale mataa ambay o 
yanawekwa sa a hii mimi nishaenda kwa idara unapata zinawaka leo hii kesho haziwaki na 
unapata bei yenye wanaweka zinazo wekwa sawa na zile za shirika la Kenya P ower ambazo 
zinangar a zaidi, hatujui shida iko wapi  na hii ni pesa ya mtoza ush uru. Kwa hivyo ni wakati 
hiyo idara ichunguzwe kwa kina tumekuwa tukibembelezana kwa m uda mrefu , mbele 
Mweny ekiti alikuwa na machungu Fahad  saa hii mamangu Prischillah pale anakuwa na 
uchungu na sio mapenzi yake kwa hivyo mpaka tukae .... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Na tuunge mkono tuangalie shida iko wapi ndio tuweze kusonga mbele, a hsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon . Mukono , sorry Shebe Athman.  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Ahsante sana Mwenyekiti , nakuruhusu Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kwa h ilo jina k wa sababu roho yangu imeridhika.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16  Kwanza kabisa na tia mushkil ripoti  ambayo imeletwa mbele yetu na M wenyekiti 
mwen za kwa sababu mbili za kimsingi;  ngonjera zil izoko katika idara ya barabara zimetia 
fora...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Ni masikitiko W aheshimiwa wenyekiti wenza hapa na W aheshimiwa wataonekana 
kana kwamba majukumu yao hawayajui lakini kusema kweli changamoto na mchongoma 
uko kwa hii wizara . Ni masikitiko hili swala la barabara na mataa mimi juzi wiki mbili 
zilizopita nakupa mfano wa haki kwangu ene o ninaowakilisha eneo la Jomvu K uu naletewa  
bulb tena ni baada  ya mimi mwenyewe kutoa kijasho. Wakati M wenyekiti mwenza alifanya 
juhudi na bajeti tukapitisha tukasema tunataka Mombasa ing'are na tuhakikishe kuwa mji 
wetu utarudi katika hali yake ya zamani lakini tunapiga hatua moja m bele baadae tunapiga 
tatu nyuma. N i mithili ya ku osha kuku miguu vile wamuosha hapa akifika pale ashachafuka, 
mimi nililetewa bulb ishirini nakupa mfano wa Jomvu K uu bulb ishirini gari halina mafuta 
ashasema yule sasa hizi bulb ishirini zajawekwa vipi milingoti miwil i Mmheshimiwa igniter 
circuit brea ker hamna wakarudi na bulb zao nikawaambia naomba mie nipeni  hizi ishirini 
nitafanya ganga n amna zangu nihakikishe eneo langu linang 'ara bulb pia sikupata sasa mi mi 
najiuliza leo ukin yoosha kidole M heshimiwa watu wanajificha katika mgongo wa Gavana, 
ndio uhalisia wa mambo...  
(Applause ) 
 
 Ni masikitiko tutam uweka wapi G avana wetu baada ya kipindi cha miaka mita no; 
anataka kuondoka na kumbukumbu na sisi tunatak a kuwacha kumbukumbu, tunat aka 
Mukono  tano tena haitakuja hii ! Kwa hivyo tunakuomba Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti 
tuhaki kishe kuwa sisi tutawajibikia Kamati zetu kama W enyekiti lakini hizi idara ngonjera 
zimezidi juzi  Mheshimiwa M wenyek iti mwenza amesema hapa katika B unge kwa hivyo 
mimi naz ungumza kwa uchungu kuna mast mbili Jomvu tangu mwaka juzi M heshimiwa 
aliekuja mpaka wa leo hazing 'ari watu wajikungwaa kila kukicha huko usiku . Kwa hivyo 
mimi sina mengi Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti naku omba utupe nguvu kwa hili swala, a hsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Athman.  Yes Hon . Benard Ogutu.  
 
 Hon.  Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Spika a hsante kwa nafasi hii . Nafikiri mimi nitaungana na 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu kwa hili jambo maanake mimi leo nik iongea na wewe karibia nusu 
ya Wodi ya Changamwe iko na  giza. M imi kwangu nyumb ani huwezi toka usiku afadhali 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili alitoka na akajificha kidogo akarudi, mimi huwezi toka nilipoenda 
nikaambiwa gari imeharibika , wiki moja ikapita gari bado imeharibi ka kazi haiwezi 
kuharibika. M heshimiwa Spika iko s hida nafikiri ni lazima  Jumba hili itafute mbinu mw afaka 
ya kuondoa hii shida maanake tumeongea kwa m uda mrefu na hatutakuwa tunaongea jambo 
moja kwa mwaka mzima watu wanataka huduma kule chini.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Ahmed Khamis.  
 
 Hon. Ah med Khamis:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nadhani W aheshimiwa 
wenzangu kwa kila mmoja ametoa uchungu wake wameongea . Mimi nataka k usema 
tusilemeze sana tukasema M awaziri , maana  ni wale wafanyi  kazi wenyewe nyie 
mumewazoesha vibaya kuwapatia mapeni kufanya hizi shu ghuli na katika idara hiyo pia kuna 
upungufu wa wafanyi  kazi. 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17  Kwa hivyo twaomba , kitu ambacho twataka tuombe tupewe nafasi sisi kama 
Waheshimiwa tuongeze watu wetu pale ili mambo yetu pale yatakwenda kwa rahisi.  Ahsante 
sana. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. K hatri) : Yaonekana M heshimiwa Ahmed Khamis ameridhi ka na 
mataa labda kwa eneo lake.  Mheshimiwa Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker thank you once again for giving another time the issue of 
street lighting and the lights as a whole , it is very challeng ing but there is one thing that Hon . 
Members  are missing here, whenever we do the request we are told that suppliers ... the issue 
is suppliers so it seems the problem begins at the stage of tendering . We need  to stop if at all 
we want our C ounty to succeed or to m ove forward we need to stop awarding our relatives 
these tenders and through that those people who are winning these tenders somehow they are 
connected if not with the people in the system or some other people, so they don't have that 
capability to supply . So I would request this Hon ourable  House we should start by the 
tendering process but if we don't countercheck the tendering process there is nothing we will 
do because even those workers , those employees are passing through alot, the same thing if  a 
Hon. Member Madam Chair could pass thro ugh all that what will just a me re employee pass 
through . They are passing through alot, let us stop awarding our relatives and friends family 
members  tenders , let us award to the competent bidders and quality service s will be rendered 
in our C ounty. Thank y ou. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Samba . Hon. Prischillah Mumba I t hink 
you have heard the Members , I think those we can call them as statements so we will want 
the answers from your C ommittee which by ne xt week Thursday we will give you latest by 
next week Thursday . We need to know all the questions which the Hon . Members  were 
asking and Hon. Prischillah this thing we are not targeting you personally so don't take it 
personal ; we know you are just a Commi ttee M ember , we know you are just a C hairperson 
but yours is just to pass the message to the relevant department there and whatever they tell 
you just tell us and we know we have our powers here as the Assembly and if the other 
department think they are mo re powerful than the Assembly then its fine we will know what 
we shall do  so please don’t take it personal and when you see all these Members  trying to 
say, they are not targeting you as Prischillah , they are just talking about it because they have 
problem s and am sure even you yourself have problem in your Ward, isn’t it true Hon. 
Prischillah?  
(Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba nodded)  
 
 Even you have the same problem ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
  So please Hon. Prischillah  I hope you took not e of all the statements the Members  
were giving and kindly just  give us the feedback by next week Thursday and the program ; 
the most important is the program . We need to know and you can even go to the budget of 
transport and see how much they have kept for the street lighting and everything,  you know, 
so check each Ward, I think there is each W ard just go a nd do your own research as the 
Committee, sit down with y our Committee, I can see your V ice Chair is there so sit down and 
look at this issue, and if you think the Member is not ahh…we know ho w to deal with that , if 
you think  an Hon. Member thinks he can not perform in that docket then you as the 
Committee you know how to do it . 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18  So please Hon. Prischillah it is not personal ;  again am telling you  all these people are 
here to represent their peo ple a nd their people are complaining. P eople want to see light s 
during the ni ght, people want to walk freely;  thank you Hon. Pri schilla and we hope to hear 
from you  next Thursday and even tell us the budget how much they have been allocated for 
these light s and how much they have used so far, you need to know, write to the F inance 
department even to give you those information through your C ommittee. Thank you Hon. 
Prischillah . Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE BY THE CHAIR PERSON COMMITTEE ON IMPLEMENTATION ON TH E STATEM ENT ON 
IMPLEMENTATION STATU S OF MOTIONS IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Salim K alume , the Chairperson Committee on Implementation, please give 
the response.  
 
 Hon. Kalume:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi na Kamati 
yangu ya Utekelezaji tuliweza  kukutana na Mheshimiwa Ka tibu wa Kaunti Bwana  Thoya na 
tulifanya mkutano kwa kina ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair) 
 
(Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes proceed.  
 
 Hon. Kalume:  Mheshi miwa Spika mimi na K amati yangu tulikutana na Bwana  
Katibu wa Kaunti  Bwana Thoya,  tuliweza kufanya mkutano kwa k ina...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : And first before you proceed, the Hon. Member 
who raised the statement that you are resp onding requested for a written response, so do you 
have a written response before you proceed?  
 
 Hon. Kalume:  Mheshimiwa Spika haijafikia hapo ilikuwa b ado naongea.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Do you have a written response?  
 
 Hon. Kalume: Mheshimiwa Spika, written response bado haijakuwa tayari.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : So if you do  not have a written response Hon. 
Kalume, go back and sit with your C ommittee and bring back a writ ten response next week 
Thursday.  
 
 Hon. K alume:  Mhes himiwa…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ndio niliuliza swala hilo na 
jambo la kusikitis ha Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti K amati ya Utekelezaji  i liomba Nyumba h ii 
kupawa siku ishirini na moja;  amepati wa siku ishirini na moja na mkutano wa Katibu  ni leo 
kwa hivyo twende tena siku is hirini na moja.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think I ha ve or dered one more week Hon. 
Kalume;  we need a written response next week Thursday, failure to which the Assembl y will 
take its way. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri I have already ruled on that issue, hope you are not up on 
the same issue.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa mimi ni Naibu Mwenyekiti  na hatuja 
ungama na maamuzi yak o kwa sababu ya maandalizi yetu.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwamwiri you are out of order!  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Kwa  muda uliotupa Mheshimiwa.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Mwamwiri you are out of order ! I have 
already direct ed that you  bring your response by next week Thursday, I think am clear.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Kalume:  Mhes himiwa Spika ingawaje you have ruled out lakini nina maombi 
napenda kukuomba kidogo.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. K alume you requested for 21 days, we gave 
you 21 days and today the pe rson who brought the statement wanted a written response.  
 
 Hon. Kalume:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri aliyekuweko ameongea vizuri kwamba 
hizi ripoti hazitoki kwetu kama W aheshimiwa, zinatoka kwa idara ambazo  zinahusika.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : It’s o kay Hon. Kalume just prepare a written 
document even Hon. Haron Moses was told to bring a written response concerning the 
Mombasa Municipal Stadium and he brought a written response today . So it is upon the 
Committee to sit down and write whatever that you  have discussed with the County Secre tary 
and bring back to this Honourable  House. Yes Hon. Ogutu, are you a Member of that 
Committee?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Yes Mr . Speaker, am a Member of this C ommittee.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Then you are out of order,  yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE BY THE CHAIR PERSON COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND INFRUS TRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS TO THE STATEMENT ON THE RENO VATION OF BOMU CATHOLIC ROAD . 
 
 Yes Chairperson Committee on Transport and Infrastructure and Publi c Works.  
 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 20  Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I have the statement of the renovation 
of Bomu Catholic road.  Mr. Speaker sir, I wish to give the following statement on renovation 
of Bomu – Catholic road whi ch was requested by Hon. Ibrahi m Omondi MCA Airport W ard 
on Thursday 4th October, 2018. Mr. Speaker sir, the road was not captured in  the public  
participation forum hence was not given priority during the budgeting.  However during the 
supplementary budget the department will request that more funds be allocate d for road 
maintenance as this is a crucial service to people. This will therefore be included in the next 
financial year work plan.  We would like to assure Members  that the County government is 
aware of their concerns and would take necessary remedial measu res to ensure service 
delivery.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you the Chairperson Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works for the good response conc erning renovation of that road . 
Yes Clerk.  
 
RESPONSE BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRUSTRUCTURE AND P UBLIC WORKS 
ON THE  STATEMENT  ON CONCERNS OF BLOCKED SEWER IN WAYANI AIRP ORT WARD 
 
 Yes the Chairperson Committe e On Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works.  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker, I think this statement goes to the… 
that Wayani is the same Ward, just the name because is st ill the Airport Ward. 
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Hon. Prischilla the  statement concerns blocked 
sewer in W ayani Airport Ward. 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.)  Mumba : Yes that’s why they did  not bring the sewage blockage; they 
just brought the C atholic road so I would still go to t he ministry and ask for the Wayani one.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Even though I will let your Committee to s it with 
Water and Sewerage Committee to deliberate on this issue because sewer belongs to Water 
and Sanitation Committee so sit with th at Commi ttee then you will respond on it.  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : Okay.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk.  
 
VALUE AND ITEMS OF STREET LIGHT EQUIPMENT TO B E PROCURED IN THE  FINANCIAL YEAR 
2018/2 019,  CRITERIA AND WHEN TO BE  DISTRIBUT ED IN EACH WARD  
 
 Yes Chief Whip MCA Frere town Ward.  
 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mr. Speaker sir, I seek  to know from the Chairperson 
Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works the value and items of street light 
equipment that have and planned to be procured in the financial year 2018/2019, the criteria 
of distribution and when the distribution  will take place in each Ward. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Chairperson Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works , do you have a response on that.  
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 21  Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : That one I don’t have for today, but at least by next we ek as I 
was instructed by Thursday we would have all the report s so that is can a nswer that question . 
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : So you are asking for one week?  
 
(Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba nodded)  
 
 Put in consideration the w ork load that you have, will one week be oka y for you?  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : You can add me another week if possible so that I bring the 
last report, then I bring Hon.  Kitula’s request also.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay for this statement then I will give yo u two 
weeks Hon. Chair . Yes Clerk?  
 
PLANS BY COUNTY GOVERNMENT  TO PROVID E LUNCH TO KCPE AND KCSE CANDIDATES  DURING 
THEIR EXAMINATION  
 
 That statement will be brought…. Yes Hon. Faith.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwende : I would like to read the statement on behalf of the Deputy 
Speaker, Mr. Fadhili.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay  proceed.  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mwende : Mr. Speaker i would like to read the statement on behalf of the 
Deputy Speaker Hon.  Fadhili . Mr. Speaker sir I  seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee on Education whether he is aware of the forthcoming Kenya Certificate of 
Secondar y Education (K CSE) and Kenya Certificate of Primary  Education which is (K CPE) 
exam ination and whether the County government has any plan of providing lunch to 
candidates during this period b earing in mind that majority of the candidates come from 
humble background s. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Than you Hon. Faith and I understand you  are 
also a Member of the same Committee that you are asking so please take note and take 
charge, yes Clerk… Is Hon. Athman…  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : Thank you  Hon. Speaker . I stand under Standing order 41 (c) 
Hon. Speaker.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  41(c), what does it say?  
 
 Hon.  Shebe  Athman : ‘A Member may re quest for a statement from the Committee 
Chairperson related to the same matter under the mandate of the Comm ittee and the Speaker 
may either appoint day for the said statement or direct that the statement be issued on the 
same day. ’ Hon. Speaker there is an emergency and there is an is sue which needs your 
indulgence ; I think it is obvious it is on t he public domain what is happenin g in my Ward, 
there is a demolition that is about to happen and it is fall s under K enya Urban Roads 
Authority . 
October 18, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                           85 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 22  Hon. Speaker  I need really your indulgence about this issue because anytime from 
now through  the department of Transport and Infrastructure I really require them to follow up 
this matter because it is of great public concern . Thank you.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : It is demolition of the Highway, Mombasa 
Nairobi Highway or…  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Athman : No, on the interior Jomvu Madafuni – Jitoni Rabai, that road 
falls under Kenya Urban Roads Authority Mr. Speaker.  
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) :  Thank you Chairperson Transport, Infrastructure 
and Public works are you aware of the expansion of the road in Jom vu K uu Ward?  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.)  Mumba : Thank you Hon. Speaker, I’ve just heard it from the area MCA 
but I think I will consult with Waziri so that he can guide me more . 
 
 Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay, thank you and the Hon. Member said it’s 
an emergency issue so ple ase work on it as an urgent matter . Yes Clerk.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members  the House stands adjourn ed until the 23rd October, 2018 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 4:05 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 