August 1 7, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            86 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 1 7th August  2016  
The House met at 9.16a m. 
(Hon. Temporary  Speaker (Mr. Fadhili  Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Have your seats please.  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Yes, I have a communication on behalf of the office of the Leader of Majority and the 
Committee of Tourism at large;  
        I take this opportunity to welcome this Hon.  House to the official opening ceremony of the 
annual Tukutane Mombasa which will be  held on 18th this Friday , so Hon.  Members you are all 
welcome  to this function and Hon.  Members I also take this opportunity to invite Members from  
other Counties to come and s ee what is happening in Mombasa, thank you.  
PAPER  
       Yes Hon. Ibrahim Kondo or any Member from this committee.  
       Hon. Moham ed Ndanda : Mr. Speak er thank you, on behalf of the Chairman on Trade, 
Energy and Investment, I have been given a report to come and inform your Chair and this Hon.  
House.  
       Mr. Speake r as regards to the paper, the Committee on Trade, Energy and Investment had a 
constructive meeting with the C EM trade , Chief  Officer and other department al heads  last on the 
issue of all ocation of stalls at Kongowea market.  
       Mr. Speak er after a fruitful discussion Members agreed to the department to form a Task 
force and as I speak now, the report will be tabled once the Committee have fina lized on the 
August 1 7, 2016                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            86 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 
 issue to meet the Task fo rce so that they can also go to the ground and bring us a fruitful and a 
very constructive paper . 
       So Mr. Speaker as I am speaking the report is not ready following the explained message 
that the Committee met, we had a discussion and people  agreed that we form a task force to 
follow up the matter, thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker:  So you are asking for more time ?  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : For more time like one week Mr. Speaker . 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker:  One week?  
       Hon. Moha med Ndanda:  Yes. 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker:  Then we are going to allocate you that time you have requested 
for, and hopefully the business will come back in a week's  time.   
ADJOURNMENT  
       Hon.  Members  the House stands adjourned until today 2:30 pm in the afternoon.  
The House rose at 9.2 2am. 
 