October 8 , 2019                       COUNTY AS SEMBLY DEBATES                                             87 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
 Tuesday, 8th October  2019   
The House met at 11:10  a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Hon.  Members you may be seated.  Yes C lerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
REVIEW OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY STANDING OR DERS  
 
 Hon. Mwamwiri please give the Notice of M otion.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Review of the County Assembly Standing orders . Mr. 
Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion as amended.  
WHEREAS, Section 14 (a) of the County Government Act, 2012 provides that a County 
Assembly may make Standing Orders consistent with the Constitution and the Acts 
regulating procedures of the County Assembly;  
WHEREAS, the current Standing Orders now in use at the County Assembly w ere 
formerly in use at the National Assembly and were to be used pursuant to section 14 (7) 
of the County Government Act, 2012 as interim Standing Orders until the County 
Assembly makes its own Standing Orders;  
WHEREAS, after usage for some time, gaps, def iciencies and omissions hav e been 
observed in the current S tanding Orders which require fixing;  
WHEREAS the N ational Assembly being a respected legislative institution in our country 
and worldwide has made so many amendments to its Standing orders to keep them 
abreast with the changing times;  
WHEREAS, with the passage of time and usage there is need to review and fill the gaps, 
omissions and inadequacies in the current Standing Orders;  
NOW , THEREFORE, the County Assembly of Mombasa hereby resolves as follow s: 
1. THAT, the Committee of Rules and Procedures to undertake a review of the 
Standing Orders to update them incorporate best practices from the National Assembly 
and other jurisdictions;  

October 8 , 2019                       COUNTY AS SEMBLY DEBATES                                             87 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 2. THAT, the   Committee of Rules and Procedures shall within 90 days of approval 
of this resolution table necessary amendments to the Standing Orders in this County 
Assembly for consideration and approval;  
3. THAT, once amendments are approved by the County Assembly the complete 
Standing Orders be published and circulated within 90 days thereof.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you  Hon. Mwamwiri. Yes C lerk next order ? 
 
STATEMENT  
 
Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nasimama na 
kifungu 41(2)c  ambacho uko na uwezo wa kuniruhusu ama kutoruhusu . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nilikuwa naomba B unge hili.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): 41(2) c inasema nini Mheshimiwa Fadhili . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Kuwa Mheshimiwa anaweza kusimama na 
kuomba kupe ana taarifa  kupitia kwako.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): You have a S tatement?  
 
The Deputy Speaker ( Hon . Mwalimu) : Ndio nilikuwa nataka nikujulishe.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes? 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Nilikuwa naomba  kama yawezekana kuna 
mkasa wa F erry ambao  umetokea … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): So Hon. Fadhili you have a S tatement ? 
 
The Deputy Speaker  ( Hon. M walimu) : Ndio Bwana Spika . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Unaweza  kusoma Kanuni ya Bunge  40(2) inasema nini?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ndio Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa naomba ku wa 
ikiwa kutakuwa na uwezekano N yumba hii iweze kuzungumzia swala la F erry.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
October 8 , 2019                       COUNTY AS SEMBLY DEBATES                                             87 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): But Hon. Fadhili S tanding order number 40(2) hujatusomea 
labda utusomee utuelez e. Yes Hon . Charles Kitula are you standing on a point of information? 
Maybe you want to inform the Deputy Speaker?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshi miwa Spika ningependa kumsaidia  Mheshimiwa 
Fadhili kwamba kwa utaratibu wa Mabunge, Seneti, B unge la ki taifa kwamba linapotokea janga 
la dharura  Bunge wanapatiwa mda kuona watakavyo  itekeleza viongozi wa B unge wa weze 
kulijadili, kwa ruk hsa yako . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Sijakataa but you see tuko katika B unge , Bunge liko na 
sheria zake kutumia. Y es Hon. Mohamed ? 
 
Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika labda 
Mheshimiwa Fadhili amesimama na Kanuni ya Bunge  41……  (Technical Hitch ). 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you.  Yes Hon. Mwamwiri . 
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spik a. Mheshimiwa Spika  ningependa 
kumjulisha Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti  ya kwamba angeekeza  hoja yake kwa 40 sehemu ya 
kwanza, ambayo una ruk hsa ya kuingilia shu ghuli za B unge  na kupeana ruk hsa  kujadili 
mazungumzo  lakini kuling ana na Kanuni zetu zimesema J umanne  masaa ya mchana natumai hili 
liko kwa uwezo wako mimi naona masaa mw afaka ni  muda wa mchana tuweze kujadili. A hsante 
sana.  
 
    The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri.  Hon. Fadhili I just wanted to 
make it ver y clear to all M embers about Statements ; you see the problem M embers  we are not 
following the Standing orders.  I have no problem, everyone knows the issue of the Likoni F erry 
but my main issue is  what  I want to bring into th is House is about the issue of S tatement ; 
Members we should kn ow the procedure of bringing a S tatement in the House we should have a 
written S tatement  so that every M ember can  have a copy of the Statement and even the Clerk 
should have the S tatement. This is b ecause we have been having issues wher eby Members are 
asking S tatements and we have to go back to the H ansard and get the things that M embers have 
been asking so we do not get the proper concept of the S tatement .  So please moving forward 
Hon. Members let  us follow the S tanding order s and if we have a Statement even if it is an 
emergency S tatement let us make sure we have it written so that everyone can have a copy so 
that we all know what we are discussing, Yes Hon Fadhili.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ahsante Bwana Spika . Mimi nilikuwa naomba 
kama ni livyotang ulia kusema kwamba ni K iti chako ndicho kitakachotupa ruk hsa kuweza 
kuzungumzia jambo hili . Ningeomba kama saa nane ikiwezekana N yumba hii iweze 
kuzungumz ia janga lile ambalo limekumba K aunti yetu na mkasa ambao mpaka sasa hivi  bado  
linaumiza w akaazi wa Mo mbasa haswa wa L ikoni. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khat ri): Thank you  Hon Fadhili . So I think we can have it  in the 
afternoon and we can discus s the issue which is of concern , I think  the whole country is 
concern ed of the same issue .  So Clerks  make sure it is in the Order paper. Yes C lerk, next order.  
October 8 , 2019                       COUNTY AS SEMBLY DEBATES                                             87 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members the Assembly stands adjourned until Tuesday 8th October , 2019 at 2:30  
p.m. 
 
The House r ose at 11:20 a.m. 
  
 