August 18, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        88 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thurs day, 18th August  2016  
The House  met at 2.56pm. 
(Hon. Temporary Speaker  (Mr. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon.  Members kindly have your seats.   
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Members , the House  has received annual report from Mombasa Count y Public Service 
Board . 
       In accordance with Section 51 b of the County Government Act 2012 , I hereby submit 
the following reports ; the annual report of the fi nancial year 2014 /2015 also containing the 
report f or the first half  of the financial year 2015 /2106 , the semi annual report for the second 
half of the financial year  2015 /2016 it completes the report for the stated year . 
       Please find these reports enclosed her ein, it should be noted that the first item above 1 
was already submitted to your esteem ed office way back in December 2015 , but we found it 
prudent to resend it since it in cooperates  part of 2015 /2016 report .  
       The board wishes to say that it will continue to submit activit y reports regularly to the 
County Assembly as stipulated in the Act.  
The Secretary Juma Baya.  
(End of communication)  
       And as it is report from Service Board we have the Committee in char ge from our 
Assembly ; the Committee on Labour and Social Services  plus other Committees that will be 
fitted to act upon this report containing financial issues but  first it will be committed to 
Labour and Social Services Committee and the Labour and Social Committee will look upon 
which other committee to work wit h for the benefit of the report . 
August 18, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        88 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  2 
        So the Clerk you will Communicate with the Chairman for the Labour c ommittee and he 
will see which Committee he will work with concerning the same report , thank you.   
PAPER  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Leader of Majority or any Member from that Ad Hoc 
Committee, Hon . Saad are you a Member of the Ad hoc Committee?  
       Hon. Faraj:  Yes am a Member .  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Then proceed .  
       Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
(Hon. F araj read report  of Ad hoc committee ) 
       The report that I have today is from the A d hoc Committee which  was supposed to bring 
the report back to this House on  the benefit of Kenya  ports authority to Mombasa County. 
Those who  were given responsibility  on behalf of this House  for the Leader of Majority . 
Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani    Chairman  
Hon. Fadhil i M. Makarani         Member   
Hon Saad Faraj Ahmed    Member  
Hon Kibwana Baya     Member  
Hon Nasser Rashid     Member  
Hon Serah Nyamvula     Member  
IN ATTENDANCE  
Mr. Bernard Osero -Head of Corporate Affai rs 
Ms. Serah K. Tuva -Assistan t Corporate Communication Officer  
Mr. Silvan Mghanga - Media Relations Officer  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: There is a point of order . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : The M ember did not lay, i wish  he could have laid the paper first .  
August 18, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        88 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  3 
        Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Saad  as per the proceedings  in the Assembly you are 
supposed to lay paper and the House  Business Committee gives time for thi s repo rt to be 
discussed in th e House .  
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker I need to lay this paper and i seek leave to discuss this 
immediat ely.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Saad i wil l deny you the opportunity to di scuss this 
paper to day because it does not have minutes of the committee  then...  
(Laughter ) 
       So just lay the report and the House Business Committee will allocate you time to 
discuss this report ... 
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker  it has been overlooked by the Clerk but we had a meeting and 
you are also a member and you were part of that meeting...  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon Saad you are out of order ! Just lay the paper and we 
proceed . 
(Paper laid)  
       Thank you, the House  Business  Committee  will allocate time for  this repor t because 
Hon. I think Members need time to look upon this report and there are some Members  who 
might think or see that there is nothing that has been done  in their wards or in t heir 
constituencies  so just give Members time to go through this report and the next House  
Business Committee  we will discuss it.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker the reason as to why i so ught for leave for the report  is that 
there are  some resolutions  that are in the report  that need to be done  immediately  so that it 
can take effect . 
August 18, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        88 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  4 
        Any processes  that we need to do and that ’s why Mr. Speaker I seek leave so that we can 
read this report and make decisions so that we can move im mediately on what we are 
supposed to do, thank you . 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Yes Ho n Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya:  Asante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , hii ni Nyumba ya sheria na kupitia kwa 
kiti chako umeshafanya uamuzi kuhusiana na swala al ioleta Mheshimiwa  Saad Faraj  Ahmed , 
madamu uamuzi umeshautoa haina haja ya kuendelea na mjad ala. 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Thank you Hon . Speaker, Hon . Members i think we have 
already closed this issue. Yes Hon . Mohammed  what is it ? 
       Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika , nafikiri 
ripot i hii sio mara kwanza kuja kwa Nyumba hii kupitishwa , na nafikiri kama ni makosa leo 
kusema kuwa h atuwezi tukaipi tisha ripoti hii …                                                                                   
(Applause ) 
       Kwani ishakuja mara tatu h ivi Mheshimiwa Spika , kwa hivyo  naomba kupitia kiti chako 
kama ungemruhusu Mheshimiwa Saad aweze kuisoma hio ripoti.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon.  members of this Hon.  House  I have already ruled there 
are no minutes in this report it is not going to be discussed today . 
(Applause ) 
       This report is not going to be d iscussed tod ay. Hon. Saad Faraj have your s eat and let ’s  
proceed with our today’s business ... 
(Laughter ) 
STATEMENT  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Salim Kalume.  
August 18, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        88 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  5 
        Hon. Kalume : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  tuko na mikato ya  
malipo ya  NSSF na NHIF ambayo inatusaidia upande wa hospitali wakati tunapokua 
wagonjwa . 
       Mikato hii inasaidia sana lakini jambo la kusikitisha ni kwa mba sisi kama Waheshimiwa 
mikato hii haitusai dii kabisa , inakuwa ni shida kwamba wakati watu wanapolazwa hospitalini 
ama wewe Mheshimiwa u kilazwa hospitalini, kupata huduma inakuwa ngumu sana . 
       Ni tofauti sana watu wengine wanaotumia, unaam biwa kwamba hakuna pesa ya 
matumizi yako ama jina lako halionekani , inabidi sasa uje mpaka ofisi za Kaunti kwa Human 
Resource  tena waandike barua wapeleke na  si hivyo tu peke  yake Mheshimiwa Spika  pia 
NSSF unakuta account  iko zero . 
       Utakuta kwa account  yangu hakuna kitu, account  yangu iko sufuri, hata nashangaa , kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika  nakuomba tupate ripoti ya mikato hii ikiwezekana tuangalie vipi 
tunaweza saidika , ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika .  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Mary there is no debate on a statement .  
(Laughter  and a pplause) 
       Hon. Kalume we shall present your statement to the Committee on Labour plus the 
Committee of Finance, they will work hand in hand to make sure they report to this Hon.  
House  in the next, two weeks time. Yes  clerk. What is it Hon. Wangudi ? 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , of the same nature. .. 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Wangudi, if it’s of the same nature I have already 
ruled, Clerk.  
       Hon. Wangudi : ... (Inaudible ). 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Wangudi as I said the Committee on Labour and 
Committee on Finance will  work on the statement so if  you have anything Hon. Wangudi 
August 18, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        88 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  6 
 just forward it to the two committees and whatever that you have will be cooperated in their 
report .   
       Hon. Wangudi : Mr. Speaker ... (Inaudible ). 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: But Hon. Wangudi if you had a  statement on the same,  you 
could have notified  the Speaker, 30 minutes before we came to this ...   
       Hon. Wangudi : ... (Inaudible ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Then if it was not captured for  today you have to notify the 
Speaker,  Hon. Wangudi.  
(Laughter and applause ) 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon. Mary Akinyi.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika , taarifa yangu ni 
juu ya utekelezaji.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika  kuna mijadala ama kuna mambo mengine tunapitisha hapa la kini 
sioni kama yanatekelezwa . 
       Mmoja wapo Mheshimiwa Spika , ikiwa ni yale maeneo ya kuvutia sigara, tulileta huo 
mjadala hapa kama taarifa juu ya eneo la kuvutia sigara, lakini mpaka leo hii sijaona 
utekelezaji wowote kama umechukua nafasi . 
       Kwa hivyo  Mhes himiwa Spika  ningeomba kuwa idara iwe inahusika na mambo ya 
kuangalia mahali ambapo kumetengwa kwa ajili ya uvutaji sigara wachukue hio nafasi ili 
haya mambo yaweze kutekelezwa ili kazi ikaweze kuendelea na Bunge  hili, a hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika .  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Thank you Hon. Mary. The Committee for Implementation 
you should take charge on this issue and make sure that the executive Member to  fast track 
August 18, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        88 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page  7 
 that on the said Motion that was brought to this Hon.  House  that passed in this Hon.  House,  
thank you. 
STATEMENT  
       Statement, Hon. Zainab Ali. What is it Hon . Saad, are you Hon. Zainab Ali ?  
       Hon. Faraj : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi  si Mheshimiwa Zainab Ali kama 
unavyon iona Mheshimiwa Spika  bali nimesimama kwa niaba ya Mheshimiwa Zainab Said 
Ali ambaye ametokewa na msiba na hivi sasa  yuko katika maziko na ameomba Nyumba hii 
impe mda hapa , ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Thank you Hon. Saad. Yes Clerk. 
ADJOURNMENT  
       The House  stands adjourned until next week Tuesday in the afternoon.  
The House  rose at 2. 56pm. 
                                                 
 
  
 