October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 25th October,  2018  
The House met at 2:46p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated . Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRUSTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS ON CLEANING OF DRAINAGE  FROM MAGONGO MAINLAN D TO AKAMBA 
HANDICRAFT  
 
 Yes Hon. Prischillah Mumba, the Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure 
and Public Works please give the statement response . 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker sir I wish to give the 
following statement on cleaning of drainage from Magongo Mainland to Akamba Handicraft 
which was requested by Hon. Faith Mwende , MCA Ki pevu Ward on Thursday, 16th August, 
2018 during the 70th Sitting.  
 
Mr. Speaker sir in the financial year 2017/2018 the County had contracted youth 
companies to work on drain cleaning in various zones including Mainland West 
(Changamwe sub zone).  
 
The youth  companies have not been paid for the work done fo r the last two quarters of 
the f inancial year , and  due to that it has become quite difficult for the youth to 
continue working given that their capacities are limited.  
 
The County and relevant Committees sh ould ensure timely payment for such works 
for the programme to be sustained.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Prischillah, yes Hon. Faith Mwende?  

October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Hon. (Ms.) Mwende:  Mheshimiwa Spika sijaridhishwa na majibu ambayo yametoka 
kwa kitengo cha Uchuku zi na Miundo Misingi  nikikumbuka vizuri nimekaa pale tangu utoto 
wangu na huo mtaro ambao tunauzungumzia kutoka Mainland mpaka Akamba Handicraft 
hakujawahi kuwa na vijana wowote ! Ilipata nusra kidogo wakati kulikuwa na vijana ambao 
walijitolea kutoka Natio nal Youth Service (NYS)  kuja kusafisha na huo mtaro ndio unabeba 
maji yote yenye yanatoka Airport na Portreitz na saa hii tunaongea Mheshimiwa Spika, saa 
hii kuna vita vinaendelea pale tangu asubuhi nimeshinda kupiga simu na hakuna lolote 
linafanyika.  Mhes himiwa Spika hili si jambo la leo wala jana, hili ni jambo mwenyewe 
hususan  nilienda kwa kitengo  nikawaeleza shida hizi lakini mpaka saa hii hakuna hatua 
ambayo imechukuliwa na hata kama wanalalama hakuna pesa kile kidogo ambacho bajeti 
wamepitisha wamewez a kuifanyia nini mpaka siku hii ya leo. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Faith.  Hon. Prischillah Mumba I think 
the best thing you can do is maybe the Committee of Transport and Infrastructure if they can 
visit that  place and maybe you can come up with a relevant solution so  that you can sit down 
with CEC  Member and know if the problem has been solved or not yet , thank you . Yes 
Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFRUSTRUCTURE 
AND PU BLIC WORKS ON THE IN STALLATION OF DIGITA L HIGH MAST STREET L IGHTS IN DENSELY 
POPULATED AREAS  
 
 Yes again Hon. Prischillah Mumba? please give the response of the statement  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker sir I wish to give the 
follow ing statement on Installation  of digital high mast street lights in densely populated 
areas which was requested by Hon. Charles Kitula Frere Town Ward on Thursday, 27th 
September , 2018 during the 75th Sitting.  
 
Mr. Speaker sir during the implementation of the 2017/18 financial year b udget, the 
County failed to allocate monies for streetlights. This was however corrected when 
the money was allocated with the supplementary b udget and works started in June, 
2018.  
 
Currently the department is repairing all exis ting street lights and high mast lights so 
as to have them functional. Upon the completion of this exercise then the installation 
of addition lights will be considered as per the needs of respective W ards.  
 
The Department has planned site visits to all W ards and will give recommendations 
on improvement of lighting across Mombasa County. A schedule works and summary 
executed in the 1st quarter of 2 018/2019 in each W ard as attached.  
 
We had no maintenance materials for more than one year. Fortunately, we rece ived 
some materials in June which we had three  programs cycles as per attachments ...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Prischillah I think this document was here last 
week, you were reading this paper and you brought it again the same pape r? 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yeah because it is the reply of this s tatement . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you may continue . 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  ... as per attachments.  
 
The li st of items allocated for each W ard is as follows;  
 
Phase o ne was 20 pieces Hps 150w bulbs, 10 pieces of 150w ballast, 5 pieces 70 -
400w ignitors, 3 pieces 250w ballast, 2 pieces 50 Amps 2 Pole contactor, 1 pieces 
timer switch, 5 pie ces circuit breaker and two is phase t wo which is 16th July...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Hon. Prischillah so this is phase o ne and each Ward 
received these  items? 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yeah.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : ...and did you give this copy to each Member? Did you 
give the copies to the Members?  
 
 Hon. Members:  No! 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So the Members should have the co pies so that they can 
confirm.  Clerk, i s there anyone with this copy, the one with the phases ? 
 
 Hon. Members:  We don't have ! 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No one has that copy Clerk! So how will the Members 
even co nfirm if they have ever seen these things in the Ward?  Yes you can continue Hon. 
Prischillah,  I think you have already read phase o ne which is between 18th June to 12th of 
July, y eah? 
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yes, we have phase t wo which was 16th July to 10th August  20 
pieces ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :...and this again it is in each W ard. 
  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yeah! 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You are saying each Ward have receive these  things ? 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Phase one was the fi rst one and this is phase two, now am 
reading;  
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  Phase two was also 20 Pieces  150w bulbs, 7 pieces ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I would like to inform the House on this 
same issu e that Hon. Prischillah Mumba is reading. Mr. Speaker sir I thought that it could be 
wise if the Chairperson could organise for the copies so maybe in the next sitting so that the 
Members should have the copies for the confirmation because even if they rea d Mr. Speaker 
it doesn't help us at all, we cannot be able to take all that materials that is reading Mr. Speaker 
sir. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Maimuna?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna Salim:  Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru kwa kunipatia  fursa hii . 
Mimi yangu ni masikitiko kwa W aheshimiwa wenzangu ambao wamesimama kwa sababu 
Mheshimiwa Prischillah yeye anapewa ripoti , kwa hiyo hiyo  si kazi yake ni kazi za M akarani 
wa Bunge ambao ndio wapatian e ripoti . Kama tunavyoingia tukic huku a order pa per ilikuwa 
tuchukue pale ; mimi sioni inayotendeka ni haki kwa upande wa Mheshimiwa Prischillah 
kulingana na hizi zinazoendelea hapa wanaume ni kama ambao wanataka kuleta hujuma kwa 
huyu Mheshimiwa mama na sisi hatutokubali ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Maimuna hizo fikra zenu sijui munatoa wapi? mimi 
sioni kama hapa kuna  anything personal, yo u know there's nothing personal . Hon. Maimuna 
to be honest this thing is not personal and even the last time if I remember I told Hon. 
Prischillah t hat Committee you are sitting on has so many things so don't take it personal 
when people are here to talk about these issues , they have problems in their W ards so please 
Hon. (??) and this thing about the photocopies the problem is not about Hon. Prischil lah if  
you can hear I told the Clerks... I didn't say Hon. Prischillah where are the copies? I instructed 
the Clerks , where are the copies? S o let us not change the topic, yes you can continue Hon. 
Prischillah and Hon. Members will have the copies I think. Clerk , make sure all the Hon. 
Members have the copies now please ? Yes Continue with phase two Hon. Prischillah 
Mumba.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for defending me  on that matter . If i 
may continue reading the statement  as I ha d started  phase two am repeating ; 
  
Phase t wo that was 16th July to 10th August 20 Pieces 150w bulbs, 7 pieces 150w 
ballast, 15 pieces 70 -400w ignitors,  3 pieces 250w Hps bulbs, 2 pieces 250w ballast, 
2 pieces 50 Amps 2 pole contactor and I piece timer switch, 5 pieces circuit breaker 
that was phase two  and then we go to phase three  that was done on 19th September to 
16th October  which was  15 pieces Hps 150w, 2 pieces 70 -400w ignitors and 3 pieces 
circuit break . 
  These were the challenges which they indicated ; 
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Lack of  enough maintenance materials, lack of technicians, lack of working and safety 
gears, lack of continuous working status of street lighting fleet.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Prischillah Mumba . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon . Charles Kitula?  
 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kwanza kumpatia 
kongole Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi .... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa juhudi anazozifanya  Mheshimiwa Spika kuhakikisha kwamba analeta ripoti 
katika Bunge hili lakini vile vi le ningependa iwe k wenye  kumbukumbu kwamba shida hii ya 
taa za barabarani  ni donda sugu katika Kaunti ya Mombasa na shida si Mwenyekiti huyu 
Mwenyekiti anaomba taarifa  kutoka Idara ya Uchukuzi  anapoandikiwa pale inakuja moja 
kwa moja hapa na ni dhahiri sha hiri kuwa hakuna Waziri, hakuna Afisa Mkuu  ambaye ataleta 
taarifa ambayo itampiga mwenyewe au kusema kwamba hajafanya kitu fulani . 
Tusidanganyane  Waheshim iwa wenzangu kila Mbunge, kila W aziri na kila Afisa Mkuu  
ataandika taarifa  kwamba hili linaendelea mas hinani lakini ni ukweli jamani sisi ndio 
wabunge tunaowakilisha kila sehemu, suala la masuala ya mataa Mheshimiwa Spika 
limekuwa donda sugu sana ....  
 
(Applause)  
  
 Shida Mheshimiwa Spika huenda ikawa sio W aziri, shida huenda isiwe sio Chief 
Officer , shida  huenda sio Procurement officer  saa hizi tumeambiwa kwamba 20 pieces  kwa 
kila Wodi  mimi ningependelea kama kiranja wa Bunge hili kupitia maoni haya ambayo i dara 
imeweza kutuletea na pia tungependa maoni ya procurement waweze kutuletea barua 
kwamba wakati w a Juni na Julai 2017 wali  procure  vitu vingapi? W atuletee halafu 
tulinganishe na hii nd io tujue kw eli hivi ni vitu vinakuwa procured  au la ni stori tu kitengo  
inatuandikia ili kuweza kutufurahisha sisi Bungeni. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula. T he Chairman of 
Finance I think is not here, any other Member of Finance maybe ...?  
 
(Hon. (Mrs.) Prischillah M umba stood up ) 
 
 You are also a Member  so you can check with your Finance t eam what Hon. Charles 
Kitula is asking about . 
 If these things were really procured then you can bring the answer maybe next week 
on that list, okay Hon. Prischillah please next week Thursday if you can bring the answer. 
Yes Clerk?  
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPERSON TRANS PORT , INFR USTRUCTURE AND PUBLI C WORKS 
ON GRADING AND GRAVE LLING OF MWAKIRUNGE ROAD LEADI NG TO MWAKIRUNGE DUMPSITE  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes again Hon. Prischillah Mumba kindly give the 
response ? 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. O nce again Mr. Speak er I wish to 
give the following statement on grading and gravelling of Mwakirunge Road leading to the 
dumpsite which was requested by Hon. Feddis Salame MCA Mwakirunge Ward on Thursday 
27th September , 2018 during the 75th Sitting.  
 
Mr. Speaker s ir, the roa d in question is classified as a national road and under the 
management of both Kenya Urban Roads Authority (KURA) and the Kenya Rural 
Roads Authority (KERRA).  
 
The road is currently being maintained by KURA and KERRA hence the County 
cannot utilize her fu nds on the same as this will attract audit queries. Furthermore the 
road requires huge amounts of money for improvement hence should be budgeted for 
adequately if the County has to do it due to the interest in the dumpsite.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Prischillah Mumba, yes Hon. Feddis?  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na pia nampongeza mamangu 
mpendwa Mheshimiwa Prischillah kwa hiyo ripoti lakini barab ara ninayolilia si barabara ya 
serikali kuu  ile kubwa ni kwamba Kaunti kama itawezekana waweze kutoa kuanzia ile 
barabara ya serikali kuu  kuingia ndani ili wakati gari zikipeleka taka ziingie ndani zipeleke 
taka mahali kunatakikana kwa sababu saa hii kusema kweli Mheshimiwa Spika barabara yote 
imezibwa . Kama kungekuwa na barabara ya murrum ya kuingia ndani kulikuwa na  jaa 
hatungekuwa na hiyo shida, hivyo basi  hivyo ningeomba tu niweze kupata tena majibu kama 
Kaunti inaweza kupeana hiyo barabara kuanzia mwisho wa ile barabara ya national mpaka 
ndani. Ahs ante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fe ddies Salame.  Yes Kitula, Hon. 
Kitula?  
 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kusema kweli mimi nishawahi 
kuzuru katika Wodi ya Mwakirunge; hili tatizo limekuja sana B unge ni katika kumbuk umbu 
zetu hivyo basi  tungependa sana Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti leo hii toa uamuzi ndani ya wiki 
tatu au n dani ya mwezi  mmoja barabara ile itengenezwe m aanake  lori zetu zote za K aunti 
zinaenda Mwakirunge . Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sasa hivi ukisema kuwa hii taarif a irudi kwa 
idara itakuwa  tunamuonyesha unyonge Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Mheshimiwa wa 
Mwakirunge.  
 Malori yote yanakwenda Mwakirunge na barabara kule ni mbovu hasa wakati huu wa 
barabara ikiwa takataka zile zinamwagwa barabarani yataonekana v ipi katika Bunge letu 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7 (Applause ) 
 
  Kwa hivyo leo tuo uamuzi Mheshimiwa mwenyekti tumsaidie tutoe kama ni mwezi 
mmoja barabara iwe inatengezwa na kama haitatengezwa sisi kama Bunge tuw eze kuchukua 
uamuzi Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti. Ahsan te sana.  
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kitula. Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi?  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ninaunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa Fe ddies,  Mheshimiwa Kitula. Mheshimiwa Spika hali ilioko Mwakirun ge sasa 
hivi ni hali ngum u sana; k wanza huu msimu wa mvua ambao uko  hakuna barabara, t akataka 
zinamway wa hiyo barabara. Pikipiki zinatafuta mahali , kama pi kipiki itatafuta mahali wewe 
binadamu utaenda wapi? Mhe shimiwa Spika kuna dharura sana,  Mwakirunge ni Kaunti ya 
Mombasa  kwa hi vyo nayo inataka kutengenezwa , takataka zot e sasa za Mombasa nzima 
zimeenda Mwakirunge . Kama takataka Mheshimiwa zaenda kule pia wa  Mwakirunge nao 
wanataka waangaliwe ; barabara , hospitali  kila kitu mwanzo tumewapelekea  magonjwa kule 
iko haja ya dharura leo  hii tunasema barabara lakini kipindupindu kiko tele kule, watoto 
wanaumwa na maumbwa usiku wanapotafuta chakula kule , Mwakirunge iko haja ya 
kuangaliwa kiundani vilivyo na hii ni dharura. Tunaita janga la Kaunti ya Mombasa hiyo 
Mwakirunge Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa hivyo ninaomba iangaliwe kwa jicho la huruma sio 
tumua ngalie eti ni Mheshimiwa Fed dies tunaangalia wa  Mwakirunge wote wako katika hali 
mbaya . Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa. Yes  Hon. Ahamed Salama .  
 
 Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika siku zile niliposema hapa 
Mwakir unge yatisha ni kama si Mombasa ; Mheshimiwa wa kule alilalamika sana lakini 
kusema ile ukweli  Mwakirunge imekaa kama ambaye si Mombasa , kwa hivyo tunaomba hili 
swala hili lishughulik iwe haraka kwa sab abu yatisha sana Mwakirunge. Ah sante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon ourable.  
 
(Some Members s tood) 
 
 Relax Hon . Members! Just relax I will call you by your names. Just relax , sit down 
Hon. Members, r elax! Ahmed Salama, yo u have finished?  
  
(Hon.  Ahmed Salama nodd ed in the affirmative )  
 
 Okay, Hon. Faith please?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwende:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Ninashukuru  Mwenyekiti  
wa Uchukuzi kwa kuwajibika kwa wakati ambao unaofaa hilo mpaka tumpatie kongole. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika tukiongelea hali ya Mwakirunge mimi nimeenda mikutano mingi 
na kina  mama wa M wakirunge nikasikia kilio chao; u napata pale sehemu ya takataka mama 
hata anaanguka anaangukia mabuu , mwengine ilikuwa hali ya kus ikitisha tuko pale ka ma 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8 Wabunge mama anasema zi ngine hata ziliingia kwenye m domo. Hali ile ya pale ni mbaya 
sana na Mheshimiwa Spika si njia ya id ara ya uchukuzi ku hepa majukumu k ama ile  barabara 
kuu ni ya serikali kuu. K una hicho kichochoro chenye Mheshimiwa aliongelelea  husu san 
yenye inapeleka takataka, hivyo  basi Mheshimiwa Spika si mambo hapa ya kubembelezana 
ama kuogopana ni utenda  kazi ufanyik e kwa vile mwisho wa siku sisi W aheshimiwa ni sisi 
tunalaumiwa . Waziri wa U chukuzi na watu wale wake wote wanafanya  kazi, h ili jamb o 
lichukulie la dharura sana tena sana. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honorable. Yes Hon. Bwire ? 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Shukran Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika mjadala ni mzu ri ila 
nataka tukumbushane ya k wamba tunapojadil iana pia tukumbuke ya kwamba  idara ya 
mazingira nayo inafaa ihusishwe katika mchakato mzima wa lil e swala. Kwa hivyo 
ningeliomba M wenyekiti wa Kamati ya Mazingira washirikiane na Mwe nyekiti wa Kamati 
ya U chukuzi t unapozungumzia kuhusu kumwaga takataka tuna zungumzia idara ya mazingira. 
Sasa hapa ni kwamba i dara ya U chukuzi iangalie njia jinsi gani magari yatapita yasimwage 
takataka pale na hawa idara ya mazingira wasimwage taka kusudi barabarani kwa sababu 
hawataki kuingia ndani. Kwa hivyo hizi idara mbili M heshimiwa Spika ni ombi langu ya 
kwamba washirikiane kwa pamoja kusaidia watu wa Mwakirunge. Ahsante . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Thoya . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Mimi nafikiri swala hili la Mwakirunge 
kufikia saa hii hat a wa kati tunajaribu kulipeleka kwa K amati ya Uchukuzi ni kama ambaye 
tunazidi kutesana lakini limefika kwamba ni swala la…. (Tehnical hitch)  ingewezekana 
Bwana S pika ungelitil ia uzito na ukatambua ipo haja J umba hili lot e likiongozwa na wewe 
mwenyewe S pika tuweze kutembea Mwaki runge kuweza kujionea na macho ama mimi 
naona tukizidi kulisukuma kwa Mheshimiwa Priscilla na Mheshimiwa Kitula…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya you can continue . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Nilikuwa nataka uyasikie viliv yo haya.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ndio nayasikia twende Mwakirunge na kusikiza . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Naomba Jumba hili liweze kupata safari; s afari hii twendeni 
Mwakirun ge tusiende Nairobi wala K ilifi twendeni hapa hapa tukajionee kwa sababu shida 
haianzi . Hii alikuja akasema wazi hapa wasichana wake saa hii wanabakwa na kasha kwa 
maji nafikiri yalienda hivyo hivyo; i kaja sasa ni mambo ya barabara takataka zinamwagwa 
sijui ingekuwa ni vyema wale watu wa Mwakirunge saa hii wakasema kwamba sasa hizi 
takataka naz o zisije huku Mwakirunge nyinyi mtasema nini?  
 Kwa hivyo nataka kumshukuru Mheshimiwa Fed dies kwamba hawatii sumu watu 
wake lakini ikiwa ni  lazima mlete taka nyinyi nanyi jukumikieni hizi barabara zetu. 
Wakesema kwamba hizi barabara kama hazitatengezwa ta kataka nanyi kil a mmoja amwage 
kwake mtasemaje?  Kwa hivyo naomba Bwana Mwenyekiti na ikiwa ni W odi ambayo inataka 
kukuzwa basi ni Wodi ya Mwakirunge na zingekuwa pesa ziko kungekuwa na kama vile 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9 wazungu wanasema equalization funds Mwakirunge ingeweza kupel ekewa pesa za kutosha 
ili ifikie W odi zingine ambazo kwa saa hii zinang’ára. Bwana…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 …Mbona mnanitesa!  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, endele a Hon. Thoya n akusikiza . 
 
 Hon. Thoya : Mimi nimemaliza nimesema hata wakati tunapanga hizi pesa t uiangalie 
kwamba Mwakirunge ndio W odi kitinda mimba ambayo inahitaji kukuzwa iwe sawa sawa na 
Wodi  zingine lakini pale yalipofikia Bwana S pika si ya Mheshimiwa Priscilla peke e yake. 
Ningekuomba wewe mwenyewe itatia moyo sana wale watu wa Mwakirunge waone k wamba 
Spika na  Nyumba nzima imetembelea pale , itasema kweli sisi tunawajali sana. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Thoya na nafikiri ni muhim u 
kupanga hilo jambo kwa hivyo M ungu akipenda wiki ijayo tutapanga. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
 Chie f Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ahsante kunipatia fursa hii na 
vile vile ni  kuong ezea pale kwa Mheshimiwa Thoya a metoa wazo zuri sana kwamba sisi 
Wabunge sote tuweze kuandamana hadi kule sehemu ya Mwakirunge lakini vilevile 
Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti pia mimi nina  wazo kwa hapo  hapo katika Mheshimiwa Thoya 
alipoongelea sisi ndio tutaenda pale kama  Wabunge lakini tupate kuifahamu pia kwamba 
watenda  kazi ni hawa executiv e Mheshimiwa Thoya. Kwa hivyo ni bora zaidi mimi ningeona 
kwamba kab la hatujaweza k ufika kule kama W abunge waje hapa katika Bunge letu 
tuandaamane na wao wenyewe hadi Mwakirunge uamuzi utolewe palepale sisi tukiwa na wao 
wakiwa pale...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Kwa hivyo waje B ungeni hapa tuweze kuzungumza mambo yetu wenyewe kwa 
wenyewe halafu tuand amane na wao mpaka Mw akirunge Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Mheshimiwa Priscilla shida nyingi naona ziko upande 
wa uchukuzi  hapa ; nikiangalia kila mmoja kilio chake analia ni upande wa uchukuzi kwa 
hivyo m taangalia vile upan de wenu kama maanake W aheshimiwa kila unapopeana jibu 
naona hawaridhiki hivyo pengine labda umuite huyo  Waziri wa Uchukuzi  aje hapo na 
Waheshimiwa m kae kwenye K amati  ajibu hayo maswali k ama kutasaidika m jue. Si o kila 
siku ni tunakaa response  peleka,  jibu p eleka , jibu peleka na hakun a kitu kinafanyika, k wa 
hivyo mw angalie kama Kamati mko na  nguvu za  kumuita mkubwa wa kitengo hicho . Kama 
ni ku muita muiteni huyo W aziri am a ni kama ni afisa mkuu  waje, waheshimiwa  wako hapa 
kuwakilisha wananchi  na wananchi wanas hida na kama wananch i hawasaidiki sasa kuna 
faida gani? Thank you. Yes Clerk ? 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON YOUTH , GENDER , SPORTS AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
ON COUNTY GOVERNMENT PL ANS TO AWARD COUNTY EMPLOYEE S IN NATIONAL SPORTS  
COMPETITIONS  AS A WAY OF M OTIVATING THEM  
 
 Yes H on. Aran Moses please give the s tatement?  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  Hon. Aran:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish to give the following 
statement on awarding County employees in national sports competition in response to 
concerns raised by Hon. Fadhil i Mwalimu in the House on the 75th Sitting seeking to know 
from the Committee o n Youth , Gender , Sports and Cultural Affairs whether M embers are 
aware that some County employees have been posting tremendous results in national sports 
scooping awards in diff erent cat egories and whether the County g overnment has any plans to 
reward such employees as a way of motivating them.  
 
Mr. Speaker sir the D epartment recognizes the need to motivate both individual and 
employee teams that exemplary achieve outstanding per formance in national and 
international competition s. In this regard they intend to include the modalities to 
award achievers in the plan ned sports policy by the D epartment.  
 
Mr. Speaker sir the department shall therefore co nsult with the Department of 
Devolution and P ublic service before coming up with final recommendation.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Moses Aran. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON OF IM PLEMENTATION COMMITT EE ON 
IMPLEMENTATION STATU S OF MOTIONS PASSED IN THE HOUSE SINCE I NCEPTION OF THE SECO ND 
ASSEMBLY  
 
 Yes Hon. Salim Kalume?  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Mr. Speaker sir I am standing in 
regards to a statem ent requested by Hon. Mohamed H atimy on the implementation of 
Motion s passed in th e House since inception of the Second A ssembly on Thursday 4th 
October , 2018 during the 75th Sitting. Mr. Speaker sir first allow me to bring to the attention 
of the House that I was not given 21 days as it was stated by Hon. Speaker  during the 85th 
sitting on Thursday 18th October , 2018 at 2: 30p.m. Instead Mr. Speaker sir I was given 14 
days to the respons e, this can be confirmed in the V otes and P roceedings and the Hansard 
records. Mr. Speaker sir the Committee on Implementation has  managed … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Salim Kalume, who gave you 14 days?  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  You gave me 14 days.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You asked for 21 days , three weeks ? 
 Hon. Salim Kalume: Yes? 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And I gave you three  weeks . 
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume : No you gave me two weeks.  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No but I agreed with you , if I remember I told you three 
weeks.  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume : No the Hansard is there Mr. Speaker sir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): You asked for one month, i sn’t it?  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  I asked for 21 days.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay . 
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume : Yes and you gave me 14 days . 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay, alright continue?  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  Mr. Speaker si r the Committee o n Implementation has 
managed to prepare a M otion tracker…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Because if you can read you r statement very clear ly, 'Mr. 
Speaker sir,  first allow me to bring  to attention to this House that I was not  given 21 days as 
it was stated by Hon. Speaker ’’. So you are contradicting yourself, y ou are saying I have 
stated that you are given 21 days and now you are saying I have not given you 21 days so…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  No that is a little m istake, it was 14 days.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  It was 14 days . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry it was…  
 
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  You gave me 14 days.  
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So then why are you saying it w as stated 21 days?  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  It is a clerical error Mr. Speaker sir.  
 
(Silence ) 
(Table Clerk consultations ) 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Salim Kalume you may continue . 
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume: Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. Mr. Speaker sir the Committee on 
Implementation  has managed to prepare a M otion tracker as attached. The H ouse has 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12 resolved 28 substantive  and 41 Procedural M otions.  Mr. Speaker sir, after the request of this 
statement, the Committee on Implementation resolved immediately t o invite the County 
Secretary to a C ommittee meeting on the concerns tha t were raised by the Honorable 
Members.  Mr. Speaker sir,  the C ommittee managed to engage the County Secre tary on the 
subject and after lengthy deliberations it was resolved that the Co unty Secretary will make a 
follow up with concerned depa rtments and report back to the C ommittee ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Salim Kalume just hold on, yes Hon. Fadhili ?  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank M r. Chair . Mr. Chair the Chairman 
for I mplementation is presenting his response ; he has said that there is a M otion tracker 
attached to this statement that is giving but unfortunately Mr. Speaker there is no tracker with 
us. Mr. Speaker i don’t know where i s the tracker?  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Clerks do you have the M otion tracker?  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  Yes I have.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No Clerks! Clerks?  You have the copies?  
 
(Table clerks responded in the affirmative)  
 
 So you didn’t share wit h the Members?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Yes you may continue Salim Kalume?  
 
 Hon.  Salim Kalume:  Mr. Speaker sir, in reg ards to the aforementioned the 
Committee would wish to seek for three more weeks to enable the office of the County 
Secretary and…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hatuna copies . 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Clerks can you please do your w ork and give the copies 
to the M embers. .. 
 
(Loud C onsultation s) 
 
 So you are telling me tha t there is no enough papers in the House?  
 
(Silence ) 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13  
 So the C lerks are saying that there are no enough papers in the House s o there is a 
problem with the procurement, is that what you are saying?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Yes you can continue Hon. Salim K alume.  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume : Mr. Speaker sir, in regards to…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr Speaker to add 
on the Hon. Member is no t properly dressed ... 
 
(Laughter and appl ause) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Fadhili I think I can see him he is properly dressed. 
I do not know I am blind here can you tell us what is that he is not properly dressed?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker I am wondering why the 
Serjeant left him to come in this A ssembly with slippers and jeans...  
  
(Laughter ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Salim Kalume is it true that you are wearing 
slippers?  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri sote twajua kwamba huu ni msimu 
wa mvua na leo mvua imekesha na kwangu nyumbani nimevujiwa na nguo zote karibu 
zimetota , kwa hiyo namjibu Mheshimiwa Fadhili k wamba sikupenda kwangu kuja na jeans 
lakini ni kwa sababu ya ile hali ilioko katika Kaunti ya Mombasa . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Kha tri): But Hon. Salim Kalume you know this House has 
procedures to be followed.  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  Nakubali.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You can not just … Sergeant -At-Arms …you know… 
Hon. Sergeant -At-Arms at least you should advise the House at least we  know what is going 
on. You should do your work. Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika  nafikiri japo kuna nidhamu ya Bunge 
lakini W aheshimiwa wenzangu wananifaham isha kwamba hatuendi sawa kama B unge ; 
endapo Mheshimiwa atatolewa ni b ora pia basi ile ripoti mwana Kamati yeyote aweze 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14 kuisoma ili Mheshimiwa Hatimy na Bunge hili liweze kupata ripoti kwa muda ulioweza 
kuekezwa na Bunge Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think the Hon. Member stated very clear ly that he h ad 
his issues  and it is raining and all the M embers know that it is raining so for now we can 
exempt him so that he may continue because from up I can see he is well dressed but 
Serjeant -At-Arms at least keep an eye this is your job we do  not have to keep on telling you 
what to do. Yes you may continue Hon. Salim Kalume?  
 
 Hon.  Salim Kalume:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunilinda.  
 
Mr. Speaker sir, in regards to the aforementioned the Committee would wish to seek 
for three more weeks to enable the office of the Count y Secretary and the C ommittee 
to collect tangible information to table in this Hono urable House.  
 
Mr. Speaker sir the C ommittee is not only interested in the status of implementatio n 
but also reasons to why some M otions are not fully or yet to  be implemented.  Mr. 
Speaker sir, going forward I want to assure this House the C ommittee on 
Implementation is committed to its course as expected of it as per the Standing order 
189.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Ho n. Salim Kalume...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed Mohamed. .. 
 
(Silence ) 
 
  Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed Mohamed.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Ametupatia tracker  ambayo inasema uwongo.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Tracker yasema uw ongo, Miswada mingi  imeandikwa 
adopted, adopted adopted  na hatujui anamaani sha kitu gani.  
 Kwa hivyo hii stakabadhi haiko sawa, sijui adopted  inamaanisha kitu gani 
Mheshimiwa Spika, adopted  inamaanisha kuwa yataka ... ikiwa ni adopted  kitu kishafanyika 
kije na ripoti yake kuwa hiki kitu kimefanyika na hakuna ripoti yoyote na kusema kuwa 
wanauliza kutaka wiki tatu nyengine n afikiri huu umekuwa mchezo sasa. Hii ni  kwa sababu 
Mswada  kuna kitabu pale ambacho tukitoka kwenye hii Nyumba na nyinyi pia mko na Vote 
Book yenu yaonyesha leo sisi tumefanya nini ; kitu ya  kuonyesha kuwa adopted ni kuwa 
kupatikana ripoti ya kusema hii kitu tayari imekuwa adopted  lakini vitu vyote hivi 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni ripoti ya uwongo hivyo basi  hii nataka itupiliwe mbali kwenye hili 
Bunge. 
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa S pika pia mimi ni mwanachama wa Kamati hii ya 
Utekelezaji na kama siku hiyo ilipotafutwa ripoti hii nilisema sisi bado ni wanagenzi na hat a 
nikatatizika na kitu inaitwa Motion tracke r. Nashukuru siku hiyo kabla ya kwenda 
mafundisho  niliweza kuipata na nikajua ni nini ; tunaweza kujaribu na tukapata hayo lakini 
ukiangalia aya ya mwisho Mwenyekiti amesema , 'Mr. Speaker, go ing forward I  want to 
assure this House the Committee on I mplement ation is committed to its c ourse as expected ', 
na tutajaribu kuhakikisha zile ambazo zimepitishwa h apa je, executive  inatekeleza? K wa 
hivyo  ningeomba tuzidi kupewa muda mw afaka kuangalia zile ambazo zimepitishwa hapa na 
zimeenda mpaka kwa executive  kwa sab abu si hizi peke yake, ziko nyingi ambazo 
zilipitishwa mwaka jana ambazo b ado tunazitafuta ili  kujua je executive inatekeleza na 
nafikiri  Katibu wa Kaunti  kama alivyotuambaia alituambia tumpatie kama wiki mbili zile 
zingine ili  kuona kwamba je, kuna  kitu k inatekelezwa na executive ? 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Thoya . Hon. Members if you can read 
the response of Hon. K alume it was very clear that he was ask ing for another 14 working 
days so he said 14 working days ; that means it is like three weeks Hon. Salim Kalume right? 
Because it 's Monday to Friday working days so you have ask ed for working 14 days which is 
three weeks to enable the office of the County Secretary to reply . So we are going to give you 
that three  weeks;  I think you have heard  Hon. Mohamed Mohamed claiming that  whatever  
report you brought  is not a genuine report, is it something that you have drafted yoursel f 
without the knowledge of the C lerks and other Members of this House? S o please we are 
giving you three weeks, go and ma ke sure you get a report, a clear report from the County 
Secretary and even bring us the proper M otion tracker which is g oing to be approved by the 
Clerk himself, make sure the Clerk stamps himself to approve that its the proper copy of  the 
true o riginal and make sure all Hon. M embers have the copy the next time you are here which 
is three weeks from now  then we can take it from there.  Thank  you Mr. Salim Kalume.  
 
 Hon. Salim Kalume:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Clerk. 
 
RESPONSE ON STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF TRANSPORT , INFRUSTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS ON THE STATUS OF THE RO AD FROM JUNDA DISPENSARY TO JUNDA 
NG'OMBENI AND JUNDA MISSION  
 
 Yes Hon. Pri shcilla Mumba I  can see again you have a response.  
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker sir, I wish to give the 
following statement on status of the road from  Junda Dispensary to Junda Ng’ombeni and 
Junda Mission which was requested by Hon. Raphael Bwire MCA Junda Ward on Thursday, 
23rd August, 2018 during the 71st Sitting.  
 
Mr. Speaker sir, the road is planned for improvement in the financial year  2018/2019 
which is yet to take place. This financial year the C ounty has not procure d any road 
works as the process of biennial tendering is ongoing.  
 
However Mr. Speaker, the D epartment is going to undertake remedial works to enable 
residents access their homes. A site visi t has already been done by the D irector of 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16 Roads and the area MCA. The road requires more funds as opposed to the current 
allocatio n.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Pricilla Mumba, yes Hon. Bwire.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I stand to confirm that we did two 
site visits ; that is after writing to the D epartment concerned and I also happen to serve your 
office with a copy as well as the office of the County Secretary and the Chairperson on 
Transport and Infrastructure. T he first site visit was between me and  Engineer Migosi from 
the said D epartment and the second site visit was  between the CEO and the County S ecretary 
and myself and indeed they have confirmed.  I think th at it is just the delay because of the ra in 
but in some few days to come  they promised to address the issue so am  satisfied  with the 
report from the department.  Thank y ou. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire, yes Clerk.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON EDU CATION ON THE LUNCH 
FEEDING PROGRAM IN T HE COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. S peaker sir, I know mos t of the M embers a re very 
eager.. . 
 
(Loud noise)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order M embers! Please let the Hon. Member … 
 
 Hon. Omondi : Thank  you Mr. Speaker for the protection that you have offered to 
me. Mr. Speaker sir I was saying that M embers are very  much eager to hear from  the 
Department of Education  on the feeding program.  I was requested by Hon. Kitula and am 
going to be very much precise and accurate on it , Mr. Speaker sir, I want to say that we shall 
provide….  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Kh atri): Hon. Members  please order!  Let the Hon. Member , if 
you have an issue with bursary you can stand and ask for the statement and he will reply so 
please let him reply on the issue he was asked.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker sir I think am answering a stat ement on provision of 
lunch to primary and high school candidates, that is exactly what am answering, not the issue 
of bursary, thank you. S o Mr. Speaker sir I want to respond a nd I want to say on Sunday the 
Department of Education  will provide or will dis tribute food but particularly public primary 
school s and the following will be given; 1 packet of m ilk, a b ottle of wate r, a bread or a bun 
and a fruit.  Mr. Speaker sir I think that  this time round the education D epartment has done 
something very good and we need to be thanked. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Bwire.  
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17  
 Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Once again  Mr. Speaker I want to urge this 
Honourable House to be serious;  we are not giving much attention to the issues affecti ng 
mwananchi , we have been calling upon... you can hear the voices people are murmuring 
bursaries, no one is responding to whatever we have raised, the issue of lunch is what they 
have considered to be more effective and that of concern compared to the burs ary. Mr. 
Speaker i want to urge the Department and the Committee on E ducation to be vigilant and 
serve the interest of mwananchi , those….  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Bwire the statement was regarding the bursary or 
was it regarding th e lunch?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Of course Mr . Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Who raised the statement , was it Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Of Course Mr . Speaker with your permission I understand that the 
statement was touching on provision of lunch to the school going children who are yet to start 
their final exam bu t we are appealing to the M embers to give priorit y to the most issues that 
affect mwananchi  than thi s small issue that won’t give anything that will help mwananchi  
down there. T hank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Bwire you can appeal but not murmuring 
around, you can stand and ask the statement to the Hon. Member, use the procedure.  Yes 
Hon. Charles Kitula.  
 
 Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Mheshimiwa nafikiri niliweza kuuliza taarifa  hiyo kwa 
niaba ya naibu wako kwa vile alikuwa amechukua kiti chako Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, 
lakini pia ningependa kumfaham isha Mheshimiwa ambaye aliweza kuongea kwam ba tatizo la 
kuweza kuwapatia vy akula sio shughuli  ya idara ya elimu , hiyo ilikuwa ni Hassan J oho 
Foundation ali okuwa akitoa kila mwaka . Kwa hivyo kama ni maswala ya  basari  tafadhali lete 
kwa njia inayo stahili maana yake hili ni Jumba la sheria na litajibiwa kwa njia inayostahili, 
kwa hivyo chakula ni Hass an Joho Foundation Mheshimiwa. A hsante.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fatma K ushe can you give Hon. Maimuna the 
microphone , Hon. Fatma you can use this one it’s working.  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.)  Fatma  Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fu rsa hii, 
nafikiri kabla sijakosea nimemsikia kwa mak ini Mheshimiwa Bomoa akisema kwamba 
watatoa maziwa, mkate na maji. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ninavyo jua safari hii naona kuna 
mabadiliko, ma ana yake Mheshimiwa Spika watoto wakitoka majumbani itakuwa 
wameshakunywa chai, maji watakuwa washakunywa sasa watoto si ku tatu mfululizo watoto 
wakifanya mtihani, wakipewa maziwa na maji na mkate baada ya hapo watakuwa 
washafunga choo. Mheshimiwa Spika Bomoa aweze kuja na mikakati mizuri ya kutuambia 
kwamba watoto wetu watakula kitu gani , ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya, yes Hon. Maimuna, sorry Hon. Thoya 
let Hon. Maimuna speak first then you.  
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18  
 Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna  Salim :  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, mwanzo mimi 
nitasema nashukuru Joho Foundation kupitia kwa kitengo cha elimu  kwa sababu kipindi 
kilichopita  watu walipata chakula.. . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ni kumaanisha Bwana Mwenyekiti  ambaye anashughulika na mambo ya elimu 
hajish ughulishi zaidi kuhusu wananchi  anajishughulisha na mambo yake ya kibinafsi ndio 
maana alivyo ulizwa hapa ameleta taarifa ambayo ha ituridhishi. K wa hivyo sisi hatufurahii 
kwa sababu tunajua kama alikuwa ni Mwenyekiti  mkakamavu wa kuf uatilizia tusinge uliza 
ripoti tungekuwa tumeambiwa chakula ni fulani na fulani lakini ameenda tu kwa muda mfupi 
ikabidi watu wafanye kuagiza mikate. H izo ni habari za kusikitisha sana Mheshimiwa Spika, 
anaangusha Kaunti yetu, K aunti yetu haipeani mikate inapean a chakula, kifungua kinywa na 
chakula...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry Hon. Maimuna, I think Hon. Members you are 
contradicting yourself, is it the County giving or it is Joho Foundation?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna  Salim : It is the education D epartment.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But you just said Joho Foundation! You know H on. 
Members there is  the Hansard capturing all these  thing s please when you are talking just 
understand what you are talki ng, is it coming from the Joho Foundation? Y ou can let the 
Chairman tell us first. Yes Chairman ? 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, for giving me that particular opportunity, 
I just want to  clarify this and I want to clarify this boldly that this lunch provision...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Omondi you are addressing the Speaker here, you 
are not addressing Hon. Members.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  This lunch provision that I’ve ju st read here, this is…  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : That doesn’t look like lunch Honourable,  Just say the  
food;  lunch you are giving water and bread,  are you having lunch bread Honourable?  Do not 
put words in your mouth just say the list of things that yo u were saying, don’t call it lunch, 
yes you can continue. Hon. Members let the H onourable  clarify that first.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi:  Yes Mr. Speaker sir, I mentioned lunch because as per the statement, 
the statement talks about provision of lunch that ’s why I have  to adhere to that; t his lunch 
program that is being provided I want this House including Hon. Maimuna to listen very 
careful ly and get that this is not pro vided by  Education Department , this lunch am talking 
about…  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19 (Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khat ri): Yes hold on Hon. Ibrahim . Yes Hon. Thoya I think you 
are eager to say something.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri Bwana  Ibrahim Omondi ni Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya E limu Kaunti ya Mombasa, na  yeye si M wenyekiti wa Joho Foundation na nafikiri 
aliyeuliza hilo swali alikuwa anataka ripoti ni nini kitengo cha Elimu  kinafanya…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na tungependa atuambie yeye na W aziri wake  na timu yake wana  mipango gani na 
tunashukuru inaweza kuwa ni maji na mi kate Joho Foundation imetuletea; wao kama  kitengo  
cha Elimu k inafanya nini kwa sababu na tunazungumza kwa uchungu zaidi haya maneno 
ambayo nasikia hapa ya basari ukimaliza hii ndugu yangu wiki ijayo tuko na wewe mpaka 
watoto waen de wakasome. H atutakuwa tukimeza maneno hapa wala tunazungumza chini ya 
meza , we are serious about it , wewe tuletee maji na mikate watafunga vyoo watafanya nini 
lakini watoto watapita mwaka ujao wanataka kwenda se kondari  na hakuna pesa, hayo nayo 
ujipange utujibu.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Mhes himiwa Spika hili swala liliw eza kuulizwa siku chache zilizo pita 
na Mheshimiwa Spika  majibu  amba yo yameulizwa siku chache zilizopita na yakapata u amuz i 
wa Mwenyekiti umeletwa katika mfumo kama huu; lakini Mwenyekiti yeye amei nuka ni  
kama hilo swala limeulizwa sasa hivi, hana lolote ambalo litafanya sisi tuamini ya kwamba 
hata Hassan Joho Foundation imekubali kupatia wanafunzi wetu chakula kwa s ababu hakuna 
mahali kumeandikwa .  
 Pili Mheshimiwa Spika Mwenyekiti alikuwa hajui hichi chakula kitatoka wapi mpaka 
aliulizwa swali a kasema kitatoka Joho Foundation. Y eye amekuwa akijibu kama Mwenyekiti 
wa Kamati ya Elimu  kumaanisha kwamba chakula kitatoka katika idara  ya Elimu  kwa hivyo 
tunaomba Mhe shimiwa Spika hii K amati imezembea sana..  
(Applause)  
 
 Na mimi sioni k ama nitaogopa kusema hivi, hii K amati imezembea sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika na ni wakati hili Jumba lichukue sheria  mkononi ili tuokoe watu wetu kule nje. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Bwire. Hon . Members I think we 
have heard about this issue and I think not only this Committee they are so many Committees 
here which…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 We need to start afresh and you know disband all the Committees here and 
reshuffle…  
 
(Applause)  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 20  All the Committees but the other is to follow  so we should follow all the procedures 
because do not think if you are given a Chairman or something of that Committee and you 
think that you will do whatever you want to do. People are elected here to deliver to the 
people and people are really waiting o utside there to see what we are doing here in this House 
so if we keep on playing around here Hon . Members just  leave that seat and let other 
Member s do the work . We do not need to force you to do that work and I am not talking this 
to Hon. Ibrahim Omondi I am talking th is in general to all the other M embers. So please Hon. 
Ibrahim the statement which you have been asked last time we are giving you until next week 
Thursday…  
 
(Loud c onsultation s) 
 
 Anyway but I think they are other statements here Hon . Membe rs they were 
murmuring around so maybe they can ask you that statement and please so that you can give 
a written response. Yes Hon. Feddis?  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mbura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Kufikia Alhamisi mitihani 
itakua imemalizika, ombi ni kwa Mwenyek iti wa Kamati ya Elimu ajipange mwaka ujao 
hatutaki kuon a mambo madogo madogo kama haya; k wanza mwaka jana kulikuwa na 
chakula cha mchana ambapo tulikuwa twalilia chakula hicho cha mchana kipikwe mashinani 
na makundi madogo madogo ya kijamii a mbapo hilo ta yari litakuwa limei nua jamii. 
Tulikuwa twafikiria leo atasema kuna makundi ambayo yamepangwa mashinani yatapika 
chakula lakini leo hii ametuletea mambo ya mikate, ndizi, maji ajipange mwaka ujao hili 
jambo liwe linatekelezeka katika hali ya kisawa sawa na jamii ifaidike, watoto wafaidike na 
wafanye vizuri. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba ? 
 
 Hon. Samba : Yes thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to remind the Chair 
Committee of Education even the report that he is read ing for us we cannot even verify its 
authencity ; number one . 
 So I do not see the reason why we should give him more airtime to continue 
misleading the House. This Committee has never been responsible on anything leave alone ..., 
we started crying about bur saries when we  were elected until now we are one  year and above 
still he cannot be responsible on anything not even him alone so many Committees here. 
Hon. Speaker I do not see if it is in order for us to sit down listeni ng to the report that even 
the M embers of the said Committee were never even consulted, they never even had a sitting 
to bring this report s o let us jump we go to another b usiness of the House and then they 
should go and plan for themselves , they should plan well so that whatever report tha t was 
requested he should bring reports that are in order. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili you wanted to say something ? 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker what I 
wanted to raise  before this Honourable House  has already been said by Ho n. Tobias Samba 
from Tudor Ward. A nd Mr. Speaker even the mode of distribution the Hon. M ember has 
failed to talk before this Honourable House how the breakfast is going to be distributed and 
as per the q uestion we were asking for lunch and you can see that the Hon . Member is 
replying on breakfast and furthermore as what the Hon . Member from Tudor  Hon. Tobias 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 21 Samba has said even the Committee, the Committee has not sat to verify on this report and 
the Hon . Members from the same Committee of Education are here with us then they can 
attest with what I am saying Mr. Speaker. Thank you.    
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Hon. Fatma Kushe , I think Hon . Member s we can move 
on now.  I hope you are not tal king about t he same issue again, Y es Hon. Fatma then Hon. 
Thoya you will tell us.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Fatma  Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. 
Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kufahamisha hili Bunge kwamba mwenzetu kidogo alipata 
matatizo wakati wa mwanzo  aliweza kuingizwa ndani na nafikiri nataka  kulia ....Nafikiri 
Mheshimiwa Spika tangu siku hiyo Mhesh imiwa aliweza kuathirika kidogo k wa hivyo 
nawaomba W aheshimiwa wenzangu mumuelewe. Ahsante sana.  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Thoya, ye s Hon. Ibrahim Omondi . 
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker sir and I want to add on this particular one ; 
number one  I want to say this, I am goin g to start with this l unch programme, the statement 
that was requested. Mr. Speaker sir, they are Chairmen of several Committees in this 
particular House who when they are requested to respond on a problem even they do not 
come to this House, they do not even answer and some keep on repeating  the same next week 
give after three  weeks and the same thing repeats … 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Chairman of Education, Hon. Ibrahim Omondi today has responded to a 
statement on the issue of lunch provision and I have said here categorically, I have answered 
that statement . 
 I have said on Sunday we shall be distributing the food that  have just been named 
here; now can we compare those Chairmen who do not come to answer questions, those 
Chairmen who postponed, who keep on postponding statements, responding on statements 
and the one Mr. Speaker Sir who has actually answered it ? 
 
(Interr uption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim you know you cannot ..., two wrongs 
do not make a right. So please we are not here to look at, I think I said it very clear ly it is not 
only you they are other Committees which have problems. So Hon. Ibr ahim please we do not 
say that you are the only one who has those issues they are other Committees even have those 
problems and I can remember very clear ly I even to ld you the other day that your M embers 
were complaining about you in the House Business. So  please Hon. Ibr ahim this thing is not 
personal . 
 
 Hon. Omondi : Exactly .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Just sit down with your Committee and see how you can 
work out.  
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 22  
 Hon. Omondi : And again Mr. Speaker sir, I just want to wind out . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Kha tri): Yes? 
  
 Hon. Omondi : That Mr. Speaker sir, that these  statements when they are requested 
they are not written by the entire m ember ship; these statements are not written by the 
Chairman, these statements go through the Clerks and they are requested th rough the office 
of the Clerk to the Executive where the Clerk responds and the Chairman come s and read s 
the statement . Remember we already have a problem with the Executive Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Hon. Ibrahim , thank you very much fo r your 
response. Yes Hon. Thoya?     
     
 Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to inform Hon. I brahim Omondi he is 
not special;  he is a Honourable M ember like everyone of us here and if we want to g et 
information from your docket  kindly deliver as we like it  do not just tell us ooh other 
Members are doing this and this, please stick to what we want to this House. Last but not 
least, let it be in record either in Hansard or in papers that the year 2018 our Honourable kids 
ate bread  and water and this shows how your Committee is working . Let it go on record that 
you are under performing and due to that problem our children will have bread and water,  let 
it be on record. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Thoya you know Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi we do not 
have to work for you are the Chairman and when you are given this question first you should 
go to the budget, are these things budgeted in your budget? Are they there?  
 If they are not even there why are we even talking? I t is no t about exactly, it is about 
you now to go and do your work…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 So...but if you do not do that research Hon. Ibrahim please yes Hon. Mohamed 
Mohamed ? 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama chini ya kifungu  kanuni 
za Bunge nambari 177, kama nitamuuliza kwa ruhusa yako Karani  wako atusomee 177 
inasema nini?  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili, you want to read the Standing Order 
for us?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): No Mr. Speaker I do not want to read the 
Standing Orde r but the procedures of this House it is the Hon . Members who speak in this 
House unless it is just .. the Clerk will read when it is in the Committee of the Whole House 
reading a Bill or the sequence of the proceedings of this House. So Mr. Speaker I would  
like…  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 23 (Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Mohamed I think you just clarify your point where 
you are taking us with that Standing Order, if you may just clarify and state what you want to 
state. 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : It is good to go by proc edures Hon.  Speaker;  now 177 
states that , ‘A Procedure in Select Committees ; 
  
177. (1) Except as and to the extent to which the Chairperson may otherwise direct 
for the purpose of facilitating full consideration and discussion of a matter reffered 
to a Co mmittee, the procedure in a Select Committee shall be as nearly as possible, 
the same as that Committee of the Whole County Assembly.  
 
(2) Any question arising in a Select Committee shall be decided by vote and the 
resolution on any such vote shall constit ute the decision of the Select Committee on 
that question.  
 
(3) The minutes of a Select Committee shall be kept in the same form as the Votes 
and Proceedings of a Committee of the Whole County Assembly and in such other 
form as may be prescribed in the Com mittee Manual.  
 
(4) Where a Vote on a question is n ot unanimous, the names of the M embers voting 
for and against the question and those abstaining from voting, respectively, shall be 
recorded in the minutes.  
 
(5) Except as the Speaker may otherwise direct,  a Committee may sit 
notwithstanding the adjournment of the County Assembly.  
   
Hapa Mheshimiwa Spika inasema tunapokaa kwenye Kamati ; naona utata ndio 
unakuja hapa, ni lazima ikiwa kuna kitu chochote kiwe kitakua kimekubaliana ile Kamati 
itakapo kaa itaku bali wale wanakamati waliouunga ule uamuzi wa Kamati ama wale 
waliokataa, itatiwa kumbukumbu za Kamati na ni lazima zile kumbukumbu ziwe 
zitaambatanishwa na ile ripoti ye yote ambayo itakuwa kuwa tabled hii Nyumba. Kwa hivyo 
nafikiri sisi tunaenda kiholela holela ni lazima wanakamati wawe watakubaliana , ikiwa mtu 
amekubali, amekubali ikiwa  mtu amepinga uamuzi kwenye Kamati  ataandika kwenye 
kumbukumbu kuwa fulani amepinga na atakuja eleza sababu zake za kupinga ule uamuzi 
ndani ya hii Nyumba. Kwa hivyo nafiki ri Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia kiti chako twataka 
kuanzia leo utoe uamuzi wa kusema kuwa stakabadhi ye yote isikubalike bila ya 
kumbukumbu za Kamati ion yeshe ile Kamati kama inafanya kazi vile inavyotakikana. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy. Hon. Hatimy are you a 
Member of the Educat ion Committee? I think we have M embers here of E ducation 
Committee. Hon. M embers when the Hon. Ibrahim Omondi was giving a respon se so maybe 
you can tell us did this thing eve n pass in your Committee or you are just hearing it in the 
House here? Yes Hon. Faith ? 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 24  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mwende : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ni mmoja wa hio Kamati ya Elimu na 
ni jambo la kusikitisha kwa kuwa leo pia tulikuwa na mkutano na Mwenyekiti wetu 
hakuweza ku tueleza…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa hivyo ni masikitiko makubwa kwa vile Mheshimiwa Spika si ati nakejeli mtu 
lakini vile tunaenda sivyo ; tuna majukumu mengi mashinani na taarifa  ikiletwa hapa mtu 
anataka majibu aweze kurudisha kwa wananchi si jambo la kucheka lak ini vyenye tumekuwa 
tukiendelea ni sijui naweza kusema ni cumbersome  ama ni kivipi? Lakini sivyo yafaa tufuate 
Kanuni za Bunge  na si mtu mmoja afanye uamuzi na aweze kuleta kwa Bunge pasipo 
kujulisha wana Kamati . Wale hatuko hapo kama flower girls  ama kusi ndikiza mtu tuko pale 
ili tuweze kutenda kazi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable. Yes Hon…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Point of information Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mohame d? 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Nataka kutilia nguvu maneno yako uliyosema , 
umemwambia Mwenyekiti wa Elimu aende aangalie juu ya bajeti.  
 Ni ukweli sasa nataka yeye aende akafanye uchunguzi huu kuwa shule za  msingi ziko 
chini ya Serikali k uu na hatuwezi sisi ku tumia pesa kwenye shughuli ambayo si yetu, lakini 
itakuwa ni vizuri yeye mwenyewe aende akachunguze haya maneno kwa sababu kuna 
queries  ambazo zimekuja . Kwa hivyo yeye aende akajue vile u livyomwambia kuwa kwenye 
bajeti kama ime wekwa bajeti  na kama wale was haweza ku suluhisha haya maneno … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But again on t he same note Hon. Ibrahim you see you 
alone cannot perform and that is why  you have a Committee. Kwa hivyo mukikaa kama 
Kamati m lete huu ujumbe ambao umepatiwa kisha  hapo ndio mtajadili , sasa mwengine labda 
wewe un aweza kuwa una fikra nyengine, M wanakamati mw engine akakwambia hii kitu haiko  
kwenye bajeti, kwa hio lazima m kae pamoja  na kama hamuwezi kukaa pamoja hata 
nimewaambia  the other day, I even told you very clea rly, there is a procedure also if you 
think that  Committee is not reliable you M embers can write whatever you want to give, if 
you think the Committee you want it to be disbanded and we bring a new Committee.  
 So please Ibrahim Omondi share those things w ith th e other M embers , call a meeting 
with your  Committee sit down consider the se things as urgent because as you said by next 
week pupils will be finishing their exams, so Hon. Hatimy told you very clear ly and you as a 
Committee of Education you know very  clear ly that primary schools are not under us we are 
only here for the ECDE and maybe if you see this problem it is raising now next financial 
year maybe you can keep some money for those things , that is why we have Committees and 
that is how we should im prove the lives of our people in Mombasa. So please Hon. Omondi 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 25 and Hon . Members do not take it too personal with Hon. Omondi just try to talk to him 
because I saw Hon. Pris chilla I think she had a Woman C aucus defending her…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 And Hon. Omondi I do n ot see anyone in your defence i t is very sad for the men 
caucus … 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Yes Hon. Aran.  
 
 Hon. Aran : Hon. Speaker in regards to that I would really request you to instruct 
Hon. Fatma Kushe to withdraw her statement on what she said in regards t o Hon. Omondi. If 
I can quote what she said , “Alisema  kwamba ni vile aliingizwa kule ni kama alifanyiwa kitu” , 
and that is not a proper language to use in this Honourable House.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Alifanyiwa kitu? I have never heard that. Yes Ho n. 
Bwire ? 
 
 Hon. Bwire : Thank you. Mr. Speaker why is  he concerned and yet the said M ember 
is ok ay with what Hon. Kushe sa id. Hon. Kushe might be knowing.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon . Members we should use proper words in this 
House but there is nothing like alifanyiwa kitu . 
 
 Hon. Bwire : Hon. Speaker nobody has objected even Hon. Ibrahim has not 
objected…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So what is that kitu alifanyiwa  if we may…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Bwire : The Hono urable knows better…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No, Hon. Fatma did you state that word , alifanyiwa kitu ? 
 
(Loud c onsultation)  
 
 Hon. Aran : Hon. Speaker even the person I am defending is unaware so I withdraw 
my statement ... 
 
(Laughter)  
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 26  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok. Thank you Hon . Members, Hon. Omondi I think we 
need to move on . 
 
 Hon. Omondi : Yes Hon. Speaker . I think it is only good for this House Mr. Speaker 
we h ave the procedure of this House,  I cannot stand and talk while the other Member is 
talking, I have to give time for him to talk then I can talk.  Secondly  Mr. Speaker sir I do not 
need to be object on that, I am not the  one supposed to object when a M ember has used a 
language which cannot be used in the House , I am n ot the one supposed to object. Any 
Member can object towards it  so when M embers say that am okay with that I think that's very 
wrong Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But on the same note did she say that ulifanyiwa kitu ? 
 
 Hon. Omondi:  She said Mr. Speake r, I confir m that from the records of the H ansard.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : We will look at that and if she did that obviously she 
will get some punishment in this House.  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker sir just to finalise I don't think we don't need to go  
personal  just because of bursary a nd I just want to finalise this;  I want to say this, this 
statement that am reading today, the issue is that I have followed for this particular statement . 
 From the day it w as requested from the executive, the Deputy G overnor is the 
incharge of this Department of E ducation , personally I have followed it several times but I 
have not got the respon se Mr. Speaker S ir, let me be given time to explain.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Just continue you are addressing me, you  are n ot 
addressing them, don't get worried.  
 
 Hon. Omondi:  So what am saying I have followed this issue several times with him 
so that I can get the  answers until yesterday Mr. S peaker  sir when we had the education...  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But you see yo u have followed it personally,  you see 
Hon. Hatimy told you very clear ly Standing order 177 , did you bring that thing in the 
Committee? Did you have a minute of saying that  you have followed it with the D eputy 
Governor  and that there was no response? T hat thing should be done with the C ommittee and 
it should have those minutes so you don't do everything by your head Hon ourable. Y es Hon . 
Bwire.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  I think Mr. Speaker after analysing all this, you have already given the 
directive and you have alrea dy finalised , you have said what should be done I don't know 
why we are still repeating the same and you have already made a ruling.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon Omondi I think we are done with that  and please 
sit down with your C ommitt ee and follow  the procedure of S tanding order 177 and the way 
how it wants to be done. Yes Clerk.  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 27 RESPONSE TO  STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF TRANSPORT , INFRUSTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS ON DEMOLITION  ALONG THE INTERIOR J OMVU MADAFUNI /JITONI RABAI 
ROAD  
 
 Yes Hon . Prischilah Mumba.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. T he statement about demolition has 
not yet reached to my  desk so I don't have the response by now , I request to be given until 
Tuesday so that I can table.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Tuesd ay? Yes o kay p ermission granted until 
Tuesday.  Yes Clerk.  
 
RESPONSE TO  STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE OF TRA NSPORT , INFRUSTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS ON  LIGHTING PROBLEMS IN  PORT REITZ WARD  
 
 Yes again Hon Prischilah Mumba.  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.) Mumba: Thank you  Mr. Speaker, also this one will be on Tuesday.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry, y ou will bring the response on Tuesday next 
week? No its fine you can bring them on Tuesday there is no problem . 
 If you have the response on Tu esday we can let you bring t hem, i t is a response, so 
you will bring them on Tuesday?  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Faith.  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mwende:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama chini ya Kanuni za Bunge 
nambari  41 (c). 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon  Prischillah.  
 
 Hon. (Mrs. Mumba ): Sorry Mr. Speaker I had forgotten that we will be on a trip to 
Kisumu so I don't think I will make it on Tuesday , maybe I will make it by Thursday.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are going to give back the response b y Thursday 
next week?  
 
 Hon. (Mrs.)  Mumba: Yes for both.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  That is fine, yes S tanding order number 41 (c), Yes? 
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mwende:  Mheshimiwa Spik a naomba kujua katika idara ya Uchukuzi 
kulingana na mafuriko yanayoendelea kwa kitengo cha Disaster M anagement  tunajua kuna 
pesa nyingi ambazo zimetengwa katika ile idara na tushapitisha Mswada hapa na M wenyekiti 
pia akaleta mw engin e ya kuongeza uzito Bwana Moham ed Hatimy tunataka kujua kwa 
sababu kuanzia jana usiku mpaka sa a hii hak una juhudi zozote ambazo zimechukuliwa 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 28 kuweza kunusuru watu wetu ambao wameingiliwa na maji . Japo kuwa m aji ni baraka za 
Mwenyezi Mungu  tukiangalia katika runinga tumeona kwamba idara ilikuwa imearifiwa haya 
mambo wiki mbili zilizopita lakini hakuna juhudi zozote ambazo wa meweza kuchuku a. 
Mheshimiwa Spika tunaomba majibu kamili na haswa hizo pesa zimetumika vipi zenye 
zimetengwa katika hiyo idara na ni kwa  nini kuna  mvutano kwa vile nimeshuhudia s iku ya 
leo nikiongea na watu wa disaster  mara wanasema pipe ziko kwa kitengo cha Inspectorate  
mtu wa disaster  anasema ana gari na wafanyi  kazi. K wa hivyo huu utata ni uweze kuletwa 
majibu kamili huo utata unatokea wapi kwa vi le wananchi wetu wanaumia sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika, a hsante sana . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Shebe Athman Salim.  
 
 Hon. Shebe  Salim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti , vile vile nasimama kwa  
Kanuni za Bunge  kipengee 41 c  na iliyonifanya kusimama hapa ni dharura inayojiri Jomvu , 
licha ya kuwa mvua imeleta furaha vilevile pia karaha imekuja  nayo . Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kuna hospitali yangu ya Jomvu Mikanjuni model CDF C ounty hospital na kwa 
sababu si swala la kwanza mimi kulileta hapa katika Bunge hili tukufu nimekuwa nikilirudia 
kila mara lakini sijapata maskio ya W enyekiti wenza kuhusu hili  swala . Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti nafikiri nimepata wasaa kidogo nikaeleza hali yangu ya kule Jomvu ; ni 
masikitiko h ospitali imejaa maji na sio maji tu ya mvua ni sewage  ambayo imeingia mpaka 
kwenye sehemu ya wamama kujifungua.  
 Vyombo vile Kaunti  imeg haramika  kununua vimeharibika vyengine n a hili swala 
nililiweka hewani ndani ya Bunge kupitia M wenyekiti mwenza wa afya na vilevile kwa 
sababu leo limegusia kitengo cha barabara na ibara ya maswala ya marekebisho na maji taka . 
Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti ningependa W enyekiti wenza walivalie njuga hili swala na naomba 
kwa sababu  hali Jomvu ni mbaya imenibidi Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti hata nikitoka hapa 
kuna kikao kinanisubiri vipi hali halisi ya ile hospitali tuta fanya vipi maanake hakuna budi 
Mheshimiwa wale wamama ambao wan ajifungua pale itabidi tuwatafutie mahali mbadala . 
Nimepiga mbiu kila upande jamani Waheshimiwa W enyekiti wangu siko hapa  mimi 
kuzungumza ngonjera ama m kaona munashabikia mimi nikizungumza siku zote nazungumza 
maneno mazito ambayo yanahitaji jamani yawain gie katika roho zenu muangalie Jomvu kwa 
jicho la huruma, J omvu inaangaliwa kana kwamba ni sehemu nyengine iko mashambani 
kabisa. Kwa hivyo mimi kila nikija hapa Mheshimiwa wa Jomvu nikilia kilio cha Jomvu 
naona ni kana kwamba W aheshimiwa na idara husika ba do hawajalivalia njuga hili swala ; 
hivyo basi Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti leo ndio kilio changu cha mwisho kupitia kwako unipe 
nguvu na hili Bunge pia kupitia Waheshimiwa wenzangu mlipe nguvu hili swala  kwa sababu 
ikiwa nitakuwa saa yote nazungumza na nalia kili o na nawakilisha wajibu wangu na 
natekeleza wajibu wangu wa kikatiba lakini hakuna hata swala hata moja  litafanyiwa kazi ni 
masikitiko. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti wa barabara ames ikia swala hili na 
vilev ile K amati za afya ziko hapa naomba tafadhali  swala hili walifanyie kazi, a hsante sana 
Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Samba, Hon Shebe please switch 
off the mic rophone . 
 
 Hon.  Samba: Hon Speaker I was just wondering whether he was requesting for a 
statement or he was deb ating already.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : He was requesting for a statement.  
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 29  
 Hon. Samba: But that was a debate.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Not unless he was debating by himself, yes Hon Bwire.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire: Mr. Speaker I stand here to inform this Hou se first that if the phone calls 
some of us are receiving and the messages that are trending online is anything to go by then 
am informing this House that we have lost a great son  of this County , the Son to our S enator 
Mohamed Faki by the name Ahmed Mohame d a.k.a Chuchu . Mr. Speaker the son of our 
Senator is somebody that is known by everyone of us we were with him in our campaigns 
and unfortunately he has passed away.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members I think it is very sad that today we  have 
lost the son of the Hon. S enator M oham ed Faki , so I may ask that we rise and condole with 
him for one minute silence ... 
 
(Hon. Members rose and observed a mo ment of silence ) 
 
 Thank you Hon . Members you may be seated and we pray that h is soul may rest in 
peace.  Amin. Y es Hon . Kitula.  
 Chief Whip  (Hon Kitula ): Mheshimiwa S pika tukiweza kuzungumza kweli ni 
kwamba nafikiri ningeweza kuongea kama Mheshimiwa Mukono  angeweza kunis ikia; 
Mheshimiwa Shebe Athman angeweza kunis ikia, lakini naona  anaweza kuzuru sehemu 
nyen gine. K usema kweli asilimia 90 za H oja na vilevile taarifa mbalimbali zinahusu idara ya 
Uchukuzi,  kwa hivyo kupitia kiti changu , kupitia kiti cha Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  
na vilevile kwa ushauri na M wenyekiti wa chama ni bora za idi kupitia pia kiti chako cha 
Spika tuweze kuwa na mkao baina ya sisi W aheshimiwa wote pamoja na idara ya Uchukuzi  
inayohusika na idara ile ili hizi changamoto hoja ndogo ndogo kama hizi ziweze kuhakikish a 
zimepatiwa kipao mbele  zaidi  maana tangu tuingie katika B unge hili as ilimia 90 inahusiana 
na idara hii . Hivyo basi  tungependekeza kwamba kupitia kiti cha  Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi 
Bungeni na M wenyekiti wetu tuweze kua na mkao huu, a hsante sana M heshimiwa.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon . Mohamed Moha med.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri kwenye mambo haya hivi sasa 
yanavy oendelea kuna K amati ya disaster  na kuna sheria y a disaster  na nafikiri disaster  ni 
wanachama  wa executive  karibu wote;  ikiwa tutapata ruhusa ya  Nyumba hii tuwaite kwa 
haraka vil e inavyowezekana kuzungumza nao ili waweze kuhudumia raia wa Mombasa ... 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Na kwa sababu disaster  hua kwa mujibu wa sheria ya PFM inasema kuwa asilimia 
mbili ya audited accounts  za Kaunti  pesa zile zinaweza kutumika k ushughulikia majanga,  
kwa hi vyo nafikiri itakuwa ni jambo la usawa kuwa sisi tutakutana na wao alafu tuangalie 
tutaweza kufanya nini.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Moham ed Hatimy but Hon . Moha med 
Hatimy I think you are not getting it right , you see the transport and inf rastructure is very 
clear M embers are complaining  about the drainage system here  so that lies with the Transport 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 30 Minister himself and his ministry so let u s not just move balls , keep on moving to the other 
side. T his th ing and all other issues which M ember s are complaining about  in this House  is 
about the transport ministry, so let  us call a spade a spade and let u s not stand  here to start 
defending other Members. W e are here people are complaining about that transport ministry , 
let u s look at it, let  us ca ll Hon. Chairperson for Committee, call your T ransport CEC or 
whoever is in  charge l et him have a meeting with the M embers here and know where is the 
problem, no one is special here there a re procedures to follow if the M embers are not happy 
we cannot ever y time keep on blaming Hon . Prischillah Mumba here every time we are 
giving her statement every now and then and she does  not even know what to reply . So please 
Hon. Members let  us follow the right procedures we have seen in the national go vernment 
and the  issues, those M inisters , those PSs have been called to answer those questions , they 
have been called t o the C ommittee so no one is special here let him be called , let the C hief 
Officers be called and answer those questions directly to the Hon . Members and  the other 
Members can be invited to that C ommittee . Yes Hon . Mohamed?    
 
 Hon.   Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sikusimama hapa kum tetea mtu 
yeyote atakae kuitwa am uite, Kamati i muite wamtakae mimi nazungumza juu ya hivi sasa 
mambo yanavyoendelea , kwa hivi sasa vile mambo Mwakirunge hawana  miundo  misingi ya 
maji taka .... 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Mwakirunge wana shida ya mabarabara that's what Hon . 
Feddis Salama was saying.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Lakini kwa  hivi sasa twazungumz ia Mombasa  kwa ujumla, 
miundo misingi ya maji taka  Mombasa sio Mombasa peke e yake ; kuna mambo mengi , kuna 
watu ambao manyumba yao wamejaliwa na maji kuna  sehemu Mheshimiwa S pika ambayo ... 
na hi ki kitengo  hiyo inayozungumzwa majanga  ndio wenye kuangalia hii ha li ilivyo sasa 
ndani ya Mombasa m ambo ya mvua na kuangalia watajirekebisha vipi ili kusaidia watu hao 
wengine waitwe aitwe baba ; aitwe mama , aitwe nyanya , aitwe mtoto ye yote aitwe aje hapa 
sikatai kuwa M heshimiwa Spika lakini ile hali vile ilivyo hivi sasa ni kubaya Mombasa , ni 
lazima tuangalie tutaweza kusaidia vipi watu wetu wale wengine hata kam a ni kesho mimi 
nakubaliana na M heshimiwa hata kama ni kesho tuangalieni tutawasaidia vipi watu wetu, 
wale wa miundo misingi  wataka kuitwa waitwe waje wajibu K amat i ifanye kazi yake lakini 
mimi nasema hivi sasa mambo vile yalivyo majanga,  kuna Kamati inayoshughulikia majanga 
kila mmoja...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Hon. Hatimy is there a C ommittee already for disaster 
now?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes there is . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Maybe you can share with us the Members of that 
Committee because am sure all the M embers here don't even know ; is there any other 
Member who knows about that C ommi ttee of D isaster? Maybe you can share with us?  
 
October 2 5, 2018                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 31  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Mheshimiwa Spika Kamati ya kushughulikia majanga  
ilichaguliwa na Mwenyekiti  ni huyo  huyo una yemtaja kwa kusema kuwa ndie W aziri wa 
Kitengo, ni W aziri wa  miundo misingi  lakini ni K amati ambayo imetengezwa tuko na  sheria  
yetu sisi ya kushughulikia hali za dharura na majanga ije tujue kama iko na kama hakuna 
hakuna kwa sababu sasa kila kitengo  kina mpiga mwenzie mpira . Ukienda huku wa ambiwa 
ni yule ukienda kule waambiwa ni huyu , twataka kujua ile kweli G avana ali teua Kamati  ya 
kushughuliki a majanga  wafanya nini hii Kamati  ili hawa watu wetu tupate kuwasaidia.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Hatimy on the same note the Committee of 
Disaster is normally a temporary C ommittee or it  is permanent?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Permanent.  
 
 The Speak er (Hon. Khatri) : It is permanent y eah?! So whenever there is disaster they 
are responsible for that? Yes , so again it is the same person I mean it is the same department 
we can say so , Hon. Prischillah Mumba please I think everyone had the warnings one we ek 
before we knew that these rains were coming ; we knew very clear ly that there were going to 
be heavy rains . 
 It was everywhere in the social media , everywhere so am sure that that the Disaster 
Committee must have sat down or because if you can see today while I was driving to the 
office all over Mombasa was flooded by water and luckily my car was a Prado ; was a four 
wheel drive so I was feeling sorry even for the other residents , you know with the small cars 
and am sure they cannot pass through those road s and I was not seeing any one from th e 
executive or anyone from the C ounty trying to open those drainage system s. So pleas e Hon. 
Prischillah this thing i s an emergency issue , speak to the M ember of that dis aster team and I 
think all you M embers have your Whatsapp group whereby you can share with the Members 
or maybe ask the C hairperson for that Disaster C ommittee to give you the numbers whereby 
the other Hon . Members can call if they have a proble m then you can share it in the 
Whatsapp group . Yes thank you  Hon. Members, Yes Clerk ? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this House shall stand adjourned until Tuesday 30th of October , 2018 
at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 3: 45p.m. 
 
 
  
 
 