August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1                                MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Tuesday, 23rd August 2016  
The House  met at 2.35pm.  
(Hon. Temporary Speaker (Mr. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Yes Clerk. 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CH AIR 
       Hon.  Members , today we are privileged as the Mombasa County A ssembly ; we have visitors 
from Mvita S ub-county.  
       This is an Assembly, the C hildren’s Assembly from the Sub-county Mvita constituency, and 
I take this opportunity as it is an A ssembly of Hon.  Members  and acknowledge the presence and 
Hon.  Members  in the public gallery, when you hear your name just stand and bow. We have;  
1. Emmanuel Ndambi   Governor  
2. Salma Fadhil   Deputy Governor  
3. Sofia Mohamed   Speaker  
4. Judge Makusanya   Deputy Speaker  
5. Salma Salim   Clerk  
6. Issa Ibrahim    Deputy Clerk  
7. Silvia Awour   Sergeant At Arms 
8. Felix Muhatia   Member  
9. Derrick Mungai   Member  
10. Cosmas Mwaka   Member  
11. David  Habib Hamton  Member  
12. Zulekha Juma Bakari  Member  
13. Felicity Muth oni Ngatia  Member  
14. Esther Robina Kwamboka Member  
15. Purity Kavutha   Member  
16. Zedrick Ali   Member  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 17. Dennis Ilondaga    Member  
18. Victor Akoyo    Member  
19. Erick Muthoka    Member  
20. Michael Kiprono    Member  
21. Faith Mwikali    Member  
22. Gladys Mwik ali   Member  
23. Margaret Mbinya    Member  
24. Elizabeth Njeri    Member  
25. Catherine Atieno    Member  
26. Tersa Onsare    Member  
27. Erick Kuria    Member  
28. Nahason Andoo    Member  
29. Yvonne Akembi    Member  
30. Nelly     '' 
31. Jane  
32. Lilian  
33. Gilbert Mw akio 
34. Elijah Mbarouk  
35. Mitchell Bahati  
36. Assum pta Njeri  
37. Sofia Ondolo  
38. Zamzam Ibrahim  
39. Sume iya Abdulkadir  
40. Shekha Abubakar  
41. Maryam Jillo  
42. Firdaus Ahmed  
43. Aisha Fuad  
44. Nuru Hassan  
45. Hadija Athman     '' 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3        Those are M ember s from the Children’s A ssembly from Mvita Sub-county ; before we 
proceed I will allow any member from Mvita constituency to at least acknowledge those Hon.  
Members from your constituency, yes Hon. Saad.  
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mr . Speaker it’s always a pleasure to have 
our young upcoming leaders visit this Hon.  Assembly and being part of the Mvita fraternity, I 
would like to take this wonderful opportunity  to welcome you all to Mombasa County A ssembly, 
feel at home make sure that this is a learning process that will eventually give you the 
opportunity to serve this country in the near future . Thank you God bless you all.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Thank you Hon. Saad . Hon. Simi nyu. 
(Applause)  
       Hon. Simi nyu:  Mr. Speaker I am very happy to have these M embers  and they know they 
are M ember representatives of the ward s. Hon.  members Mr. Speaker I would like to welcome 
the G overnor, plus the Deputy G overnor and his Hon.  Members … 
(Applause)  
       Because  Mr. Speaker the future  lies on their hands, as they study , it is going to  help them be  
better  leaders in the future.  I take this opportunity to welcome them all thank you M r. Speaker 
sir. 
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: I also take this opportunity to the Leader of M ajority, to at least 
have a word to the Hon.  Members . 
       Leader of Majority (Hon. H amisi Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this 
opportunity.  I am very happy to see that we have the full House  of the  Assembly of Mvita 
constituency, mine Mr. S peaker I would like to know, in fact you have mentioned the Deputy 
Governor, it is Salma Fadhili, and Mr. Speaker I know you are Hon. Fadhili, so we don’t know 
whether she is your daughter or….  
(Laughter and applause ) 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4        Am very happy Mr. Speaker even if she is your daughter then let her keep up … 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Thank you Leader of M ajority, our Hon.  Members I have used 
Standing order number one, to give you that opportunity to at least say something to the Hon.  
Members in  the public gall ery. 
       So Hon.  Members y ou are welcomed to the Mombasa County A ssembly, and I wish you 
well in whatever, what is it Hon. Saad, Hon.  Saad in fact you are out of order, yes C lerk let ’s 
proceed.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Yes Leader of M ajority . 
       Lead er of Majority (Hon. Hamisi Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker, for giving me this 
opportu nity, I would like to move the Notice of M otion;  
       That, this Assembly adopts the report on benefit of Kenya Ports Authority to Mombasa 
County. Thank you Mr. Speaker  sir. 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Yes clerk . 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
REHABILITATION AND EMPOWERMENT OF COMMERCIAL SEX WORKERS 
WITHIN THE COUNTY  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Saad Faraj.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Thank you very much once again Mr. Sp eaker. The N otice of M otion that I am 
presenting to this House  is on Rehabilitation and empowerment of commercial sex workers 
within the County. Mr. Speaker I beg to give a Notice of M otion;  
       That aware that Mombasa County  is a tourist hub and a metropolitan cit y hence it attracts 
many investors and people.  
       Further aware that Mombasa is a religious town with majority of its residents professing the 
Islamic and Christian faiths;  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5        Concerned that the metropolitan nature of Mombasa has attracted vices such as prostitution 
which are against both the culture of the indigenous Mombasa residents, religion and form of 
public nuisance;  
       Noting that most of the youth engage in prostitution for lack of employability skills and/ or 
employment;  
I urge this Assembly to resolve that;  
 The C ounty government through the department of Youth, Gender and Sports in 
conjunction with the department of I nspectorate to put up measures to remove the 
commercial sex workers from the streets of Mombasa and to provide them wi th 
counseling;  
 The department of Youth Gender and Sports to then rehabilitate the commercial sex 
workers by providing them with technical skills where they have none and assist them in 
securing gainful employment;  
 The department of Youth, Gender and Sports  to also facilitate the rehabilitated 
commercial sex workers with start -up capital to start small legitimate business in order to 
rid Mombasa of prostitution  
       Mr. Speaker I would also like to take this opportunity to seek leave of this House  so that we 
can liberate on this very crucial motion , thank you  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Yes C lerk. 
MOTION  
       Hon. Khamisi Musa Mwidani.  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Hamisi Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker,  now let me move for 
the motion  that this Assem bly adopts the report on benefit of Kenya Po rts Authority to Mombasa 
County under the Ad hoc committee.  
       Mr. Speaker before I move to the report, I would like Hon. Saad to second my motion.  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6        Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker sir I ra ise to second the M otion of the report presented by Hon. 
Khamisi Mwidani.   
(Question proposed)  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: The M otion has got a seconder . I’ll propose a question that a 
motion  by Hon. Khamisi Mwidani under Benefits of Kenya Ports Authority t o Mombasa C ounty 
be debated in this House .  
(Question put and agreed to)  
       Yes?  
       Leader of Majority (Hon. Hamisi Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker , report on benefit of K enya Ports  to Mombasa County . 
(Leader of Majority  (Hon. Hamisi Mwidani ) read Report)  
Report on Benefits of KPA to Mombasa County  
1. Executive summary  
       This is a report of the findings of the committee of Ad hoc following a statement raised by a 
Member of the County Assembly and ruling by Hon.  Speaker on 27th July 2016 a t 2.30 pm that a 
site visit to the Kenya Port Authority  be undertaken and a report of the same be tabled.  
       The mandate of the site visit was to among others seek an audience with the KPA 
Management with  a view to determine the following main issues ; 
i. Benefit of Kenya Port Authority (KPA) to Mombasa County.  
ii. Awareness of ongoing Kenya Port Authority Projects  
2. Introduction  
The Committee on Ad Hoc was created pursuant to the ruling of the Hon. Speaker in regard 
to the statement raised by a Member of th e County Assembly on benefit of Kenya Ports 
Authority (KPA) to Mombasa County, specifically from the financial year 2013/2014.  
 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7 It is mandated to provide clear guidance on which way Mombasa County benefited from 
KPA since the new political dispensation.  
       It is pursuant to these provisions that Members of the Committee on Ad Hoc undertook the 
site visit on 28th July 2016 with a view to make findings, observations and make necessary 
recommendations to the House  as directed.  
3. Findings  
       The commi ttees embarked on the site visit on 28th July, 2016 from 9.00am and met with the 
Kenya Port Authority officials at their Boardroom.  
       The Committee members had fruitful discussions with the officials, and presented a list of 
projects under their Corpo rate Social Responsibility (CSR) projects in Mombasa County as 
listed;  
CSR  PROJECTS IN MOMBASA BY KPA  
 
 INSTITUTION  PROJECT 
DONE  LOCATION  AMOUNT/Ksh s 
1 Uhuru gardens along 
Moi avenue  Rehabilitation 
and 
maintenance of 
Uhuru gardens  Mombasa 
CBD  Spent 7 million on initial 
rehabilitation and annual 
maintenance expenses of 
Kshs 300,000 for the past 
10 years  
2 Fish market  Carried out 
Civil works 
and purchase of 
cooling 
machines  Old port , mji 
wa kale  21,000,000  
3 Coast general hospital  Donation of 
ICU machines  Makadara  2,431,360  
4 Pwani school for Classroom  Bombolulu   
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8 Physical handicapped  
5 Kadzandani primary 
school  Four 
classrooms  Bamburi  5,782908.88  
6 Salvation army, Likoni 
school for the blind  Purchase and 
installation of 
solar backup 
system  Likoni  2,723490  
7 Changamwe 
constituency  Donation of 30 
computers  Changamwe   
8 Mama Ngina Girls, 
Mbaraki Girls,  
Liwatoni Primary 
School,  
Mbheni School,  
Tudor Secondary,  
Shimo La Tewa 
Secondary  
SOS  Hermaine School,  
Sheikh Zayed 
orphanage  
  Donation of 80 
computers  Mombasa 
county   
9 Jomvu High School, 
Mwijabu Secondary, 
Changamwe Secondary  Enlisted for 
upcoming  
Donation of 21 
computers  Changamwe   
10  Majaoni primary school  4 Classroom  Majaoni   
 
11 Port Ritz school for the 
handicap ped Poultry House  Port Ritz  Over 4,000,000  
12 APDK  Rehabilitation Port Ritzy  5,704,569  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  9 of therapeutic 
swimming pool  
13 Tom Mboya School for 
children with cerebral 
palsy  Donation 43 
normal and 
special wheel 
chairs  Tononoka  500,000  
14 Operation ear dro p 
Kenya  Medical camp  Mombasa 
County  530,000  
15 Fishing community  Four boats for 
the fishing 
community 
after the 
dredging  Mombasa 
county  70,000,000  
16 The Light  House  for 
Christ Eye Centre  Eye camp  Bamburi  150,000  
17 Swahili cultural center 
in par tnership with 
national museums of 
Kenya   Ongoing talks 
to take up 
landscaping 
works at the IT 
hub  Pandya  Approx. 30,000,000  
 
 The KPA officials led by Mr. Bernard Osero - Head of Corporate Affairs informed the 
members that their CSR programme is not pol itically driven and only responds to urgent 
societal needs, in all parts of the region.  
 He also informed members that consideration for sponsorship is acted upon after they 
receive requests from leaders from Mombasa and other Counties in the coast region o r 
directly from the institutions.  
 Mr Osero said they usually receive very few sponsorship requests, especially from 
leaders of Mombasa County despite having the institution domiciled in Mombasa.  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
10  He said that although KPA has no clear CSR policy, it current ly has an open door policy 
and would accommodate engagements with the County leadership in areas of 
opportunities for CSR support.  
 That the institution spends about shs 30 million annually towards their CSR programme, 
specifically towards education and hea lth projects.  
 That the KPA will henceforth work with County leaders in identification of opportunity 
areas for CSR interventions.  
4. Committee observations  
 The KPA list of projects did not give a breakdown of the financial year in which they 
were undertake n, hence not giving a clear picture of the impact the organization has had 
since devolution.  
 The KPA management has been working directly with some of the institutions benefitting 
from CSR projects and by passing grassroots’ leaders such as the Member of C ounty 
Assembly (MCA).  
5. Conclusion  
 The Clerk should therefore urgently write to the KPA management to request that the list 
of projects should clearly indicate which financial years they were undertaken.  
 That the Committee should visit some of the identi fied projects on the ground with a 
view to ascertain their existence and impact, if any to the beneficiary communities.  
1. Recommendations  
 The Committee should request the House  for more time to await the official response 
from KPA on the timelines for the CS R projects.  
 The Committee should seek to find out from other corporate institutions domiciled in 
Mombasa on their CSR presence in the County.  
  I think Mr. Speaker thank you for giving me time to bring this report on board and the issue of 
the motion, than k you.  
              Hon. Temporary Speaker: Thank you Leader of Majority, I had given you an 
opportunity to bring the report and the motion in this House  but it seems the report is incomplete 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
11 because we heard from you that the process that we are going to  take you are asking yourselves 
very many questions i heard you raising an issue of the Kenya Ports Authority not indicating the 
financial year’s and the Ad hoc committee to visit the sites so that to identify if what is on the 
paper is actual on the groun d. 
       So for today i will not allow any other member to debate on this report but in the House  
Business Committee we shall accord another day but what we want is a complete report Hon. 
Leader of Majority for the benefit of the House  and Mombasa residen ts at large.  
       So Clerk take note that the report cannot be debated today.  
       Hon. Leader of Majority (Mr. Mwidani):  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
 (Interruption)  
       Hon. Faraj:   Mr. Speaker sir.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Yes Ho n. Saad.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Mr. Speaker earlier on when i was reading my Notice of Motion I had 
requested for leave so that this Motion can be deliberated, so I don't know whether or not I have 
been allowed to move the motion so that it can be deliberated in this House , thank you.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon Saad, proceed.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, i would like to move the following motion 
for the rehabilitation and empowerment of commercial sex workers within the Cou nty and i 
would call upon Hon. Patrick Siminyu to second me on this motion.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:   Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, the Hon. Member has not taken us through 
the Motion so we don't know what Hon. Siminyu is going to second.  
       Hon. Tempor ary Speaker: The Notice of Motion has been already tabled so first we 
propose a question then Hon. Members will give their input on this Motion so the Motion having 
got a seconder I will propose a question that the motion be deliberated in this House . 
(Que stion put and agreed)  
       Yes Hon Saad.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, the issue at hand might sound a little bit controversial; 
it is for the good of this County and our people.  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
12        Mr. Speaker Mombasa has its heritage and culture and the  fact that these people of 
Mombasa are spiritually inclined to their religious Islamic and Christianity faith, what is 
happening on our roads at night is a matter that needs to get our attention as a House . 
       It is very crucial and a few of those peop le that we have been able to interact with have been 
complaining that it is because of lack of proper jobs, employment which causes them to go to the 
streets and sell their bodies, and i feel Mr. Speaker if we come up with a proper mechanism plan 
we will b e able to address this issue in a manner that is applicable.  
       I want to reiterate the fact that Mr. Speaker those who are working outside there are not 
there out of their own volition but they are there because of the problems that they  are facing 
day to day; they have decided to take that route which is not applicable in any arrangement.  
       Mr. Speaker i therefore insist the process we are going to take for this particular exercise 
should be done in a manner that is applicable to the law and we don’t want these people to be 
arrested that should be very clear we want them to be taken away from the roads and be 
rehabilitated to be given an opportunity to start a new life Mr Speaker. I rest my case, thank you.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Yes Hon Kibwana.  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, this Motion that has been brought by my 
brother Hon. Saad is lacking some measures...  
(Applause)  
       That would have helped the people on the streets.  
       Hon. Speaker if I can just point o ut that, to be clear on record as opposing this motion...  
(Applause)  
       If you look at the Motion that is telling us that the prostitutes should be removed I believe 
there are mechanisms for rehabilitation and giving them money…  
(Interruption)  
       Hon. Faraj:  Point of information.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Who do you want to inform?  
       Hon. Faraj:  The House . 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Proceed.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Mr Speaker I think the fact is very clear that the Member is introducing a n ew 
meaning to what I have requested in my prayers.  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
13        This is not a matter that can create differences between us but my aim is to turn around the 
livelihood of the people who are wasting their lives on the streets Mr Speaker and this should 
very clea r to everybody, we want to rehabilitate their livelihoods, we want to take them from 
where they are right now to be a better person, a better personality Mr. Speaker, thank you.  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Mr Speaker, when we look at the Motion w hen we look 
at number one from analysis, the removal, so actually the number three should be number one 
then number two provide them with technical skills rather than saying we remove them then 
provide them with skills and capital.  
       I think the first  thing that is going to happen we will remove prostitutes and provide them 
with skills of which they will be against, mine is to say these are people they are human beings 
that are earning a living we should accept it is happening, even in developed countr ies.    
       Hon. Speaker even when you go to Britain which is a developed country you will find a 
prostitute there, if you go to USA they are there if we want to remove these prostitutes let’s 
provide them with jobs first before thinking of removing the m, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: Hon. Mary.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, na nimesimama hapa kupinga mjadala 
huu, napinga kwa sababu zinazofaa.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika hatuwezi kuambiwa kuwa utaenda  barabarani kule watu wamesimama 
uende ukatoe wale ambao ni wafanyi biashara ama jina ambalo halifai wale ambao ni Malaya.  
       Kule barabarani utatafautisha vipi huyu ni malaya huyu si malaya, hapa tukiwa tumekubali 
mjadala huu upite katika hili Bunge t utakua tunakosea wengine haki zao Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Hata utafiti inatutolea vizuri sana kuwa hata wale ambao wanafanya ile biashara ya kuuza 
miili yao ndio hata hawana waume Mheshimiwa, hata wale ambao wanawaendea hawa 
tukiwatoa...  
(Interruption)  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker: You are on a point of order or point of information?  
       Hon. Faraj:  Point of information , na tukizungumzia utafiti ni lazima atupatie uthibitisho 
aliepanga huo utafiti ni nani ulifanywa mwaka gani, ulifanyika sehemu gani n a wale ambao 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
14 walikuwa wamelengwa wametoka sehemu gani na sehemu gani ni kuzungumzia utafiti wa 
mazungumzo.  
       Hili ni Jumba na sheria na nidhamu tunaomba kama umezungumza utafiti basi tufahamishe 
nani amefanya utafiti huo, ahsante sana.  
        Hon. Te mporary Speaker: Hon. Saad as the mover of the Motion just let Hon. Members 
to contribute on the Motion.  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:   Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika utafiti ulifanywa na 
watu wa KEMRI na hivi tunavyoongea wale wote ambao wanafanya  biashara hii ya kuuza miili 
yao kuna dawa ambayo hata wanapewa kutoka katika idara ya afya kutoka sehemu ya HIV na 
wanajipima kila mara na wako vizuri.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika tukisema kuwa hawa ambae ni watu wazima na akili zao tena ni wasomi 
amba o wanaf anya biashara hii tukisema tuwatoe pale barabarani ama zile imesemekana hapa 
idadi ya watoto wetu itazidi watazidi kulawitiwa kwa sababu wale watu ambae wanapenda 
kulawiti watoto na kubaka watakua hawana mahali pa kwenda Mheshimiwa wanakuwa 
wanaharibu wato to. 
       Naendelea kupinga huu mjadala kuwa ile biashara iendelee ndio wale ambao wanaendelea 
kubaka watoto wasibake watoto na kuwe kuna mahali ambapo wanaweza kwenda kupata watu 
ambao wanaweza kustarehe nao, ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Hon. Tempora ry Speaker: Hon Siminyu . 
       Hon. Siminyu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity, this is a sensitive 
matter that  is going to affect our sisters.  
       The mover of this M otion had two intentions and what I hear from this House  there are  some 
amendments that are  required to be placed and the M otion was brought in the House  so that it 
can be discussed and amendments be proposed Mr. S peaker .  
       What I want to tell the House  is that some enter into this business becau se they have no 
means and each M ember of the County A ssembly come with a way through department of sports 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
15 plus trade which we allocate money so that we assist our  sisters  to help our sisters to come the 
right way.  
       If it mean s consolation but saying that we don’t care  it will be another disaster so that we 
can have a progressing Mombasa and I urge members if there is amendment they should not just 
go against the M otion ; if they have amendment they s hould put forward so that this M otion can 
help Mombasa people and our w omen who find themselves in the streets not because they like 
because of the di fficulties in life challenges  who find themselves in the streets because of 
difficulties and challenges that life brings Mr. Speaker I really support with amendments and the 
honorable member here agrees. Thank you.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Hon. Hatimy.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika , hili ni jambo ambalo linaniudhi sana 
Mheshimiwa  Spika . 
       Nasimama mbele ya Nyumba hii kuunga mkono mjadala huu na s ababu zangu ni  Kifungu  
153 na 154 ya sheria za Kenya  code inazuia watu wanaorandaranda kufanya umalaya ndani ya 
….katiba kama mtu anataka kufanya kazi kaa pale unakaa kwenye bar, kwenye danguro tafuta 
mahali ukae . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika  ni kinyume cha she ria kwa hawa wanaoranda randa kufanya kazi hii kwa 
hivyo jambo hili sisi twasema hawa wafanyi kazi wetu ni lazima wawe wan afanya kazi vile 
inavyotakikana na sisi hatuwezi kwenda kushika kwa sababu sheria tayari iko inakataza 
mwanamme na mwanamke . 
       Hii sheria a mbayo nimesema imekataza mwanam me na mwanamke kurandaranda kufanya 
hiyo kazi ambayo tunazungumza sisi ikiwa tutapitisha m swada  huu ni kuhakikisha kuwa wale 
tuliwapatia kazi ya kufanya iwe tutawa lazimisha  wafanya kazi vile inavyotakikana kama sher ia 
vile ilivyosema.  Ahsante sana.  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Yes Hon . Fatma?  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
16        Hon.  Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante Spika  kwa kunipa fursa hii ; kwanza kabisa kabla 
sijazungumza ningependa kuambia Jumba  hili kwamba hakuna kitu kizuri kama kuwa na  imani 
ya dini Mheshimiwa  Spika.  
       Sisi leo ni viongozi na kesho tutakwenda mbele za haki na Mungu  atatuuliza uongozi wetu 
tuliutumia namna gani ; kama unavyojua ndani ya  dini zote nazungumzia dini ya K iislamu na 
Kikristo , katika dini hizo hakuna mahal i imeandikwa katika Biblia ama katika Quran kwamba 
uasherati unafaa , ni watu tu wanafanya  katika vichwa zao na jambo la kusikitisha kama 
Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Afya  mwenzangu Mheshimiwa  Kibwana  anaweza kuunga mkono 
mjadala huu Mheshimiwa  Spika  mimi naunga  mkono,  ni jambo la  kusikitisha..  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker:  Address the S peaker.  
       Hon. Fatuma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika  ni jambo la  kusikitisha sana kama Mwenyekiti 
wa Afya an aweza kupinga mjadala huu kama M wenyekiti wa Afya na kam a unavyojua ni 
madhara mengi yanat okea kutokana na u asherati . 
       Mimi ningeo mba N yumba hii kwa kumuogopa Mwenyezi  Mungu  iweze kuunga mkono 
mjadala huu na sheria zichukuliwe mara moja kwa wale watu wanao  randa  randa na kufanya 
uasherati Mheshimiwa  Spika . Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika .  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Yes Hon . Wangudi?  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa fursa hii ili niweze kuchangia swal a 
ambalo limefikishwa mbele ya Nyumba hili na Mheshimiwa  mtumishi wa Tononoka . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika  naweza sema ni  mswada mzuri ambao ni sharti tuwe tunazingatia lakini 
kidogo mimi natofautiana na ombi ambalo  Mheshimiwa  alikuwa anaomba yaweze kutekelezwa . 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  kabla sijaendel ea ningependa kufahamisha Jumba  hili kurekebisha hao 
makahaba itakuwa ni jambo gumu ; ni swala ambalo ni gumu hivi sasa tunapojadili hili jambo 
huwezi ukajua kahaba is ipokuwa kama umepata fursa ya kutembea na yeye…  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
17 (Applause ) 
       Mtu hawezi kumtambua itakuwa ni ngumu kwa hivyo tutakapopitisha mswada huu 
Mheshimiwa  Spika  watakao umia ni tofauti  na namna tulivyonuia mswada huu . 
       Hilo ni swala sisi sharti tunazingatia tunapojadili mswada huu na Mheshimiwa  Spika  
kutokana na maombi ya Mheshimiwa  Saad  ya kuwa hawa watu waweze kure kebishwa  hawa 
watu wanapofanya vile si kuwa maskin i; wale  walio wasomi wanasema it’s a lifestyle . 
       Ile ni maisha wameamua wataishi vile lakini baadhi yao hata tutakap oenda mashinani 
ukitaka kuwatofa utisha utapata  ya kwamba wengi ni wenye yale magari yameandikwa mia ; mtu 
ana gari zake mbili tatu lakini usiku anatokea pale kwa barabara . 
       Mtu kama  yule hahitaji ule msaada tunapanga hapa kama Bunge  Mheshimiwa  Spika ; ni 
swala a mbalo lazima tuketi chini kama Nyumba tutafute mbinu mwafaka ya ku lishughulikia  nalo 
jambo hili , tutakapo fanya hiv yo tutapata fursa ya kuiga katika nchi zingine na sheria ambazo 
zinalinda maswala kama haya tutakapo enda kinyume na sheria tutas htakiwa kortini . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika  si swala la kukimbilia kwa mfano kuna nchi ambazo mambo haya 
yanaruhusiwa mradi wewe u we hutegemei zile pesa zilizo patikana katika na swala hilo 
Mheshimiwa  ni mambo ambayo inahitaji  kuzingatiwa . 
       Ukitazama Mheshimiwa  ombi la kwanza ni ombi ambalo linaweza tekelezwa hata leo lakini 
haitatusaidia kwa sababu wengi ni watu watakao shikiwa , si watu tulikuwa tu mewalenga 
ikiwezekana wakati hii department  vijana jinsia na michezo ishirikiane na kitengo chetu  cha 
Inspectorate  wachukulie swala hili removal of the sex workers  linaweza kufanyika lakini 
halitaleta manufaa . 
       Ukitazama swala hili Mheshimiwa  Spika  na la ta tu ni swala halibadiliki hivi sasa tuko katika 
awamu ya kwanza ya bajeti  hata hatujapata senti katika bajeti  hii na kulingana na sheria za 
Bunge  mswada una miezi sita . 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
18        Naomba Nyumba hii iwapo tutapitisha mswada huu linazingatiwa katika bajeti  inayokuja 
hivi sasa ni vigumu kutekeleza kutokana na bajeti  na vile hali ilivyo naomba kumalizia hapo 
Mheshimiwa  Spika . Ahsante sana.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Hon. Dharwesh.  
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Zainab  Said : Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika , mimi naunga mkono hoja hii 
iliyoletwa na Mheshimiwa  Saad ; sisi hatuwez i kupitisha ukahaba itakuwa ni kinyume cha sheria  
kwa sababu kuna watoto wa skuli wako hapo juu na hapo kuna skuli wakisikia kama haya 
mambo ni sawa basi mtu akimaliza skuli akikosa kazi  ataona afanye ukahaba . 
       Kwa hivyo ukahaba umepingwa kila mahali ikiwa nchi za nje zimepitisha basi wana  mambo 
yao ambayo w anaw eza kufanya na si chochote kwao , lakini kwa sisi twamcha Mungu  sisi 
Waislamu na ninasema itakuaje mtu kujua kahaba , kahaba anavyo vaa inajulikana vile mwendo 
wake unakaa inajulikana na vitendo vyake pia an avyofanya vyajulikana .  
       Kwa hivyo hii naipinga kabisa ukahaba usiendelee , naunga mkono ukahaba usiendelee.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Hon. Maimuna?  
       Hon.  Leader of Minority (Ms.) Maimuna  Salim:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . Mimi 
naunga mkono mswada huu ulioletwa na Mheshimiwa  Saad Faraj kwa sababu tunaj ua ya 
kwamba sheria zetu mtoto ambaye ako chini ya miaka kumi na nane hafai kufanya jambo la 
ukahaba lakini kwa sababu imewachiliwa basi watoto wanaacha skuli wanaingia kwa ufuo wa 
bahari  wanaona hio ndio kazi ya kufaa . 
       Kwa hivyo hii tukiweza  kupitisha hizo ….kwa ku kaa mahali panapostahili watu 
….w akaweza kufanya kifahari si kufanya ambaye ni biashara  ya kuuza nguo . 
       Ndani ya mji wetu wa Mombasa watu wana heshima , watu wan aita watu kwa heshima, 
kutembea kwao ni  kwa heshima inashawishi hata watoto wadogo waone ya kwamba il e ni kazi 
halali , wanawacha shule wanaingia  kwa ufuo  wa bahari  na kufanya . 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
19        Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono ikiwezekana ipitishwe na iweze kufanyiwa kazi isaidie 
vizazi  vijavyo kwa sababu ya maradhi , kwa sababu  ya hali zao kwa sababu sisi kama sisi tukiwa 
kama wabunge hatut alinda haki zao baadaye watakuja lia na sisi na dini ya Kiislamu  na Kikristo .  
       Sisi kama waumini haijaturuhusu ya kwamba watoto wafanye ukahaba na hawa watoto 
kama wako na wazee wasemezane ili zisifanywe ndani ya nyumba mimi naunga mkono mjadala 
huu na naomba  ya kwamba ipitishwe na tuweze kufanya kazi isaidie vizazi vyetu.  
      Hon. Temporary Speaker : Yes Hon . Mwamassa . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Maimuna (Mwamassa):  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa kunipea nafsi hii ; 
mimi pia naunga kikamilifu hoja hii kuwa ukahaba ni lazima tuupige vita na tuhakikishe katik a 
mji wetu tumeukomesha kwa sababu sote twamcha Mungu , na kama tunamcha Mungu  kwa 
kweli Mwenyezi  Mungu  ndio aliotujalia tukafika hapa Bunge  hili na Mwenyezi  Mungu  akitujalia  
tuje mahali hapa leo tunapitisha mambo yaliyo  wazi kila kuk icha dhambi zaongezeka . 
       Ni mambo kama haya yanayofanywa kinyume cha sheria ; haramu ni haramu na haku na siku 
itakuwa halali enzi za Manabii ; enzi za Mtume kulikuwa na Sodom na Gomorra na tuliona hata 
vipi Mwenyezi  Mungu  aliwateremshia ….  
(Applause ) 
       Na neno litahifadhika kama  mzee wetu Mheshimiwa  Mohamed Hatimy  kila siku husema 
anavyosema kinachoandikwa huhifadhika na kilichozungumzwa hupotea lakini kile 
kimeandikwa tangu hatujazaliwa na mpaka sasa….  
(Applause ) 
       Kwa hivyo haina haja tuhalalishe kilichohalalishwa angalieni madaktari w ote ulimwengu 
mzima wasomi wote ulimwengu mzima wanashindwa  kupata dawa kwa kitu kisichokuwa na 
dawa ; ni kwamba kila siku twahalalisha haramu . 
       Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono jambo hili kwa dhati manake um ma unaa ngamia watoto 
wanabakia mayatima na twajua mabaya lak ini twayahalalisha kuwa mema , mimi naunga mkono 
na napinga ukahaba kikamilifu.  
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
20 (Applause ) 
(Loud consultations ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Hon. Members I may be f orced to throw you out of this Hon. 
House, if it is consulting just consult in a honorable manner . Yes Hon. Saad you can reply.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika  kwa fursa hii …  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Hon. Saad under Standing order 73 you started with English 
you are not supposed to change the language we are using either two languages Hon . Saad . 
       Hon. Faraj:  Mheshimiwa Spika  kulin gana…. 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : You started by using English, finish by the same language , 
Hon. Hatimy.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa  Spika  ameanza kwa  Kiswahili na hakuendelea 
akakaa wengine wakaongea kwa hivyo ana haki ya kuongea kwa lugha anay otaka.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : Hon. Hatimy I have ruled unde r Standing order 73 he will reply 
with the language that he started with , proceed Hon. Saad.  Yes proceed . 
       Hon.  Faraj: Mr Speaker Thank you once again for this opportunity, I am always delighted  
to speak in either of the languages, and I want to thank all the Members who have contributed to 
this Motion.  
       Mr Speaker some of the Members contributed and they aired their views , which  is accepted 
in any democratic environment.  
       Mr. Speaker s ome of the arguments that have come out of this deliberation is that people are 
referring Kenya and comparing it to other countries, and from what I have gathered is that they 
are comparing Kenya or Africa with Western countries Mr Speaker and a  most recent thing that 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
21 happened in America is that America have  passed a law which allows men to marry men and 
women to marry women and Mr . Speaker if we are to take this as an example where is th is 
country or county headed to ? 
       Mr. Speaker, perhaps we shoul d be looking into our culture, we should look at our heritage, 
where we have come from as Africans , as Muslims , as Christians , and that should be the  basis of 
our argument in this House. 
       Mr Speaker by c omparing us with all the other countries Mr . Speaker I t hink it is a very 
unfortunate fact that this Honorable House is being subjected to , and some of the Members also 
argue with regards to the budgetary allocation that has been allocated to the Youth, Gender and 
Sports . 
       Mr Speaker this money is available, the money has not been allocat ed to any youth groups, 
to any gender groups and Mr . Speaker we can ask for that piece of that cake so that it can be 
allocated to our dear sisters who are out there and our dear brothers who  are out there.  
       Mr Speaker it is crucial and it is very important that this County is guarded by the law but at 
the same time we should also be guarded by our spirituality , our religion , our religions those 
diverse religions which are in this co untry . 
       Mr. Speaker I want to take this opportunity once  again to thank each and every Member who 
supported and who opposed this Motion but call upon all Members to support this so that we can 
rehabilitate our people, we can give them a new life , a new lease of life so that they can now 
make it possible in whatever they do in this world. Thank you very much.  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Temporary Speaker : The matter  having been exhausted in this House, I stand to put a 
question that, the Motion on Rehabilitation and Em powerment of Commercial Sex Workers be 
adopted in this House and as the mo ver has put it plus some other Honorable members, we have 
seen that they are some budgetary implications in this issue . 
August  23, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  
22        I advice the Honorable House after putting this question to fi rst sit also with the Budget 
Committee to fast track on this matter.  
(Question put and agreed to. ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Hon. Members, the House hereby adjourns until the next sitting.  
The House rose at  3.42pm . 
 