October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 9th October, 2019  
The House met at 10:38a.m.   
 
(The Speaker ( Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri ): Hon.  Members  you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
STATE MENT  
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFR ASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . PRISCHILLA MUMBA ON THE QUALITY OF LIGHT  BULBS SUPPLIED TO TH E 
WARDS  
 
Yes Hon.  Prischilla Mumba , please r espond to the S tatement . 
 
Hon.  Mumba:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kulingana na swali lililoulizwa , 
nilizungumza na E ngineer na akaniambia kuwa  anataka afafanuli we zaidi  na mwenye aliuliza 
hili swali k wa sababu kama ni mambo ya mataa imekuwa mara  kwa mara nikileta  majibu yake , 
sasa haelewi haswa alinukuu a taka aelez we kivipi kiurefu ili aweze kumu eleza kwa ufasaha . 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you . Yes C lerk? Yes, Hon.  Faith?  
 
Hon.  Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am the one who brought the S tatement  and it 
was well stated, it  was about matter of substandard ligh ts which were installed in all W ards. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, C lerk, you have the copy of the S tatement , right?  
 
(Low consultations ) 
 
 Hon.  Prischilla I  do not know maybe did you have the  copy of the Statement from the 
Clerks?  

October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  
Hon.  Mumba: Kuletewa mimi Mheshimiwa Spika ?  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes, like the copy of the S tatement which the Honourable  
gave to this House , there was a S tatement which she wrote and she signed and gave to the House . 
   
Hon.  Mumba: Alipeana lakini haikuja kwangu m ikononi kwa sababu  Makarani  ruling  
huwa ikitoka hapa wao huandika barua  alafu inaenda kwa Wizara, sasa W izara itapokuwa 
inajibu ndio huwa mimi napata yale majibu niweze kui peana  katika N yumba hii . 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hiyo barua ulioandikia W izara uko nayo?  
 
Hon.  Mumba: Barua iko n a Makarani  bado si kuja nayo hapa , lakini mimi niliweza 
kuzungumza na Engineer mwenyewe kwenye simu , ili nikitaka majibu sasa hivyo ndio 
alinifafanunulia nikaweza kum uelewa kwa ufasaha . 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Ndio nasema Mheshimiwa labda ungekuwa uk o na hio 
barua uliandikia hiyo W izara ndio tujue yale anayoyasema Mheshimiwa ni yale mliyoyaandika 
ama Makarani  waliandika  mambo yao?  
 
Hon.  Mumba: Mheshimiwa Spika itab idi sasa nifuatilize kwa Makarani wa K amati nijue 
kama ni haya haya aliyoyasema , ama yaliandikwa  mengine ili aweze kufafanua  niweze kujibu 
katika N yumba hii tukufu  kuwa,  haya haya Mheshimiwa Faith aliyoyataka yajibiwe  ndio yale 
yale yaliandikwa kule ama y aliandikwa tu hii kulingana na vile Taarifa  saa hii inavyosema , 
yasem a tu status  na kulingana na Mheshimiwa Faith vile ame eleza, ameeleza kuwa anataka 
afafanunuliwe vile mataa yalivyo na uboreshaji wa mataa vile yalivyo  ili aweze ku elezwa , kwa 
sababu nikia ngali a hapa kulingana na vile imeu lizwa na vile alivyo simama Mheshimiwa Faith 
kuuliza ninaona ni vitu viwili tofauti.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : But this is just a topic hapa haiwezi kusema hii imewekwa 
katika  Order paper si lile swali , it’s just a topic . 
 
Hon.  Mumba:  Sasa yeye amesema ni sub-standard .  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Ama mko  nayo katika Vote book ? Kwa hio E ngineers 
wamejibu kukuandikia kuwa wanataka kuulizwa maswali zaidi , yaani hawajui ama ni simu ? 
  
Hon.  Mumba:  Nilizungumza naye kwa simu.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) :  Lakini s imu haisaidi i Mheshimiwa,  mawasiliano  lazima 
yafanywe , nyinyi mumewaandikia na wao wajibu;  wasema kuwa wanataka kufafanunuliwa zaidi 
tukianza mambo za simu, mambo ya urafiki, mambo y a hii si kazi, kazi ifanywe, barua 
munaandika wanajibu na ndio inakuja kwa Kamati na inaingia kwa hii Nyumba. Mambo ya s ijui 
kupigiana simu hio tuacheni , sisi tuko hapa kuhudumia watu wa Mombasa , hatuko hapa leo kuja 
kufurahi shana, ati sijui tunaanz a kubembelezana , kazi ifanywe ifanywe. Mhesh imiwa ameuliza 
swali iende huko ijibiwe kwa mawasiliano.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 Kama Karani  ameandika barua na wale wajibu waandike, mambo ya simu itakuwa si 
mzuri Mheshimiwa. Kwa hiyo tafadhali  na hili swala naona limekaa pia sana, nafikiri Taarifa  
ilikuja k itambo labda tukupa tie mda kama ... 
 
Hon.  Mumba:  Ningeomba Mheshimiwa Spika wasi wasi wangu hata ilipokuwa ndio 
nipige hio simu  ni kwa sababu nilipoingia asubuhi huwa nategemea nipewe nakala ya kuwa kuna 
majibu u meletewa , sasa nilipoona hakuna nakala ninayo pewa na Makarani  ndio mimi 
nikachukua ule wasi wasi wa kusema hebu n ipige pengine kuna nakala kule tayari i shawekwa 
lakini haijakuwa delivered  huku.  
Kwa hiyo  wasi wasi wangu ile kupiga ili nisikose jibu katika Nyumba hii sasa ndio 
nikatumia wakati wangu kupiga kutaka kujua , ndio akanieleza hivyo sasa nikasema ni bora nije 
nijieleze , kwa sababu imebidi pia mimi mara nyingi Mheshimiwa Spika nime kuwa nikitumia 
mda wangu sana nikikimbia mim i mwenyewe kwenda mpaka kwenye W izara, ambapo sielew i 
utekelezevu yaani shida inatokea wap i katika kutoka barua hapa kwenda kule na katika kujibiwa 
kutoka kule kuja hapa . Kuna shida f ulani hapa katikati ambay o mimi siwezi kueleza , kwa sababu 
barua huwa haziji kwa wakati , hata saa nyengine Mheshimiwa Spika utakut a barua yaingia sasa 
hivi na she ria inasema  mpaka kwanza nikae na K amati barua ikija .  
Sasa u nakuta Order paper  inaniambia nijibu hili swali na barua ndio imeingia sasa hivi  
sijakaa hata na K amati yangu , ambapo nikija hapa kwenye Nyumba ninakuwa nina jawabu 
ambalo hata K amati sijakaa nalo . Sasa pia ningeomba Mheshimiwa Spika kulingana na  hali 
ninavyoiona inavyoendelea , ninataka onyo kali itoke hapa , kupitia kwa M akarani  wetu waweze 
kufuatilizia haya mambo , sio tu kwa mimi kama Mwenyekiti wa Uchukuzi , kwa W izara zote 
maanake saa zengine tun apewa majibu kwa wakati mfupi sana , kwa mda  wa kuwa hatuwezi kaa 
na K amati zetu kuwaeleza na hatuwezi kuleta majibu katika N yumba hii . 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa . Mheshimiwa naf ikiri labda 
nitawapatia zile nguvu  zenu ambazo mko nazo , labda nyinyi wenyewe hamtaki kuzitu mia ama 
mwataka kujidharaulisha. K atiba iko wazi katima Article  195, “County Assemblies power  to 
summon  witnesses . A County Assembly  or any o f its cCommittees has power to summon  any  
person to appear before it for the purpose of  giving   evidence or providing information” ! Nguvu  
mko nayo , lakini sasa Mheshimiwa si kwa ubaya , najua saa zengine unapiga simu unataka 
kuharakisha lakini tumieni hizi nguvu  zenu mk o nazo na nyinyi leo mko hapa kushughulikia 
watu wa Mombasa na pia  Mwenyezi Mungu anawaangalia , either  mwataka k ufanya hili jambo 
ki haki ama  mwataka kufanya jambo kukaviana .  
Sasa hayo ni majukum u nyinyi wenyewe laki ni angalieni leo mko kesho ham ko, kwa hio  
ni majukumu mmepatiwa fanyeni kazi yenu na m ko na nguvu ziko wa zi Katiba hii inasema 195. 
Sasa sijui ni kitu gani ambacho kinawazungusha huku na huku, hili jambo limekaa sana zaidi ya 
mwezi mmoja nafikiri na ni jambo very sensitive , Members  have been complaining, Members  
have been coming to my office to complain  kuhus u hii mambo ya taa za barabarani , taa zinaenda 
zinawashwa sijui siku mbili zinazima , kwa hio tafadhalini  Mheshimiwa angalieni hili jambo 
muone vile mtaleta hio  Taarifa , so please two weeks ? Okay. Yes C lerk, next order?  
 
MOTION  
REVIEW OF COUNTY ASS EMBLY STA NDING ORDERS  
 
Yes Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri?  
 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I seek your guidance 
whether we should introduce the M otion or we proceed from where we left yesterday?  
 
(Low consultations ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri . I have been advised that it i s the 
resumption of the interrupted  business from yesterday, so Members  may contribute or maybe 
because other Members  were not here , I do not see any harm if you can read the M otion again.  
 
(Resumption of business  interrupted on 8th October, 2019)  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Most obliged Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion as amended.  
 
WHEREAS, Section 14(1)(a)  of the County Government Act, 2012  provides that a 
County Assembly may make  Standing Order s consistent with the Constitution and the 
Acts regulating procedures of the County Assembly;  
 
WHEREAS, the current Standing Orders now in use at the Coun ty Assembly were 
formerly in  use at the National Assembly and were to be used pursuant to Se ction 14(7) 
of the County  Government Act , 2012  as interim  Standing  Orders until the County 
Assembly makes its own Standing Orders;  
 
WHEREAS, after the County Assembly adopted the interim Standing Order in 2013, 
gaps, deficiencies and omissions have been ob served in the current Standing Orders 
which require fixing;  
 
WHEREAS, with the passage of time and usage there is need to review and fill the gaps, 
omissions and inadequacies in the current Standing Orders;  
 
NOW THEREFORE, the County Assembly of Mombasa he reby resolve as follows;  
 
1. THAT, the Committee of Rules and Procedures to undertake a review of the 
Standin g Orders to update them to incorporate best practices from the National Assembly 
and other jurisdictions;  
 
2. THAT, the C ommittee of Rules and Procedures  shall within 90 days of approval 
of this resolution table necessary amendments  to the Standing Orders in this County 
Assembly for consideration and approval;  
 
3. THAT, once amendment  are approved  by the County Assembly  the complete 
Standing Orders to be publ ished and ci rculated within 90 days thereof . 
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5 The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwamwiri . Hon.  Members  those  who did 
not contribute to the M otion can now make the ir contribution . Yes, Hon.  Mohamed Moha med?  
 
Hon.  Moha med Hati my: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika ukifanya 
maombi  yako kotini n a lile ombi  likionekana  lina mako sa, lile ombi  hutupiliwa mbali.  Kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama hapa kupinga hii Motion kwa njia vile imeletwa , ni 
kweli County Governm ent Act inazungumza haya maneno lakini ukiangalia hii Motion 
imezungumza juu ya County Government Act pek ee yake , haikufuatilia Kanuni za Bunge  
zasema nini ukitaka ku  amend  hii Kanuni ya Bunge . Mheshimiwa Spika angalia kifungu 235 
inasema nini .  
 
The Speak er (Hon.  Khatri) : Tusom ee labda Mheshimiwa . 
 
Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika 235, Amendment on the initiative  of a 
Member , not a C ommittee but a Member. A Member may with the support of ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Maybe Hon.  Hatimy ... maybe if you can start from the topic 
or from the amendment of S tanding orders.  
 
Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy:  Yes, Amendments  of S tanding orders . Mimi Mheshimiwa 
Spika mwanzo  kusema 234  mimi nimetegemea 235 lakini  234 pia n itasema , ’County Assembly 
Procedure and R ules Committee may at any time propose  amendments to these  Standing order s’. 
Hii Kamati  inam aanisha ... hii Kamati  wakati wowote inaweza kuleta mapendekezo  kurekebisha 
hizo Kanuni za Bunge lakini tu kienda kwenye Kanuni za Bunge nambari  235 (1)  inasema , ‘A 
Member may with the support of at least  two other Members  request the P rocedure and County 
Assembly rules C ommittee t o consider an amendment to the S tanding order s’. Mheshim iwa 
Spika hii alikuwa asilete huu Mswada  ndani ya hii Nyumba lakini a andike bar ua kuwa omba hii 
Kamati iliyotajwa hapa kutaka kufanya h aya marekebisho . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika kama 
wanasheria wanasema kuwa h uu Mswada ni  bend in law  na naf ikiri itakuwa ni kupoteza wakati 
tukizu ngumza  huu Mswada  kwa nji a ilivyoletwa Mheshimiwa Spika , ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy . Yes Hon.  Charles Kitula?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon.  Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika nikiweza kumuarifu  Mheshimiwa 
Hatimy kwamba , Kanuni za Bunge  amezisoma ni kuhusu marekebisho ya Kanuni za Bunge 
lakini Msw ada unaonge lelea kuhusu review of the whole  Standing order s sio marekebisho. 
Ahsante sana.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Lakini Mheshimiwa   ilikuwa review . Yes Hon.  Hatimy?  
 
Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kichwa  naku bali imeandikwa , “Review of 
County Assemblies Standing Orders” , lakini ukiangalia mwanzo wa huu Mswada u nasema , “I 
beg to move the following Motion as amended ”, alafu ukienda kwenye  ombi la pili l inasema 
kuwa ,  “THAT, the C ommittee of Rules and Procedures shall within 90 days of approval of  this 
resolu tion table necessary amendments” .  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika imezungumza mara mbili juu ya marekebisho;  ya kwanza 
ni kuwa , “I beg to move the following Motion as amended ”. Hii ni kuon yesha kuwa hii 
inazungumzia juu ya marekebisho , ingekuwa ni review ingekuwa yeye kutoa m aoni yake 
tunge kubaliana na kusema kuwa tunataka ku  review  lakini imeongezwa na ku  amend . 
Mheshimiwa Spika naf ikiri hii ni makosa na hili jambo naf ikiri tuliangalie kisheria pahali 
imefika si kisiasa ama jambo lolote ,  ahsante.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba 
kumta arifu Mheshimiwa  ya kwamba  uandishi wangu wa kwanza ama maombi yangu ya kwanza 
yalikuwa nimesema tu adopt  National Assembly with S tanding orders  na nikakosolewa 
nikafanya marekebisho  ndio maana nikanukuu ya kwamba, I beg to move the following M otion 
as amended  kwa kuondoa nukuu ya  adopt  na kuweka ya review .  
Mheshimiwa Spika pili nimtaarifu Mheshimiwa ya kwamba yeye anazungumza 235 y a 
ku amend  Standing Orders , Mheshimiwa Spika Bunge la Mombasa halina Standing Orders  tulio 
nayo ni ya kuazima na  sheria ya  County Government Act ambayo ina nguvu zaidi ya Standing 
Orders  yetu ya kuazima ilitupa hili suala tulishikikilie kwa muda na kufikia  sasa ikiwa ni tamu . 
Ya pili Mheshimiwa Spika hatuna Standing Orders ; ni aibu kwa Bunge hili na kwa Mheshimiwa 
wasi wasi wake wa kutaka kubakia na hii pengine atuelezee kama kuna interest  ama kuna kitu 
ambacho ananufaika nacho katika hili hali ya kwamba n i suala la k uazima na serikali Gatuzi zote 
au mabunge G atuzi yote yametengeneza Standing Orders  zao ambazo ni legacy  kwao . 
Sisi kama wawakilishi Mheshimiwa Spika tuko hapa si tu kwa minaajili ya kuwakilisha 
na nini hali kadhalika tunataka tuache taswira amb ao Bunge litakalokuja kwa wale ambao 
watakaojaaliwa kuwa hapa w awe katika muelekezo wa K anuni ambazo ziko kisawa sawa na 
ziko kwa wakati unaostahiki na sikuend elea na miaka saba saa hizi na K anuni ambazo tumepewa 
tushikililie Interim ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwamwiri.  I think maybe you are not 
understanding the Hon.  Member what he is saying. The Hon.  Member is saying that he is not 
opposing the amendment but he is saying the procedure which you took they are not in line with 
the Standing Order s, I think that is what he is trying to say. Yes Hon.  Juma?  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker fo r according me this 
opportunity.  Mr. Speaker I want ed to enlighten the House on this , because I overheard one of 
the Members  differentiating between review and amendment and in my opinion and according to 
the dictionary , a review is a formal assessment of something with the intention of instituting 
changes  and an amendment also is a change in order to improve a text or som ething . So review 
and amendment all have a core function which is change , so the argument of amendment is 
neither here nor there . I would also wish to state that the Standing Orders that we are now  using 
were adopted by the previous House and even effecte d an amendment then by the Justice and 
Legal Affairs Committee so saying that this is still an interim Standing Order I think is a 
misinformation because from where am standing these Standing Orders were adopted then by the 
First House Mr. Speaker Sir . 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 I also want to add that the Hon.  Member spoke of 235 (1) and 235 (2) is clear on the 
procedures , and it is that you need  written reasons and written clauses where you want them 
amended with the justifications . One w ill then  hand over with a list of Members  who are 
supporting you and tha t is when you hand them to the Committee of R ules and Procedures . So 
this is a House of order Mr. Speaker that is what you have always been saying and its time that 
we follow the law to the latter. Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon.  Bwire?  
 
Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I just want to remind the Hon.  
Members  who are opposing this Motion that we once had an amendment to our Standing Orders 
that was written by Hon.  Moha med Hatimy and given t o Hon.  Mwaka Zahoro in form of a 
Motion it was brought to this House no letters were written to the Committee, there were no 
signatures of Members  but it was brought here in form of a Motion…  
 
(Applause)  
 
And we discussed it and approved as a House . So Mr.  Speaker if we start giving the 
references so many things have been done and we should just continue as it were done just like 
the other one which was brought by Hon.  Hatimy through Hon.  Zahoro Mwaka and we will not 
buy an idea of opposing Motions that wer e brought by some Members  perceived to be 
opposition. Thank you and th ose are  my views.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy?  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi hata siku moja nikileta ishu ndani ya 
Nyumba  hii siichukui personal mimi hufua ta vitabu vile vimeandikwa , namba one Mheshimiwa 
Spika nataka Zahoro aseme ni siku gani yuko hapa ndani ya Nyumba nimempatia kitu chochote 
kutoka kwa ofisi yangu, namba two… 
 
(Loud c onsultations)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Order! Order Hon.  Members ! Yes? 
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I need to tell this House  kuwa Mheshimiwa Spika kuna nakala 
za Hansard  ambazo ziko ndani ya N yumba hii ziletwe zile nakala za Hansard  halafu tuangalie 
maneno yanayozungumzwa Mheshimiwa kutoka Junda kuwa maneno anayosema ni ya uwongo 
si ya ukweli na mimi niko tayari Mheshimiwa Spika kuleta ushahidi w a kuonyesha Nyumba hii 
ilikaa Kamati ya Justice  through  the Procedure  Committee  ilikaa na ikazungumza na ikaleta 
ndani ya Nyumba hii na ikaendelea kupitisha hizi Standing  Orders . Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa 
hivyo kupitia K iti chako naomba Mheshimiwa Zahoro aeleze Nyumba hii ni siku gani, wapi na 
wakati nimempatia hizo karatasi.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Samba?  
 
Hon.  Samba:  Mr. Speaker I was going through the Standing Order ... thank you fo r 
giving me this opportunity . 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  I was going through the se Standing Orders and Standing Order Number 44 on Notices of 
Motion, the Procedures and processes. Hon.  Speaker we claim that maybe the procedure…  
 
(Silence)  
 
Yes Hon.  Speaker the issue is not even abo ut the Motion should not be tabled o n the floor 
of the House, the issue is about the process and Hon.  Speaker when I was going thro ugh the 
procedures, notices of M otion Standing Order Number 44 (2) states that, before giving Notice of 
Motion the Member sha ll deliver to the Clerk a copy of the proposed Motion in writing and 
signed by the Member; and the Clerk shall submit the proposed Motion to the Speaker and (3) if 
the Speaker is of the opinion that any proposed Motion…  
 
(Consultations)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Yes continue Hon.  Samba . 
 
Hon.  Samba:  Yes Hon.  Speaker the issue is all about the process and the procedure and I 
was going through Standing Order 44 (2) which states that , 'Before giving Notice of Motion the 
Member shall deliver to the Clerk a c opy of the proposed Motion in writing and signed by the 
Member; and the Clerk shall submit the proposed Motion to the Speaker and then it goes on (3) 
states if the Speaker is of the opinion any of the Motion  - (a) is one  which infringes, or the 
debate on which is likely to infringe, any of these Standing Orders; (b) is contrary to the 
Constitution or the Act of Parliament or the County Assembly without expressly proposing the 
appropriate amendment ... 
Hon.  Speake r I just want to leave it there.  Hon.  Speaker  the Member who has just raised 
this concern is a Member of House Business Committee and when it was adopted he was there 
and you are also a Member of the House Business Committee and the Clerk also is a Member of 
the House Business how did is it that they  allowed this Motion to come to in the floor of the 
House if the process is not good. Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Yes Hon.  Faith?  
 
Hon.  Mwende:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Saa zote msema kweli ni kipenzi cha 
Mwenyezi Mung u na nakumbuka tulikuwa House  Business  katika Committee  room  na tuliweza 
kupendekeza  hizo Motions  na Motion  ilipokuja katika hili Bunge hatujui ilifika vipi? Kwa hivyo 
ni vizuri Mheshimiwa mwenye alikuwa anaongea Bwana Hatimy awe muwazi kwa sababu 
Hansard  ilikuwa, rekodi zilikuwepo a ape kwa jina la Mwenyezi Mungu kama hatuku pendekeza  
kama House  Business  na vyenye iliingia katika hili Jumba kama Mswada  hatujui ilifikaje. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Yes Hon.  Juma Boy, do you wa nt contribute?  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I was looking at the function of the House 
Business Committee and in my view the House Business Committee does not deliberate or 
discuss the contents of the M otions , that is the work of the Assembly .  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 Mr. Speaker, what indeed the House Business does is to plan and allocate the timings of 
the businesses of the House , that is a clarification the House needs to note. Thank you very 
much.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Yes Hon.  Sorry yes Hon.  Samba?  
 
Hon.  Samba:  Hon.  Speaker the Hon.  Member who has just spoken should not read the 
law selectively or Standing Order selectively it states very well I did not finish I thought she 
should finish being a law student Mr. Speaker at the end of it…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  So Hon.  Juma were you reading those things from your 
mind or it was a Standing Order…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Samba:  At the end of it Hon.  Speaker...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Which Standing Order? Standing Order,  wait…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Samba:  She is still looking for it Hon.  Speaker , let me take her through the little 
knowledge…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  152 what does it state? Y es 152 what?  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma : For the purpose of time I will  just go straight to 152 (5) (f) , That 
the County Assembly Business Committee shall consider such matters as may from time to time 
arise in connection with the business of the County Assembly and shall have and perform such 
powers and functions as are conf erred on and ascribed to it by these Standing Orders or from 
time to time by the County Assembly . So the main business is in connection to business of the 
County Assembly they do  not discuss the contents of the M otion , that is what I was driving at 
Mr. Spe aker 152 (5) (f).  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Thank you. Yes Hon.  Samba?  
 
Hon.  Samba:  Yes I would just advice my friend Hon.  Amriya Boy to at least read 
Standing Order Number 44…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  But Hon.  Amriya I think Standin g 152 (5) (b) before you 
jump to (f) did you read (b) sorry did you read (b)…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma : Number (5) (b) The County Assembly Business Committee shall 
monitor and oversee the Implementation of the County Assembly Business and programs . There 
are no discussions (b) is monitor and oversee the Implementation of the County Assembly 
Business , that is what I was talking about.  The function ...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
I am on the floor Mr. Speaker , protect me…  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Continu e. Order Hon.  Members  please. Yes Hon.  
Juma?  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker for that protection . You see when 
interpreting the law there  is a golden rule you look at the  law it is speaking for itself you do  not 
need to interpret anything further . The County Assembly Business Committee shall monitor and 
oversee the Implementation of the County Assembly Business a nd programs , there  is nothing that 
talks about here dis cussions of the content of any M otion in the County Assembly Business 
Committee . So it is very important when you are doing an interpretation of the law, the law is 
speaking we should just read as it is.  I think my fellow colle ague, my neighbour here is trying to 
interpret it the way it fits…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Thank you Hon.  Juma. Yes Hon.  Samba?  
 
Hon.  Samba:  Yes Hon.  Speaker in the same…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  So Hon.  Samba…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Samba:  I just want to inform Hon.  Amriya that 44 (3) at the end of it, 44 (3 ) states 
that the Speaker may direct either that, if the M otion is inadmissible,  or that notice of it cannot 
be given without such alteration that t he Speaker may approve all the M otion should be referred 
to the relevant Committee of the County Assembly Pursuant to Article 114 (2)  of the 
Constitution .  
Which means that Hon.  Speaker maybe the process was floated and it will just go back to 
you because anything which comes here it has your approval and I do  not think  whether you 
errored, you were right and this M otion is in or der. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Yes Hon.  Hamisi Musa?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani) : Ahsante sana B wana Spika.  Bwana Spika hili 
Bunge lilifanya review  ya hizi Standing Orders  bahati mbaya ni printing  ndio haijafanywa . 
Lakini pia Bwana Spika hakuna ubaya kama bado twaweza rekebisha Standing Orders  zetu za 
kututosheleza  sisi wenyewe…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Kwa hivyo ningeomba Bwana Spika aliyeandika h uu Mswada angalau  ange elekeza  zile 
sehemu  ambazo anasikia ndio sasa  hata tukienda kufan ya zile review  iwe inaeleweka ni sehemu 
gani kwa sababu Bwana Spika nakumbuka Bunge hili tulifanya hiyo review  ni vile 
haija chapishwa  na kuletwa lakini hakuna ubaya kama bado kuna reviews  ambazo twaweza 
zifanya ku fit our formation  ya Bunge letu.  Kwa hivyo  Bwana Spika mi mi ningependelea ya 
kwamba hii H oja haijakuwa na ubaya wowote…  
 
(Applause)  
 
…still inatengeneza Jumba letu liwe sawa. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika mimi ningeomba ya 
kwamba hii review  ni muhimu sana maanake mwisho tutaona litatusaidia sisi na wale 
watakaokuja. Kwa hivyo Bwana Spika sioni kwamba hapa kwaweza kuwa na utesi kwamba 
pengine mtu ana hidden agenda  kwa sheria hauwezi weka hidden agenda  hata ukafanya nini, 
sheria ni msumeno huwa wakata mbele na nyuma.  Hivyo basi Bwana Spika mim i ningeomba 
aliyewakilisha hii H oja ni kwamba aitengeneze alete mpaka zile parts  ambazo ameona zinafaa, 
Kamati ya Rules and Procedures  ikienda iweze ku  fit kuziweka katika zile sheria. Ahsante 
Bwana Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Nafikiri  Waheshimiwa  labda nijaribu kufafanua kwa yale 
maoni ambayo ninayoyasikia kwa watu sioni kama kuna mtu anapinga vile ninavyoona ; 
inasemekana kuwa sheria haikufuata lakini sasa sijui kama kuna wengine wanapinga, wengine 
wanapitisha according to the Standing Order  nafikiri  ndio vile W aheshimiwa walikuwa 
wanasema lakini hayo maoni ya kupinga sijui, anyway yes Hon.  Nyiro?  
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza naomba nitangul ize kusema 
kwamba naunga mkono H oja hii kwa sababu ni kweli Standing Order iko na mapunguf u kadhaa. 
Pili naomba ninukuliwe vizuri na hii nitairudia hata siku ya kiama kama kuna watu katika h ii 
dunia huwezi kuwategemea ni M awakili kwa sababu ukiua na umwambie umeua na umwambie 
akutetee atasimama mbele ya korti na athibitishe kwamba hukuua na uko  msafi . Kwa hio  katika 
muktadha huo ingekuwa Mheshimiwa Amriya anaunga mkono angetafuta vipengele vyote 
akaunga na kwa sababu anapinga anatafuta vipengele vyote apinge lawyers are never reliable, 
they are not truthful that is my opinion.  Third , ya tatu…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Yes Hon.  Nyiro I think you need to withdraw that…  
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
Please just withdraw that...  
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sijataja mtu manake lawyers  si mtu, waku…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  You said Hon.  Amriya…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Nilisema  angekuwa Mheshimiwa Amri ya anaunga angetafuta vipengele  
akaunga, angekuwa anapinga angetafuta vipengelee akapinga kwa sababu ana ujuzi…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Orde r Hon.  Nyiro . just withdraw the name…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Okay I withdraw the name, the name Amriya is withdrawn . 
  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Yes you may continue.  
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Na nasema hivi Mheshimiwa Spika ni vizuri sana tuelimishane ikiwa 
umekuja kwa Bunge hili na tajriba tafadhali itumie kwa manufaa yale ambayo wengine wetu 
hatukufika kwa upeo huo wa ufahamu . Kwa mfano nikiwa mimi hapa ni M walimu itanibidi sana 
nitumie tajriba yangu ya ualimu kupotosha hili Jumba na linafaa lijue mimi ni mwa limu na 
nimesomea ualimu ni vizuri tuelimishane kwa nia ya kujengana na hii Standing Order sio mali 
ya mtu yeyote, w ala hili Bunge si mali ya mtu. Hakuna kitu cha mtu cha kibinafsi ambacho 
kinaharibika ndani ya hili Bunge, i kiwa kuna kitu kitaharibika ni k itu cha wananchi wa 
Mombasa wote. Yale mambo tunayoyaongea hapa ndani hatuongei mambo ya Mheshimiwa 
tunaongea mambo ya wananchi ambao walituamini wakatuchagua wakatupa majukumu tufanye.  
Kwa hivyo turekebish e na ninaomba kukurudisha nyuma;  Mheshimiwa Amriya  naomba nikutaje 
tunakaa sote katika Kamati ya House Business naomba nikutaje kwa sababu tunakaa sote katika 
House Business…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma : Point of Order!  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes point of Order!  
 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Yes, the C lerks are here Members  should address the Speaker!  Mr. 
Speaker a nd also responsibility for the Statement of fact, s o I ca n read that Mr. Speaker; every 
Member is responsible for their S tatement and it is a principle that 104 of the E vidence Act; one 
who alle ges must prove . So if you are talking about lawyers being  liers you should be able to 
bring pro of to this House and all allegations that are levelled at any other M ember should have 
proof and should be brought before this House and all Members . I think the  Clerks will assist 
me, there is a Standing Order says Members  should address the S peaker and not other Members . 
Thank you so much.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes thank you . Hon.  Nyiro please?  
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Ahsante!  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Continue a nd address me do  not address Members . 
 
Hon.  Nyiro:  Ahsante, I am addressing you Chair ,  naomba nirudishe pale nyuma na kwa 
sababu naona nikitaja mtu inakuwa ni shida sisi kama Kamati ya House Business juma lil ilopita 
kuna M swada  amba o ulikuja mbele yetu na  ninakumbuka Karani wa Bunge  akitu elekeza  
kwamba huu  Mswada  haujafikia tajriba ya kuingizwa katika Bunge na tukaiachilia pale. Pili 
katika ofisi yako kuna waka ti tulipiga kura, tulipiga kura ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Moses Ara n? 
 
Hon.  Aran : Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kutoa taarifa kumjulisha ndugu yangu, rafiki 
yangu Mheshimiwa Nyiro kwamba amesema Juma lililopita na hatukuwa hapa na mimi pia ni 
Mwanachama  wa Kamati sasa sijui  Kamati gani ilikaa chini! A ngetuarifu kwamba ni Kamati 
gani ilikaa chini juma lil ilopita na hatukuwa hapa!  
 
Hon.  Nyiro : Ahsante . Ninaposema juma lililopita ni kwamba kile kikao cha mwisho 
nafikiri uswahili ni lugha;  lugha lazima uielewe kwa upana, e eeh nikisema juma lililopita ni 
kwamba kikao cha mwisho n a nimemaanisha hivyo. Kwa hivyo kwa sababu wewe si M swahili 
basi juma lililopita namaanisha kwamba kikao cha mwisho tulichokaa kabla twende kwa 
michezo tulikuwa na M swada  amba o uliletwa na Mheshimiwa na Karani wa Bunge  akatuelekeza  
kwamba haijatimia na tuk aiacha.  
Pili aliyekuwa nafikiri ataniunga mkono ya  kwamba kuna wakati tulikaa katika ofisi yako 
kama Kamati  ya House Business na tukajadili Mswa da ambao ulikuwa umeletwa na 
Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri na tukawa tunasema ..., wa mambo ya kwenda public participation  na 
tukajadili mpaka tukapiga kura wengine w akasema usije wengine wakasema u je inakuwaje 
tunasema hapa hatujadili kama aidha uje ama usije? Tuseme ukweli na tuwe wakweli ni siku 
hiyo mimi na Mheshimiwa Faith  tulipiga kura tukiunga kwamba M swada wa Mwamwiri uje na 
wengine wakapinga , inakuaje Mheshimiwa anasimama mbele ya Bunge h ili aseme kwamba sisi 
hatusemi uje ama u sije twapanga tu wakati. Tuseme ukweli kuna wakati katika House Business  
tunapingana tunasukumana ili M swada aidha uje ama usije na tulipiga kur a siku hiyo na 
zikapatikana kura mbili ambazo wali unga mkono.   
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 Ilikuaje tupige kura kama s isi si kazi yetu kupanga aidha uje ama u sije? Mheshimiwa  
Spika tuongee ukweli ndani ya N yumba hii, ahsante.  
 
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Mr. Speaker point of information.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Amriya?  
 
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Mr. Speaker I think the House should and through your Chair and 
may be when you return to your C hambers you can think about writing a ruling on this. Mr. 
Speaker the fact that we do something that  is not in accordance with the law doe s not justify that 
it is lawful;  if for instance  through our customs and usage we have been fond of bending the law 
it does  not qualify that  Act or that omission is lawful. Mr. Speaker I think you need to write a 
ruling on that because the laws are clear; order number one is clear, the Standing orders, we have 
the C onstitution , we have the Acts of P arliament. The laws are very clear on that, thank you very 
much.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon.  Shebe?  
 
Hon. Shebe  Athman:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I do not want to take this because it 
has been a battle of Standing Orders and laws but I will dwell much on the philosophy, much 
about wisdom , weight and intelligence Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause)  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir , I just want to quote one of my favourite Author by the name (??) once 
said, "the most important thing in life , Hon.  Speaker is not to capitalise on our gains even a fool 
can do that, even a mad man can take advantage of the situation but really most impo rtant thing 
in life is to profit from our loses ", Mr. Speaker that requires intelligence and wisdom and they 
also say that, " it is only a difference  between a man of sense and a fool".  Mr. Speaker , the issue 
concerning the M otion which was brought forward  by Hon.  Mwamwiri sometimes I fail to 
understand this Honourable House ; we all say that we con cur with the M otion there  is no one 
who is opposing the M otion but in the process the voices still emerge  that they want to make sure 
this Motion has to be return ed back and do some adjustment.  
Mr. Speaker S ir I once did a research of the First Assembly and the Second A ssembly of 
this County Assembly of Mombasa;  I was really perturbed and disturbed with the results because 
we came to realise that the Second Assembl y is one of the worst performed in terms of 
legislation and representation Hon.  Speaker. Why is that so? Why are  we not doing differently? 
 The F irst Assembly I have compare d in terms of legislation; the M otion s, the Bills Hon.  
Speaker they are far away a head of us and we are talking about two and a half years down the 
line. We have absolutely done a lot of nothing despite the issue of the common Bills , of the 
money B ills which of  course Hon.  Chairman of Finance h as an upper hand with the Leader of 
Majority . 
Hon.  Speaker I have come to realise that one of the most predicament and obstacle is  the 
issue of the amending the Standing orders. You a re the one ..., you also re member that I came up 
with the M otion of reorganisi ng the C ommittees of the Assembly becaus e I came to realise that 
the Committees Hon.  Speaker are not working.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 I really thank and you con cur with me you said we need to look at that matter but of  
course Hon. Speaker  time has not yet come to such a M otion to succeed, but what about this 
one? Real ly?! I just want to ask this Honourable House please we are here to represent our 
people to make this County better.  If there is any law ... these law s are here to be made and also 
to be improved so give us a chance and give us a break please Hon.  Speaker w ith your 
indulgence and your wisdom, b ecause I know  you have come up with many Solo monic decision s 
and wisdom to make sure that this Honourable  House perform s to its expectation. With  those  few 
remarks Hon.  Speaker I just want to say this is a Hon ourable H ouse please let wisdom prevail.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Shebe . Yes Hon.  Mwaka?  
 
Hon.  Mwaka Zahoro : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesikia jina 
langu likitajwa na ningependa kujua kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa Bwire aliniona nikipew a ama ni 
vitu tu anabobokwa akisema maanake sitaki kutiwa mdomoni na jambo ambalo hana  ushahidi 
nalo na wala hakuliona. Ningependa afafanue na aambie Jumba hili kwamba kama aliniona mimi 
nikipewa na Mheshimiwa Hatimy kitu kuleta hapa kwa niaba ya hili Bung e. Kwa sababu 
asiropokwe kwa sababu ya  kutaka kusema, aseme aliniona wapi? Ushahidi anao uko wapi? 
Asiropokwe tu hapa kwa sababu anataka tu kusema. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
Kwa hivyo nataka ushahidi anifafanulie na aon yeshe Bunge hili ushahidi uko wapi ya 
kuwa mimi nilipewa na Mheshimiwa Hatimy?  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwaka . Yes Hon.  Bwire?  
 
Hon.  Bwire : Shukran Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nita address  Mheshimiwa Spika I am in 
the Speaker’s panel and I know how procedure is done . Shukran Mheshimiwa Spik a 
itakumbukwa kwamba ile ndio ilikuwa sehemu  yangu ya kukaa na kila kitu chenye kilikuwa 
kinaendelea upande ule!  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba waniruhusu nizungu mze ninajua fika ya 
kwamba hio H oja iliandikwa na nani nil iomtaja na Mheshimiwa Spika end apo kuna mtu , endapo 
kuna mtu...!  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika naomba unilinde! Naomba unilinde!  
 
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Point of order Mr. Speaker!  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : You are on a P oint of order?  
 
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Yes. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes? 
 
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : I am on P oint of order 87.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Read for us?  
 
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : "A M ember shall be responsible for the a ccuracy of any facts which 
the M ember alleges to be true and may be required to substantiate any such facts...  
 
(Interruption)  
(Applause ) 
 
Members  just a minute!  "...And may be required to substantiate any such facts instantly.  
2. if a M ember has suf ficient reason to convince the Speaker that the M ember is unable to 
substantiate the allegations instantly, the Speaker sh all require that such M ember substantiate 
the allegations not later than the next sit ting day, failure to which the M ember shall be deemed 
to be di sorderly within the meaning of Standing order 109 that is grave disorder unless the 
Member …I am not done Memb ers! "unless the M ember withdraws the allegations and gi ves a 
suitable apology, if the S peaker so requires ...” 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The S peaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you but I think that is what he is trying to do so  
let him…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Bwire : Mr. S peaker!  
 
Hon.  Amriya  Juma : Hon.  Speaker  I want also invoke your Chair to also invoke 
Evidence Act , Section 104 that one who alleges must prove and the standard of pro of is beyond 
reasonable doubt because this is…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Chief Whip ( Hon.  Kitul a): Mheshimiwa Sp ika! 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Let him talk first . 
 
The Chief Whip ( Hon.  Kitula) :  Mheshimiwa Spika ! 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes? 
 
The Chief Whip ( Hon.  Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika ! 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Order Hon.  Nyiro please ! Yes? 
 
The Chief Whip ( Hon.  Kitula) : Mheshimiwa k ikao cha asubuhi leo umeweza kuongea 
jambo muhimu zaidi kwamba tumuogopeni Mwenyezi Mungu na  tuweze kusema jambo kwa 
kweli na haki.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17 Mimi ni M wanachama wa House B usiness Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti , hio siku ya kika o 
cha House Business nakumbuka anataka ushahidi Mheshimiwa Amriya apatiwe ushahidi kupitia 
Hansard.  Hizo amendments  ambazo  Mheshimiwa Zahoro aliziongelea  Mheshimiwa Hatimy  
aliongea katika House Business l akini kwa maandishi akaja nazo Mheshimiwa Zahoro kwa  
hivyo tuongeeni ukweli na haki na Hansard iko hapa na naw eza shika Biblia na nikasema kweli 
na Zahoro ashike Quran aonyeshe kwamba hiyo Taarifa  yeye hakutoa kwake. Tuongeeni ukweli 
na huo ni  ushahidi ulioko Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Order! Order Hon.  Kitula please.  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy.  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mheshimiwa Spika . 
  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes? 
  
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Madamu Mheshimiwa Amriya ames ema ametumia Evidence 
Act na mimi nitaongezea kusema kuwa evidence ya burden of pro of sasa yeye alete ushahidi wa 
kusema mimi nimeandika ama mimi nimempatia Zahoro. Mheshimiwa Spika hapa nafikiri 
ilikuwa inatakikana mimi pia kuongeza baada ya Mheshimiwa A mriya kusoma Standing Order 
87 naongeza 104 Mheshimiwa Spika mtu yeyote anayefanya udanganyifu ndani ya hii Nyumba 
ni gross misconduct  Mheshimiwa S pika. Angalia 104 (e); pole angalia 104 (b) Mheshimiwa 
anajua wazi kuwa anazungumza uongo lakini anasimama an azungumza. Mheshimiwa Spika 
mimi nimesimama kusema kuwa nam uunga mkono  Mheshimiwa Athuman Shebe kwa dhati ya 
roho yangu. Mimi I always  sichukui mambo personal ; mimi nachukua mambo kisheria ambayo 
mimi sikuipi nga hino H oja lakini n asema ije kwa njia ya sawa  sawa, l akini Mheshimiwa Spika 
kuwa watu watajaribu kuanza kuchafua majina ya watu na kuzungumza maneno yasiokuwa na 
maana nafikiri itakuwa sio jambo la sawa.  
 
(Applause)  
 
Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa wa Junda alisimama akaongea maneno ambayo sio ya 
ukweli  niko na  file ya 2015 ambayo nataka kukupatia file hii iko na ripoti za watu wote  walio  
participate  kurekebisha  na kuleta kuanzia mwanzo mpaka mwisho na  nakala ya  Hansard ya 
tarehe 18 F eb, 2018. Kabla hapo Mheshimiwa Spika Mheshim iwa Mungatana alikuja ndan i ya 
Nyumba hii akatuchukua through hino Standing Order na  tukapitisha.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
naomba N yumba hii isimamishe debate  hii mpaka uende through hii file alafu upate ule ukweli 
uliomo  ndani  ndio tuweze kuja kuzungumza tena. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy. Y es Hon.  Bwire?  
 
Hon.  Bwire : Shukran. K wanza naomba tu kutaarifu hili Jumba Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwamba mimi nimeingia hapa mwaka 2017 na hadi leo sijawahi muona Mheshimiwa Mungatana 
ndani ya hili Bunge ama akija hapa nikiwa nim echaguliwa kama Mheshimiwa .  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 Sasa 2018 sijui Mungatana alikuja kama Wanachama s hatuko? H iyo ni  kutaarifu tu 
Bunge.  Mheshimiwa Spika tunajaribu sasa kutumia wakati wa Bunge vibaya na kitu kilichoko 
cha muhimu ni kwamba hii biashara ya leo tuimalize na tumez ungumza na mimi nikazungumza 
ukweli na Mheshimiwa Kiranja wa Bunge  amezungumza ukweli . Zaidi akasema Hoja hiyo 
katika House Business ililetwa na nani na al ioileta katika Bunge ni nani na mimi kule sikai lakini 
nilijua kwa sababu mimi nilikuwa nikikaa pale na Mheshimiwa kwa sababu sote twamuogopa 
Mwenyezi Mun gu mimi niko tayari kushika Biblia ku apa ya kwamba aliyeandika Hoja ni nani , 
alioileta , na ni nani wanaopinga. Mheshimiwa Spika nao pia naomba wamuogope M wenyezi 
Mungu na washike Quran waseme sikuandika na sikuleta. Hivyo tu. Sawa ?! Hata mimi niko 
tayari.  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Niko tayari Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Mheshimiwa Bwire nafikiri  sasa tunatoka kwenye mad a ile 
ambayo tuko nayo hapa na W aheshimiwa wenzangu pia  tafadhali  sisi il e mada ambayo tuko 
nayo hapa tuang alieni hapa na nyinyi nyote ni W aheshimiwa. Hayo mambo au madhambi 
yakifanyika nyote mulikuwa hapa na mulikuwa mwanyamaza kwa hio  ni uzuri saa hii nimeona.  
Waheshimiwa wameamka kila mmoja anajua  haki zake kwa hio  tukiendel ea mbele muangalie 
haki zenu ni zipi  na pia m jue kui nuka mukiona kitu kinaenda sisawa.  Ndio kila siku mimi 
huwaambia W aheshimiwa hizi Kanuni za Bunge  someni,  someni hizi sheria kwa hio mujijue 
wapi mwasimama si o mkija mwapelekeshwa tu halafu sasa mw isho mn akuja mnalalamikia 
Spika. Kwa hio  naomba jamanini  tafadhalini  someni sheria , Katiba m ko nayo kila mtu ajue  haki 
zake na mimi K iti changu hapa juu sikuja ati contribute  upande huu ama ule mimi yangu ni ku -
judge  na ni kuamua nikisikiliza pande zote mbili.  
Kwa hio  mimi nitatoa uamuzi w angu kuhusu h uu Mswada  kwa sheria  ninavyoangalia 
Kanuni za Bunge nambari ya kwanza  inaniambia wazi in cases not provided for the Speaker to 
decide but  hili jambo  nikiangalia siwezi sema two wrongs make  a right , kama makosa 
yamef anyika kupitia kwa Karani wa Bunge  ama kupitia kwa ofisi yangu ni  makosa na kuna  
sheria ya  kufatwa. Hivyo basi s heria iko kwenye hi zi Kanuni za Bunge  nikiangalia hiyo 235 
sioni kwa nini sisi tunaona marekebisho  yako hapa 235 na twajua hii ni  sheria ya kuf uata. 
Tufuateni hii she ria si jambo la  kuanza kushindana ; kama Mheshimiwa amesema ameleta yeye 
alikuwa kwenye House Business pale ungeipinga palepale , pia Mheshimiwa pale katika House 
Business ungeleta pia hili swala lakini ni sawa vile umeleta hapa binadam u hupitikiwa. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Chief Whip ( Hon.  Kitula ): Mheshimiwa Spika!  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes. 
            The Chief Whip  (Hon.  Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika kidogo kulingana na Kanuni za 
Bunge nambari  235; mimi si o Wakili lakini Mwenyezi Mu ngu kido go am enijalia na elimu 
niliyoko nayo,  Amend ment on the initiative of a Member . Hii Mheshimiwa Spika ni amendment 
of a single Standing Order  kama kipengele fulani, kama Sub-Section  fulani unataka ku rekebisha  
ndio unawezaleta kupitia  Kanuni ya Bunge nambari  235.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19  Lakini  Mswada  ni review  ya the whole Standing Orders , lakini Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ikiwa Standing Order  iko sawa, baada ya siku 90 itaweza kuregea vile vile ilivyo 
hatusemi kwamba ni mbaya ama ni nzuri…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khat ri): Mheshimiwa Kitul a nafikiri nilikua ninatoa  uamuzi 
wangu na sijamaliza, kwa hio  labda uniwachie nimalize halafu utakuja na hio opinion  yako. Kwa 
hivyo W aheshimiwa hapa sijaona kuwa kuna issue  maana yake sioni mimi ni kwa nini 
Waheshimiwa wapinge kubadi lishwa hii  Kanuni ya Bunge  ama kufanyia amendment . Jambo 
ambalo limeweza kule twa na mimi nikiwa hapa kwenye K iti changu sitasema ati kulifanyika 
makosa mwaka uliopita, ama jana ama juzi na leo niwachilie iendelee. Kwa hivyo m imi nasema 
nikiwa akili timamu na hata nyinyi pia musifanye hivi vitu vikawa personal jamaa, there is 
nothing personal  hapa hata nyinyi pia….  
(Applause)  
 
 Tuko nazo hapa sheria , Amendments of Standing Orders  tufuateni tu hii I am sure at 
least two Members  na nikiangalia hapa the whole H ouse wants am endments  ya hiki kitu kwa 
sababu kuna vitu vyengine tunaambiwa vime rekebishwa  na hatuvioni hapa kwenye hi zi Kanuni 
za Bunge . Kwa hio  kuna mambo mengi ambayo tuliambiwa yame rekebishwa,  tukiangalia hata 
katika Kamati zingine ..., ukiangalia Kamat i ya House Business Standing Order  inasema karibu 
29, hivi sasa tunakaa karibu  11 sijui kama ni 12 lakini katika hii Kanuni ya Bunge  inasema 29. 
Kwa hio kuna mambo mengi  zinasemekana zime rekebishwa  na bado hazija rekebishwa .  
 Hivyo basi Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri  tufuateni ile sheria ambayo tumeambiwa hapa iko 
kwenye Standing Order  na sioni kuwa kuna makosa yeyote, kwa hio uamuzi wangu kwa hili 
jambo ni kuwa sina pingamizi na huu Mswada  lakini  Kanuni ya Bunge  nambari moja iko wazi,  
kama kitu hakiko kwenye hi zi Kanuni za Bunge  that is where I can give my guidance  lakini 
nimeona hili jambo liko kwenye hi zi Kanuni za Bunge . Kwa hio Waheshimiwa tufuateni Kanuni 
ya Bunge nambari  235 alafu tufanye marekebisho ya hii Kanuni ya Bunge . Ahsante . Yes Clerk , 
next Order ? 
 
MOTIO N 
MEASURES ON TRAVELLIN G BY AIR TRANSPORT  
 
 Yes Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy .  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I seek to move the 
following Motion;  
THAT AWARE , that the County has limited financial resources, given the new 
governance struct ures that have occasioned devolution of funds;  
NOTING THAT , Public and state offiers consti tute a significant part of the 
government;  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20 COGNIZANT , of the fact that the g overnment has to cater for their official duties, 
including transport and other facilitat ion within and outside the County;  
CONSCIOUS , of the need to reduce the burden on the taxpayer;  
Therefore, the County Assembly of Mombasa hereby RESOLVES  as follows:  
1. That, all state and public officers, and departments, with the exception of the 
Governor, Deputy Governor and the Speaker using air transport during official trips 
within the County should travel in economy class including international flights, 
unless they meet their own costs for an upgrade;  
 
2. That, the decision takes effect immediately and al l respective accounting officers 
take necessary action to implement, without exception.  
 I beg to move Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Seconder, Hon.  Hatimy?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I request the Leader of Majority, Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani to  
second.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I arise to second the Motion. 
Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Members  I now propose a question that the Motion 
by Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy on Measures on Travelling by Air Transport  be cons idered by this 
Honourable  House in the same term s as moved . 
(Question p roposed and agreed  to) 
 Yes Hon.  Hatimy?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nitakua mfupi wa maneno. Ahsante 
Spika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi. Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri sote tuna baru a ambayo ilikuwa 
inazunguka kuzungumza juu ya mambo vile yanavyokwenda na kuna orders  ambazo zimetoka 
kuambiwa  karibia asilimia  50 ya bajeti zetu tuziangalie. Mheshimiwa Spika nikitoa kisa kidogo 
juzi Waheshimiwa wal ipokuwa wanasafiri kuenda Dubai  Waheshim iwa wengine walikutana na 
wenzao wa kutoka Executive. Jambo la kusikitisha Mheshimiwa Spika Waheshimiwa kutoka 
kwa Bunge la Kaunti  walikuwa wamekaa nyuma kwenye Economy Class  lakini wale wa 
Executive walikuwa kwa Club Class . Hili ni jambo la kusikitisha sa na Mheshimiwa Spika na 
kwa sababu ya kutaka kutengeneza kupitisha  Mswada  huu naomba Waheshimiwa  wote 
tukubaliane kuipitisha h uu Mswada  ili tuweze kuangalia kisawasawa hawa watu wetu wa 
Executive  wanapotumia hizi pesa zetu .. 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naom ba Waheshimiwa Kamati zote zifanye ile 
oversight  ya kikweli ili tuweze kuweka jambo hili litumike kila Kamati iangalie Idara yake na 
hili jambo liweze kufanyika. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy. Yes Hon.  Charles Kitula?  
 The Chief Whip  (Hon.  Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kweli Mswada huu  ni nzuri kutokana na utumizi wa fedha katika Kaunti  yetu lakini vile vile 
katika suala la uandishi ningependa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha aweze kuenda ku re draft  
huu Mswada  kwa sababu ukiangalia the Cou nty Assembly of Mombasa hereby r esolves as 
follows;  
1. That, all state and public officers, and departments, with the exception of the 
Governor, Deputy Governor and the Speaker using air transport during of ficial trips within 
the County,  tuna airport  moja peke yake kwa hivyo huwezi kupanda ndege kutoka Kaunti ya 
Mombasa hadi Kisauni, hadi Changamwe, hadi Mvita Mheshimiwa Sp ika…  
(Applause)  
 Kwa hivyo tuweze kurekebisha Mswada u weze kuja jinsi inavyopaswa Mhes himiwa 
Spika. Lakini leo hii tukipitisha kama hivi tutaonekana sisi Wabunge ni mazuzu hatukusoma vipi 
utatumia ndege ndani ya Kaunti . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Charles. Yes Hon.  Faith?  
 Hon.  Mwende:  Ahsante M heshimiwa Spika . Nilikua na maoni hayo kwa sababu 
nilikua natazama Kisauni ama Mvi ta ni wapi kuna uwanja wa ndege  nikakosa. Kwa hivyo hoja 
ni nzuri lakini ifanywe marekebisho kwa sababu imeingia katika kinasa sauti. Ahsante.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Hamisi Musa, t he Majority Leader and the 
seconder of this Motion please give us your contribution.  
 The Majority Leader  (Hon.  Mwidani) : Mheshimiwa  Spika  unajua it is a human 
error , binadamu kukosea ni kitu cha kawaida aliyekamili ni Mwenyezi Mungu. K ulingana na 
Waheshimiwa  walivyosimama waka inuka  hata mimi nimeona nafikiri ni marekebisho tu hapo ni 
kweli kwa sababu huwezi kuenda Kisauni na Mtongwe ukitumia tikiti ya ndege. So it is just 
human error that Mr. Speaker , ni vizuri kwamba tupitishe huu Mswa da kwa sababu unakuta 
kweli  baadhi ya Maofisa wa Idara  wanaenda na First Class wewe Mheshimiwa waenda na 
Economy . Sasa unaona hii shida iko wapi , nani bosi sasa!  Ikiwa sisi ndio watunga sheria twaenda 
kwa nyuma ya mkia wa ndege yule ambaye anatus ikiza sisi  yuko mbele na dereva!  Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni Hoja nzuri sana kwa sababu pia tutapunguza ile gharama ya kipesa ya 
watu kusafiri.  Hivyo basi  nawashukuru sana Mheshimiwa Spika na pia namshukuru 
Mheshimiwa kwa kuleta hii Hoja kwa kuweza kuangalia masla hi ya  Kaunti  na pesa zake. 
Ahsante sana.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon.  Bwire?  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22  Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker the Motion indeed is good and we cannot 
oppose it only that we cannot assume that it is a common error and that is why we ar e appealing 
for the re draft of the said Motion and then we will just have it passed. So we do not want to 
assume that it is a common error because if you do away with the County, what else? So let the 
Motion Mover re draft the Motion and bring it. Mr. Spe aker and that it is the law whenever there 
is something that Members  do not understand it is always taken back to the Motion Mover and 
again amend it and brings it back and that is what we have been doing. It is not a special Motion,  
that what we have been  doing  is a tradition and the custom of this House. Thank you  Mr. 
Speaker . 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon.  Samba?  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Thank you Hon.  Speaker. I want to debate on the Motion and I stand to 
oppose the Motion. Hon.  Speaker the Motion  states that Measures of travelling by air transport 
and the issue here is about Business Class. Hon.  Speaker I have been a Member of this House 
since 2017 and I have had two trips outside the Country. I have never even boarded a Business 
Class and I am co mfortable with it. Hon.  Speaker there is a circular that has been out and it h as 
been issued by the National g overnment. This is just a circular just as the same as other circulars 
that we normally receive we have never enacted any law or rather Motion to do with circulars. 
This circular affects the whole Country, so I do not see the reason why we should adopt it as a 
Motion.  
 Secondly Hon.  Speaker the directive was issued due to tough economic times and we 
know very well that the tou gh times will not last  forever, w hat if we enact a law for now and 
then after two or three months our economy stabilizes? Three Hon.  Speaker we are talking about 
saving mwananchi’s  money and I think as Mombasa County we are one of the best Counties 
that... at least according to  Auditor General’s Report we did so well, we will save these  funds but 
we always as Members  of the County Assembly (??) and I always say this whenever there is no 
money it is echoed all over and when there is money still there is no money. So I do not know  
even if we are saving now there will be money but I s tand to oppose because there is a 
government circular, it is in place and we just need it for implementation and at least to be seen 
working. Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Hatimy Mohamed?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika huwa mimi nafurahi watu wakiweza 
kushindana kwa mambo namna hii tunazidi kusoma,  hatushindani kwa kupoteza wakati lakini 
tunasomeshana. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi kila siku  Miswada yangu  huiandika mwenyewe  na 
niko na copy  yangu, copy  ya huu Mswada  niliyoipeleka kwa Clerks  inasema Country . Itakavyo 
kuwa vyovyote ni makosa ya kibinadamu mtu yeyote anafanya makosa ..., I seek leave  
Mheshimiwa Spika under Standing Order No. 45  to amend the word County to read Co untry … 
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Hatimy under Standing Order No. 45 , it is Notice of 
Motion…  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23 (Interruption)  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Notice of Motion . 
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : But this is a Motion! So I think you sh ould.. . 
(Interruption)  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes to amend the Motion Mr. Speaker.  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Amend ment for Motion . I think it is Standing Order No. 
51? 
(Interruption)  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hii ikiwa imekuja  tayari na Notice  
imesomwa ni kusema amendment of Motion . Hata Standing Order No. 51  naweza kuitumia 
Mheshimiwa Spika ni uwezo wako sasa kupeana ruhusa…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Maana yake Mheshimiwa Hatimy hivi sasa tuko kwa 
Motion  si Notice of Motion . So I think it is wise to use Standing Order No.51 . 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Wajua Mheshimiwa Spika najaribu kuangalia baina ya 
Notice  na Motion  lazima kuna utaratibu wa kufuatwa ambapo Standing Order No.45  inasema, 
The Speaker may permit a Member to move in amended from a Motion of which Notice has been 
given if in the opinion of the Speaker the amendment does not materially alter any principle 
embodied in the Motion of which a Notice has been given . Hivyo basi  Mheshimiwa Spika 
ukiangalia Notice  ilisoma Country  sasa inasema County , hii ni typing error  Mheshimiwa Spika 
na mimi niko na copy  yangu kuon yesha nimeandika Country . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ni 
vizuri yule aliye raise  hii issue  ili tuwe waangalifu na pia naomba kama mtu ameleta Mswada  
mwanzo yeye mwenyewe apewe aipitie kabla haijaletwa ndani ya hii Nyumba.  
 Jambo la pili Mheshimiwa Spika ni kweli hii imetoka ni order  lakini order  ikitoka 
lazima iwe si sawa , imetoka order  na juzi watu wamesafiri, hawa hawa Executive  wames afiri na 
barua imekuja hakuna hatua yeyote imechukuliwa. Kwa hivyo baada ya hawa kusafiri na 
wengine twajua kuwa wanajianda a kusafiri ndio twaomba tupitishe h uu Mswada  ya kuonyesha 
kuwa we are serious  na sheria ni lazima iwe itatumika. Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
24  The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Hatimy, b ut Hon.  Hatimy again I think this is a 
Motion now it is not a Notice of Motion. So maybe you may…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  I seek leave under Standing Order No.51 . 
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Under Standing Order No.51 and you may read the whole 
Motion again so that I put the question again.  
(Interruption)  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Standing Order No.51 (7) , An amendment to leave out 
words and replace those words with other words shall ta ke preceden ce before any amendment to 
leave out words without proposing to replace those words with other words.  I seek leave  
Mheshimiwa Spika, naomba ruhusa yako haya u yakubali…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  I agree.  
(Interruption)  
 Hon.  Moh amed Hatimy:  Nibadilishe kutoka County isome Country . 
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : So from County to Country?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  From County to Country…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : So I am going to put the question again now ? 
(Interruption)  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes. 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy. Hon.  Members  I now propose a 
question that the Motion by Hon.  Mohamed Mohamed Hatimy on Measures of traveling by air 
transport  be amended with the word County  to Country  and be considered by this Honourable  
House in the same term s as moved by Hon.  Hatimy . 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
25 (Question proposed)  
 Yes we may continue debating. Yes Hon.  Fadhili Makarani, the Deputy Speaker?  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. It h as been evident 
that we are not opposing the Motion and personally I do not oppose the Motion. But Mr. Speaker 
in a situation whereby the three  said Members  will be travelling and for instance I am also 
among the three  who are travelling, I am sure Mr. Spe aker you will be lef t alone with no one to 
speak to … 
(Applause)  
 So Mr. Speaker I am looking for a chance whereby I might get an opportunity to at 
least get the favours and I hereby proposing also if it can be amended that even the Deputy 
Speaker to travel  in the First Class,  
(Laughter ) 
 It will be an experience that I have never experienced before Mr. Speaker even though 
am confident when am travelin g in the economy class but the M otion has come in the right time 
and as i have seen there is an amendment t hat has been  proposed by the mover of this M otion, 
considering the situation i highlighted before that when we are travelling the four of us may be 
you will be left alone with no one to speak to . So please Hon.  Members  just consider to amend 
so that even t he Deputy Speaker can get a chance, thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Fadhili.  Yes Hon.  Mohamed.  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hii hatukufanya kuwa G avana  ni mtu 
mkubwa au Sp ika ni mtu mkubwa au Naibu wa Spika  ni mt u mkubwa lakini tumeangalia 
tumewekwa kwa makundi sisi . Kwa hivyo ingekuwa Naibu wa Spika  yupo kwenye job group  
kama ile ya Spika na yey e pia angekuwa ameingia lakini bahati mbaya hayuko kwenye job 
group  ile. 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : So you are not amen ding your Motion on that?  Yes Hon.  
Ibrahim.  
 
Hon.  Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for the opportunity granted . Mr. Speaker I 
have read careful ly this particular M otion and i think to me it is long overdue, this was a M otion 
I can say that maybe the circu lar that has come from the Government of Kenya has ignited this 
kind of M otion , may be to appear or to come but to me it  is long overdue . 
This is a M otion that is supposed to have passed before even the government itself raised 
an alarm on this and I will give my reason why;  Mr. Speaker Sir I  will be right to say that  the 
Government or rather County have taken an advantage of misusing public funds by travelling 
through air unnecessarily and it  is very true  that you will find an official of the County 
govern ment or even from the Government traveling to Nairobi wanting to utilize or wanting to 
use air transport unnecessarily . 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
26 This is  where the funds would have been saved when that official uses may be transport 
Mr. Speaker Sir, that  is not air transport an d if he has to travel using air  then it should be by 
economy class . Mr. Speaker Sir as the M otion states and the Members  of this Assembly have had 
a cry and it is very true that most of the executive Members  being that they are very much in 
position of control ling the funds...  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Continue Honourable.  
 
Hon.  Omondi: ...Being in position they are controlling the funds especially the 
departmental travel, they take advantage of that and I thi nk it is high time we use this M otion to 
stop them . Mr. Speaker Sir as I am speakin g today am a Member of this Assembly and also 
Chairman of E ducation Mombasa County but I have never even tested, I even do  not know how 
the F irst Class l ooks like but am very sure the Executive Member in the Department of 
Education they use , in fact it is like a daily thing, they use this partic ular means of transport 
almost o n daily basis, they are used  to it. Mr. Speaker Sir so to me I co ncur with whoever 
brought this M otion that it is high time we stop this so that we shou ld be able to save the C ounty 
or even the Country money which is  unnecessarily spent. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : The Yes Hon.  Juma.  
 
Hon.  Amriya Juma:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I also am up to support the said 
Motion on trav elling for purposes of equity and also uniformity . Mr. Speaker but one thing for 
sure is that the c ompliance will be first on the A ssembly because we are the one 's who have 
passed it and it has been our way of life using this Economy C lass and am sure beca use you a re 
also the Chair of the B oard am sure this implementation will be done bu t one thing i want to urge 
the Committee on I mplementation that it takes this seriously and also ensure that there is 
enforcement on the end of the executive so that we achi eve the whole intention of this good 
legislation we make here , because we have a (??) and we also make very good laws but I do  not 
know when it comes to implementation it becomes a bit of a scramble and that also demoralize s 
us as Hon.  Shebe was first earl ier on complained about this Assembly but i think also the b uck 
stops at implementation, if we see implementation  then I think most of us will be motivated to  
work harder. So this is a good M otion, I support although the A ssembly , this has been the order 
of the day and so its enforcement now we as the Assembly on our role as enforcement and 
oversighters we make sure this also happens on our counterpart s at the executive. T hank you 
very much.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon.  Nzai.  
 
Hon.  Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker to have also given m e this the chance to contribute. 
First i stand to support this M otion though it has come late because it is true we ha ve been 
suffering on travelling and whatever but I also thought it could be a reverse that the executive to 
go with the economy class and the Hon. Members  to go on the first class bu t because it has come 
like that  at least it will bring uniformity and realization of who al so to be recognized on the 
same. T hank you very much Mr. Speaker i stand to su pport.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Nzai. Y es Hon.  Leila.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
27 Hon.  Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi h ii na mimi pia 
niweze kuchangia . Kwanza na chukua fursa hii kump ongeza Mheshimiwa aliyekuja na Hoja hii  
Mheshimiwa Hatimy ; kusema la kweli Mheshimiwa Spik a sisi kulingana na hadhi yetu 
Waheshimiwa ni Hoja nzuri kuli ngana na hadhi yet u kutambulika , tumepitia mambo mengi sana 
Waheshimiwa kudharauliwa na  hadhi yetu kama vile tunavyoju a sisi t unadharauliwa sana pande 
zote mikutanon i na hata kwenye safari lakini Hoja hii Mheshimiwa Spika imekuja wakati mzuri 
sana na sasa ndio tutatam bulika na sisi pia tuonje hiyo First Class…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ahsanteni kwa wale mumenipigia makofi.  
 
(Laughter)  
 
The Spe aker (Hon.  Khatri) : Order Hon.  Faith please order ! Yes  continue Hon.  Leila.  
 
Hon.  Nyache:  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ni hoja nzuri mimi naiunga mkono mia fil 
mia tuweze kulingana na hadhi yetu na sisi tuweze kustarehe katika safari zetu.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Leila . Yes Hon.  Mora a. 
 
Hon.  Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity to also air my sentiments but 
before i  do may i inform my colleague that the order does not give u s the opportunity to travel in 
Business Class, it only reinstates that w e shall continue travelling in Economy class and also 
some of  the executive will do the same . The issue of being demeaned does not arise the re, we 
have been travelling in Economy class and that will continue, its only the executive who have 
been put in that category too so Hon.  Leila please be in formed. I stand to support the Motion 
which obviously there is a c ircular that has come from the Ministry of Finance and the Chairman 
of  Finance has rightly brought it in thi s House and being state officers just like executive we 
need to be at per if the County intends  to do some savings on the same . 
Hon.  Speake r as one of my colleague stated  we are quick indeed to pass Motions in this 
House but implementation is a problem so  if we pass th is and I think the Chairman of Finance 
also mentioned that, that yes the circular came from the Ministry but last week or sometime last 
month they still travelled in the Business Class. So we would want to see that the implementation 
through t he Committee that is concerned so that the order is carried out effectively so I do urg e 
my colleague s to support the Motion which is a good Motion and we move forward in saving 
some finances , maybe for development or so . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Moraa . Yes Hon.  Ogutu.  
 
Hon.  Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Sp ika. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama 
kuunga mkono pia vile vile kupinga . 
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) :Yes continue Honourable.  
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
28 Hon.  Ogutu:  Mheshimiwa Sp ika naunga mkono kwa sababu ni Hoja nzuri na imekuja 
kwa wakati mzuri na pia itafanya sisi sote ambao kama mama Leila alivyosema, Mheshimi wa 
Leila alivyosema hatujaonja First Class hata na sisi tuonje. Pili Mheshimiwa Spika hata wale 
ambao walik uwa wanatumia First Class na tuko juu yao, wao pia waonje hii Economy  wajue 
inafanana namna gani. Kwa upande wa kupinga Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kusema ya 
kwamba tumepitisha Mswada  na ule uchungu tunasikia kwamba utekelezaji  ndio shida kwa hio  
mimi kulingana na hayo  ndio napinga , ahsante sana.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Benard Ogutu . Yes Hon.  Kizito Opeya.  
 
Hon.  Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker i think the Motion has been brought 
in good faith by the Member and w e should all, i think in spirit we support it but also we should 
also remind the ea rlier events . We once passed a Motion about the cars, for some of us who like 
to walk at night we still see these cars and when you ask the drive r he will tell you he is with  the 
Chief Officer, he  is waiting  he will tell you, the  Chief Officer or he will tell you the Director or 
someone with the Minister . So the Motion of the cars was not implement ed now we are bringing 
another Motion for the air ticket which is good, what are the  penalties which are going to be 
imposed on this account ing officers, the mover of the Motion has not told us what are the 
penalties if they disregard this Motion . Otherwise i support it , thank you.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Kizito . Yes Hon.  Mohamed Mohamed 
please reply.  
 
Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza ku upeleka chini ya 
uongozi wako h uu Mswada . Mheshimiwa Spika  nataka kuchuku a fursa hii ha ujapita h uu 
Mswada  lakini najua m taupitisha na kuwapongeza Waheshimiwa kwa ma neno waliyoweza 
kuzungumza ndani y a Nyumba hii. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi mwenyewe nilikuja across  kuona 
Mheshimiwa mmoja am esafiri tikiti amelipa kupitia Kaunti  1.2 M ilioni First Class tikiti ambapo 
sisi twatafuta elfu tatu kutangaza Punguza Mzigo na Waheshimiwa wa nakaa miezi minne 
hawajalip wa mishahara yao . Watu wao huku wapanda First Class ambapo ingekuwa amepanda 
Economy  yule aliyelipa laki tatu vile vile an gefika lakini Mheshimiwa Spika Waswahili 
walisema , shari ije balaa iondoke.  
Mheshimiwa Spika juu ya utekelezi  nataka Nyumba hii tuelewe leo hii tuanze upya , 
Wenyeviti wa Kamati wawajibike wafanye kazi ile oversight ya kikweli, nawapa cha ngamoto  
Wenyeviti na Wanachama  wao kuwa watu wazungumze na  Idara  zao kuwaambia kuwa kuna 
Mswada  huu umetoka na kupitia Kiti chako naomba wewe mwenyewe uto e agizo kwa Makarani  
walioko hapa  hii barua ian dikwe haraka inavyowezekana na Kamati zote ziangalie kuwa Idara  
kuwa wamehakik isha wamezipata zile barua na h uu Mswada  waambie kuwa  kwa sababu hivi 
sasa ni kuwasha zile mulika mwizi . Kuna yale mataa yanaitwa mulika mwizi, uchumi  ni mbaya, 
Kaunti yetu tumenya’nganywa shs1.4 Billion i hatuju i tutazivuta kutoka wapi pesa h izo.   
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika Wenyeviti w awajibike tafadhalini tufanyeni  kazi pamoja, 
tusaidiane tuhakikishe upuuzi huu umeondoka na kumwambia Mheshimiwa Opeya ni kuwa haya 
magari (??), tuliileta hapa lakini hatukupitisha, pia imo kwenye ile circular  maana yake hii 
imekuja lakin i tukaona bado wanasafiri, tukiuliza tukaambiwa hakujatoka order  yoyote, sasa 
kwa hivyo sisi twasema order  twaitoa sisi, sisi ndio wenyeku oversight  hizi Idara , twaito a na 
twawambia kuwa ni laz ima ifuatwe vile inavyotakikana . 
October 9, 2019                       COU NTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            89 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
29 Kwa hayo machache Mheshi miwa Spika nashukuru Waheshimiwa kwa ku unga mkono 
hii Hoja na ikiwekwa swali  tulikubali na tuanze kazi kutoka le o tuonekane twaifanya hiyo kazi . 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Hatimy . Yes Hon.  Members  I now put the 
Question that the Motion by Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy on measures and travelling by air transport 
be adopted by this Honourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Yes Clerk next order.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon.  Members  this House stands adjourned until Wednesday 9th October, 2019 at 
2:30p .m. 
 
The House rose at  12:19 p.m. 
 