February 26, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           8 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 26th February, 2020  
The House met at 2:58p.m. 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
  The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes C lerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
REQUEST FOR STATEMEN T BY HON . HAMIDA NOOR ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTA TION OF THE 
MOTION ON RECOGNITION OF AUTIS M SPECTRUM DISO RDER (ASD)  IN MOMBASA COUNTY   
 
  Yes Hon. Hamida Noor , please give the Statement.  
 
  Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speake r Sir, I seek to request for a 
Statement from Chairperson Committee on Implementation on the  status of implementation of a 
Motion passed in this House during the 109th sitting on Wednesday, 20th November, 2019 at 10:0  
a.m. on recognition of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in Mombasa County. Thank you.  
 
  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Noor for the Statement. The Chairperson 
Committee on Implementation?  
(Silence)  
 
  Any other Member of that Committee? Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 
  Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I stand on behalf of my Chair 
Implementation Committee . I want to respond on this very important matter and S tatement  or 
rather M otion which was brought to the House on the 20th November , 2019 . Mr. Speaker by the 
time this M otion  was brought, it was the time as  well as we were about to proceed for our long 
reces s. At the same time it came in concordance  with the time that we also had vetted our new 
County Secretary . At this juncture, then I beg our Hon. Member who brought thi s very important 
and demanding M otion on its implementation that together with the Committee and our Chair we 
shall fast track this , plus other M otions in the next  two weeks. Thank you M r. Speaker .  
 

February 26, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           8 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2   The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nzai. Yes Hon. Milka?  
 
  Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this chance . I just rise to inquire 
what language the Hon. Member was using because we do not understand some  words that he  is 
using ... some words he used whether it was  his vernacular or not but it was something that 
sounded similar to English . He mentioned something like concordance it could mean something 
that is so important for us to know , could he please elaborate and expla in to us what concordance 
means. T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
           The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Nzai?  
 
            Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker S ir. I am a newly graduate from...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
            Okay well thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I say sorry to the Hon. Member who maybe could 
not understand some other words ; in other words let me use a soft language whereby the Hon . 
Member can understand what I meant . I actually meant to beg for time so that we fast tra ck the 
implement ation of this Motion that i s why I had begged for two weeks Mr. Speaker.  
 
           The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Nzai, two weeks is okay. Yes C lerk, next 
order?  
 
REQUEST FOR STATEMENT  BY HON . FEDDIS MBURA ON WHEN THE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF 
MOMBASA PLANS TO OFF ICIALLY OPEN THE DIG IRIKANI ECDE AT MWAK IRUNGE WARD  
 
  Yes Hon. Feddis Mbura.  
 
            Hon. Mbura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity . Mr. Speaker Sir I 
seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Education, Information Technology and 
Mombasa V ision , 2035 on when the C ounty government of Mombasa plans to officially open the  
Digirikani ECD E at Mwakirunge Ward.  Thank you.  
 
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Feddis Salame.  Chairperson E ducation, 
Information Technology and the MV 2035, the Vice Chair? Education C ommittee? Any other 
Member can respond to that.  Yes Hon . Kibwana Baya?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker since my Chair is 
engaged in some other  importan t activities plus the Vice -Chair, i  will just ask Hon. Speaker to 
give us time so that we can reply on what she has raised Hon. Feddis. Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : So am giving you one week, next week Wednesd ay to 
please make sure you respond, i hope you are not going to ask for two weeks. One week is okay 
because th e matter which she is asking is when the C ounty government of Mombas a plans to 
officially open the D igirikani ECDE in Mwakirunge. Am sure that one  week is okay with you.  
February 26, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           8 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Hon. Speaker, i don’t want to cheat this Hon. House because i 
have to relay back this inf ormation to the Chair plus the V ic e- Chair so that i think if you give us 
two weeks it will be okay for us.  
 
 The Speake r (Hon. Khatri) : No, am not going to give you two weeks, am going to give 
you one week Hon. Kibwana Swaleh with all due respect , one week.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Most obliged.  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Because it’s a very simple issue, is just to ask when are they 
going to  officially open it and am sure when the Hon. Member is asking about officially opening 
and since she is the area Ward  representative  she knows that the ECD E is ready so it’s only 
about opening , right? Hon. Feddis, is the ECD E ready?  
 
 Hon. Mbura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spik a. ECD bado lakini haiko mbali kwa hivyo  
nataka K amati iwajibike na ishughulike na ichukue wakati iende ione ni vitu  gani vimesalia kwa 
sababu hata watoto wanasom ea nje na hiyo ni aibu kwa K aunti ya Mombasa Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Then you should have ask ed when is the completion not 
officially opening. Yes Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. As a friend of the Education C ommittee,  i would 
like to highlight some few things in regards  to the Digirikan i aah, is it Gigirikani or Mwakirunge, 
where is it? Mwakirunge. I underst and Mr. Speaker Sir, I happen ed to have talked at length with 
Mr. Mwangi who sits at the Bima Tower s Education o ffice and I happen to ask him several 
questions in regards to all E CD’s because I remembered that time I had an issue with my ECDEs 
at Kadzandani and he told me that in fact some Chairs for these ECDEs have been stored in my 
ECDE centre. So I will request my Hon. Neighbor Hon. Feddis, if she can pass by the Education 
office as in some things could be as easy as a, b, c, and d rather than having so many (??). T hank 
you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Nz ai I think the Hon. Member, she i s doing the r ight 
procedure by bringing the S tatement into this House. So I don’t know why she has to go and 
walk in those offices, where maybe you  have walked in and you got hel p. So Hon. Member she  
is in order to bring that S tatement in  this House, and the Committee will take charge of that.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:   Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Hon. Kibwana one week is o kay? Just come and tell us 
what i s the status and again Hon. Members thi s is just to inform you that we have already bought 
the vehicle for C ommittees, for you Members whereby you can go to that ECDE  yourselves and 
see… 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 So am sure the van will be here anytime , maybe in one or two days, so you will have all 
the means to do that.  
February 26, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           8 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Hon. Speaker I really respect your ruling, but am getting 
confused ; when the C ommittee is not yet ready, that  is what I have just learn t from the Member. 
So are we talking about opening or completing the construct ion? So I want to be very clear  so 
that once y ou do the ruling on this issue then I will be able to answer but otherwise am ready to 
accept whatever ruling  you are going to give me, so that I can be able to pass it.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think the Hon. Member asked when is the official opening 
of the Digirikani ECDE . So by saying that she wants to know when  is the completion of that 
ECDE,  I think, therefore  Hon. Kibwana what you can do if you want me to guide you on what 
you can do with  your Committee you will go to the Department or write to th em and ask when 
that work was given by the whatever ... I think is it the Finance D epartment! I think al l these jobs 
that are given by Finance ...or is it procurement  get all those details on when the work was given, 
which company wa s the work given to , and when was the completion? And when  is the 
completion supposed to be,  and how long have they delayed for this work? And you will know, 
where is the problem . 
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Are you okay with that?  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Very okay, thank you . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Clerk next Order?  
 
REQUEST FOR  STATEMENT BY HON . FEDDIS MBURA ON OPERATIONALIZATION /OFFICIAL OPENING OF 
MARIMANI HEALTH CENTRE  IN MWAKIRUNGE WARD  
 
 Yes again Hon. Fe ddis Salame , MCA Mwakirunge Ward , please give the S tatement?  
 
 Hon. Mbura : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me  again a chance to give out my  
Statement; o perationali zation/Official opening of M arimani Health  Center . Mr. Speaker Sir , I 
seek a Statement from Chairperson Committee on Health and when the County Government of 
Mom basa through the Department of H ealth plans to official operationaliz e the Marimani He alth 
Centre. Thank Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fed dis Salame again for you r Statement. 
Yes Chairperson Committee on H ealth Hon. Kibwana Swaleh, please respond to that S tatement?  
 
 Hon. K ibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker . Hon. Speaker I wish to state to this 
Hon. House  that we will do the writing to the D epartment so if possible Wednesday afternoon or 
morning through your guidance we are going to bring the reply back.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable, so again is this Hon. Fed dis.... is 
this Hospital re ady or not yet?  
 
 Hon. Mbura : It is not ready Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
February 26, 2020                       COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           8 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So there are still people on site building the Hospital?  
 
 Hon. Mbura:  No! 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No I am trying to ask that ...I just want to know that hospital 
is complete or not yet?  
 
 Hon. Mbura : Bwana Spika  hiyo hospitali bado haijakuwa tayari.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Kwa hio  haijamalizwa kujengwa?  
 
 Hon. Mbura : Haijamalizwa kujengwa ; ningeomba tu K amati iweze kuzuru mahali pale 
ione hali ilivyo kwa sababu jamii ina  umuhimu na ile hospit ali. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you so much. Hon. Kibwana S waleh, please try and 
have that response by next week Wednesday. Yes Clerk , next Order?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Thank you Hon. Members , this House stands adjourn ed until Tuesday 3rd of March , 2020 
at 10: 00a.m. 
 
The House r ose at  3:16p.m. 
  
 