Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 1  
 
      
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 15th February , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Eighth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 2:57p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAY ERS  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Yes Clerk.  
 
                       STATE MENT 
SUBMISSION OF COUNTY INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PLAN (CIDP), THE ANNUAL 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN (ADP) AND THE COUNTY FISCAL STRATEGY PAPER (CFSP) TO THE 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
  
Yes, Honourable Amriya B oy Juma , MCA of Mjambere Ward . 
 
Hon. Amriya  Juma:  Thank you Mr. Sp eaker Sir . I rise pursuant to Standing O rder 41 (2) 
(C) to request for a statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations, regarding the s tatus and submission on the County Integrated  Development P lan 
(CIDP), t he Annual D evelopment P lan (ADP) and the County Fiscal Strategy paper (CFSP)  to 
this County  Assembly cognizant  of relevant laws on the date of submission to this Hon ourable  
House. Than k you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fa dhili Makarani): Yes, Chairman Finance or Vice  Chair ? 
Yes, Honourable  Hamida ? 
 
 Hon. Noor : Thank you Mr . Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir , we will get back to the Member as 
soon as we get feedback from the Executive. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Yes, Honourable  Amri ya. 
 
Hon. Amriya  Juma:  Mr. Speaker Sir , I have heard from the Vice Chair of Finance but I  
am not satisfied . Mr. Speaker , cognizant to the time frame the CIDP has lapsed last year 
December also our ADP time lines have lapsed , also CFSP supposed to  be in by yesterday . So, 
we are out of time Mr. Speaker and the response by the Vice to state that they will respond as the 
Executive will respond .  
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 2 I think I  will be comfortable if they state that the r esponse will come in seven days or in the 
next sitting Mr. S peaker having it open is not convenient. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Thank you and I  am requesting the 
Committee in Finance to give a response in a weeks’  time. Yes , Honourable Mwinyi.  
 
STATEMENT  
TURNING MARIMANI LEVEL 4 HOSPITAL INTO A RE HABILITATION CENTER  
 
Hon. Mwinyi  Mtoto : Thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir . I request for a statement  on turning 
Marimani Level 4 hospital  into a rehabilitation center. Mr. Speaker Sir , pursuant to Standing  
Order 41 section 2(c)  I wish  to request for a statement  from the Chairman of Committee on 
Health Services  regarding plans by the Department of Health to turn Marimani Level 4 Hospital 
into a rehabilitation center.  Mr. Speaker Sir, Marimani  Hosp ital has served the residen ts of 
Mwakir unge well since its in ception a nd has made the residents  travel shorter distances to access 
healthcare . The plan to change the hospital into a rehabilitation center  may affect the residents of  
Mwakirunge in acc essing their healthcare needs without travellin g for a  long distance. 
Honourable  Speaker, in the statement the Chairperson should inquire into the report and  why the 
Department of Health plans to change Marimani Hospital into a rehabilitation center ; two, where 
will th e Department of Health transfer its heal th services when the hospital i s turned into a 
rehabilitation center.  Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): Chairman Health C ommittee or any other 
member from that Committee. Yes Chairman.  
 
Hon. Ogutu: We w ill give the response in  three  weeks’ time  owing to the fact  that we do  
not have the  County Executive Committee Member  for the d epartment  yet. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): But Hon ourable  Ogutu , we have existing 
CEC M’s. 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Chair , I think for a comprehen sive response we need three  weeks.  
 
The Deputy Sp eaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Makarani ): I can see the Member is satisfied so … 
 
Hon. Mwinyi  Mtoto : I am not satisfied.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu ): You are not satisf ied? 
 
                                         [Laughter ] 
 
Hon. Mwinyi  Mtoto : Mheshimiwa Spika nasema  hii maneno  ya Mwenyekiti  kusema  ya 
kwamba  atachukua wiki tatu  hiyo ni nyingi  sana na hii maneno  ni kama  kule ina harakishwa  
ibadilishwe . Kwa hivyo lazima  tupate  mwafaka  mapema  sana.  
 
The Dep uty Speaker  (Hon . Fadhili  Makarani ): Okay t hank you I will request the 
Com mittee on Health to respond to this H ouse in two weeks’ time . Yes Clerk.  
 
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 3                             MOTION  
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON REVIEW  OF TASKF ORCE REPORT ON  MOMBASA CO UNTY 
HEALTH CARE SYSTEM  
 
Yes, Honourable  Ogutu.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion:  
 
THAT , this H ouse adopts the Report on Review of the Taskforce Report on M ombasa 
County Healthcare System  
 
Mr. Speaker , I beg Hon ourable  Mwi nyi Mtoto to second. 
 
Hon. Mwinyi  Mtoto : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika, I second . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , I now p ropose a  
question  that the Motion on  adoption of the Report on the r eview of tas k force of Mombasa 
County Healt h Car e Syste m be debated in this House . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Ogutu: The report on the Review of task force on Mombasa County Health Care 
System.  
‘The right to health is a Human Righ t guaranteed in the Constitution of Kenya, 2010 under 
the Bill of Rights. Article 43 (1) (a) of the Constitution  provides that;  ‘Every person has the 
right to the highest attainable standard of health, which includes the right to health care 
services, incl uding reproductive health care.’  Promulgatio n of the Constitution ushered in 
the devolution era and  one of the notable changes brought about by devolution is 
decentralization of health service delivery function. The health function was transferred to 
Count y government pursuant to the Secon d Schedule  of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010.  
Pursuant to Executive Order No. 1 of 2022  dated 22nd September, 2022, His Excellency the 
Governor, Hon ourable  Abdullswamad Sherrif Nassir established  the Mombasa County 
Health care Task Force vide the  Kenya Gazet te Notice No . 11740 , dated 30th September, 
2022. The mandate of the Task Force entailed the following: - 
1. To review the architecture of healthcare delivery including Human Resources for 
Health and ICT for Health in the Co unty of Mombasa,  
2. To assess the state  of physical healthcare infrastructure including buildings and 
heavy and movable equipment in the County of Mombasa,  
3. To audit the state of financing for healthcare in the County of Mombasa,  
4.  To evaluate the state of supp ly chains for healthcare in the Coun ty of Mombasa ,  
5. To recommend the upgrading and/or special purposing of existing medical 
facilities,  
6. To audit public healthcare related human resource currently employed by the 
County Government and make recommendations on addressing the skills gap,  
7. To ass ess and recom mend the implementation of a comprehensive Health 
Management Information System for all County government Hospital,  
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 4 8. To assess and recommend strategies on addressing disease burden and patterns,  
9. To formulate  lasting solutions towards achieving  universal he althcare that is 
affordable and accessible in the County of Mombasa … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ogutu , I think you have 
already laid the Report. So please you can  just read the recommendations of yo ur Committee  so 
that the Members can debate.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Much obliged Mr. Speaker.  
 
Observations and Findings  
Committee Observation on the Architecture of Healthcare Delivery … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. F adhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ogutu , recommendations  of 
your Committee.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker, each and every thematic area has a recommendation,  so I 
request to read through each and every thematic area with your guidance. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ogutu, you can hig hlight 
some of the recommendations from the different sectors but the report is already with the 
Members , so that the Members can debate just highlight some of the recommendations . 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Page ni ne, task force recommended the follo wing, the est ablishment…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Your Committee. It is now a document of 
the Committee.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Chair , the recommendations are based on, this is a Report on a Report Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Fadh ili Makarani ): Yes, but your Committee has already laid 
this Report so it is not a Report of the task force  it is a Report of the Health  Committee . You own 
this Report so give us your recommendations as per y our Committee.  
 
Hon. Ogutu: Establ ishment of the Mombasa County Health Management Board,  
1. A review of the Executive Order No.1 of June, 2019 establishing the Coast 
General Teaching and Referral Hospital (CGTRH) as a County corporation to ensure 
conformity to the Constitution and the applica ble nati onal and County legislation,  
2. Review of the Mombasa County Health Act, 2018 and the Mombasa 
County Environmental Health and Sanitation Act, 2017 to provide enabling framework 
for the implementation of health system  reform recommendations.  
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 5 3. Operationa lize and  optimize all existing facilities to  enhance operational 
efficiency and service delivery at various health system levels as per norms and 
standards . 
4. Establishment of well -structure independent emergency response c entre 
with adequate ambulances and call centres, GPS tracking and manned by adequately  
trained personnel.  
 
Honourable Speaker, the Committee recommends;  - 
 
1. THAT,  This House adopts  the findings and recommendations of the 
Taskforce on the architecture of hea lthcare delivery,  
2.  
3. THAT,  the Count y governme nt to prioritize  the establishment of 
dispensaries in the seven Wards where none exists and as a stop gap measure, the 
County government to install and equip mobile containers to be utilized as Dispensaries , 
 
4. THAT, the County Assembly should amen d the Momb asa County Health 
Act, 2018 and Mombasa County Environmental Health and Sanitation Act, 2017 to 
provide an enabling legal framework for sustainable health financing , 
5.  
6. THAT , the County Executive Committee Member for Finance to formulate 
Health Wai ver Regula tions in regard to medical fees and charges within six months of 
appointment to the office for approval by the County Assembly,  
7.  
8. THAT,  the County Health Management Board and Hospital Management 
Board be operatio nalized  to manage Health facilities  that are categorized as Level 4 and 
below.  
9. THAT, Marimani Outreach  and Shika Adabu Outreach be  repurposed to 
function as a drug and substance abuse rehabilitation Centre as recommended by the 
Taskforce , 
  
10. THAT , Coast Gen eral Teaching and Referral Hospital  (CGTRH)  having 
been established by Executive Order NO. 1 of 2019, as a corporation , to continue to 
operate as a semi -autonomous entity;  Its Executive Board to continue with its operations 
in accordance with the Executive  Order . Further the Chief Executive  Officer  in Char ge 
of CGTRH to  have the same status as a Chief Officer pending  the enactment of an Act of 
County  Assembly which will anchor CGTRH in a parent legislation for posterity.  
 
We are on page 12, recommendations . 
 
1. Immediate review and clearance o f health  sector pending bills to ensure 
the completion of all ongoing and/or stalled infrastructure development projects,  
 
2. Dispose and replace obsolete equipment in all facilities as per the Public 
Procurement and Asset D isposal Act,  
 
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 6 3. Prioritize rehabilita tion, re novation a nd maintenance of existing building 
infrastructure at all levels of care, giving priority to the old facilities with ageing and 
dilapidated building /infrastructure,  
 
4. Explore Public Private Partnership models for equipment leasing and 
routine la boratory ex amination as a backup and histopathology and sample referral, 
and; 
 
5. Prioritize the setting of Specialty Hospitals by upgrading and re -
purposing some existing facilities into centers  of excellence in the  provision of specialty 
health serv ices 
 
Honourable Sp eaker , the Committee recommends;  
  
1. THAT , this House ratifies and adopts the findings and recommendations of the 
Task Force on the physical healthcare infrastructure,  
 
2. THAT all health facilities should c omply with section 22 (1 ) of the P ersons with 
Disabili ties Act, 2003 which provides: ‘‘A proprietor of a building shall adopt it to suit 
person with disabilities in such a manner specified by  the Council”,  
 
3. That adequate budgetary allocations be provided f or implementation of these 
recomme ndations, 
 
We are on  page 15, 3.4 (i) ; 
 
Committee recommendations  to strengthen County … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ogutu, stick to the Committee 
recommendations because you have  just read task force recommendations,  please stic k to your 
Committe e recommendations.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Strengthen County  health products and t echnol ogies , governance and 
management;  Improving health products and technologies,  Strengthening  Human Resource 
capa city for HPT Management,  Increase budg et allocation and invest ment in Health Products 
and Technologies.  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani): Honourable  Ogutu, the Committee 
recommendations are on page 17.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Speaker , at each and every thematic area we gave a recommendat ion so 
they are in differe nt pages that  is why.  
 
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 7 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): There are recommendations of the task 
force and  the Committee also in the same?  
 
[Hon. Ogutu in c onsultation s with the Speaker ] 
[Hon. Madialo up on a point of In formation ] 
 
Hon.  Mad ialo: Honourable  Amriya,  with all due respect you are not the Speaker!  Let me 
be guided by the Speaker, yes just relax let me be guided by the Speaker , you are not.  
 
The Deputy Speake r (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Address  the Speaker, o kay proceed. What 
is it? 
 
Hon. Madialo : Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
Hon. Amriya  Juma : Point of information.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, what is your p oint of information 
Honourable  Amriya?  
 
Hon. Amriya Juma: I just want to inquire through the Chair th e Honourable  Member has 
risen and spit ed my name I do  not understand I was not standing;  I have not uttered anything  and 
the Hon ourable  Member has risen to mention and naming my name . I stand guided M r. Speaker 
because I was just going through my Report as the Honourable  Member rose and spit ed my 
name. Maybe through your guidance I beg to be informed what is it up Mr. Speaker, why hav e I 
been named.  Thank you.   
 
Hon. Madialo: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . As a Member of the Committee and I was 
there when the report writing was going o n, the recommendations of the task force we adopted 
most of them s o wher e it is written the Committee ’s recommendations  it was simply highlighting 
some of them . So, by not all owing the Chairman to also read  we did not want to do re petitions 
and that is why ou rs with the Committee we were just highlighting few of them but we adopted 
most of the recommendations of the task force  and that is why the Chairman is also mentioning 
them so that when we debate the Members will have the ful l information. Thank you, Mr. 
Speak er. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank  you Hon ourable  Madialo. 
Honourable  Amriya , we will go to the Hansard and check what transpired then we will come  and 
report back to this Assembly ; if the Hon ourable  Memb er was out of order we will report. But as 
per the Motion  of the Committee on Health we as a House we are to adopt th is full report ; that is 
why am insisting  that the Committee to stick on their reco mmendations and at least  highlight 
because the Report is with the  Members and it has  been  tabled to the Members so the Members 
will deba te and either adopt the Report and by adopting it will be adopting the full Report. So, I 
would like the Hon ourable  Chai r to stick to the recommendations of the Committee because the 
same r ecommendations of the task force if t he Report is adopted the whole of it  is going to be 
adopted by the House a nd implemented by the executive.  Thank you . Yes Chair. 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker. I think you have made my work very easier we are 
on pa ge 19; the Committee recommends that ; 
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 8 1.  The House ratifies and a dopts the findings and recommendations of the taskforce on the 
Health Management Information System for County government  hospitals , 
2. That the health system to have a viable information s ystem with adequate back -up 
systems f or smooth operations and prese rvation of information.  
Page 21, number one the Committee recommends that;  
1. That this Honourable House ratifies and adopts  the findings and 
recommendation s of the taskforce on the strategies  for the addressing disease burden a nd 
patterns,  
2. That emphasis be pl aced on preventive innervations including budgetary 
allocation which in the long run will alleviate the burden of treatm ent costs to both the 
County and residents,  
3.  That, establishes Coast  General Teaching and referral hospi tal Utange field 
hospital to fun ction as County infectious diseases hospital and research centre as 
recommend by the taskforce.  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Dep uty Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): So, conclusion?  
 
Hon. Ogutu : The Committee having considered  the taskforce Report  extends its 
appreciation to his Excellency the Governo r Honourable Abdulswamad She riff N assir for the 
timely establishment of Mombasa Co unty Health care system task force.  
The taskforce on its part did a  commendable job by unbundlin g the issues affecting the 
health ca re system and providing sustainable recommendations to tackle challenges identified in 
each thematic area.  
The taskforce Report having been reviewed by the Committee and upon adoption of this  
Committee’s Report by this Honorable House will go a long way to  enhance the health system in 
Mombasa County.  
In addition, the Commi ttee also made recommendations which are aimed at furth er 
strengthening the health care system upon adoption by this Honourable House, 
Pursuant to Standing order 179(4) of the Mombasa County Assembly the Committee 
adopted this Report on Monday 13th February , 2023, a nnexed are the Committee’s minutes 
approving this Report;  
Recommendations, the Committee recommends that;  
1. That th e Committee having approve d the taskforce Report recommends that th e 
taskforce Report on health care be approved by this Hono urable House in so far as it is 
consistent with the Report , 
2. That this H ouse adopts this Report including observation, findings and 
recommendations of the Comm ittee. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Ogutu and I think 
these final recommendations  are your prayers as a Committee. Thank you, yes Hon ourable  
Manuari?  
 
 Hon. Juma Manua ri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa h ii nafasi ya kuzungumza 
na kutoa mweleke o wangu ama kuung a mkono Kamati ya ndugu yangu Be rnard Ogutu.   
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor   Page 9 Mimi katika hii Ripoti ambayo nimepatiwa saa hii nimeipekua  pekua kui angalia jinsi 
ilivyo na niwa pe kongole ama pongezi Kamati hii ya afya inayo ongozwa  na ndugu yangu kwa 
kukubaliana nami kuwa ka tika Wadi 30  moja katika Wadi  ambayo imeathirika na maswala ya 
afya ni Wadi ya Bofu. Kama alivyo  inukuu kw a kuwa wamechunguza wakapata katika Wadi  30 
Bofu hakuna Zahana ti, hakuna kituo cha afya,  wala hakuna Zahanati  ambayo itawasaidia w ana 
Bofu na hilo ndilo lilikuwa jukumu letu . Wakati tulivyokuwa tukitembea m ashinani kuwaomba 
wananchi kura  nikiwa na Gavana  wetu Abdullswamad Sheriff Nasir na ka tika ahadi tulizo  
ziweka ni  kuwa tutahakikisha kwa mi aka mitatu inayokuja tutakuwa tumewa wekea hud uma ya 
afya ndani ya Bofu.   
Basi mimi nami niseme kwa jukumu hili ambalo hawa wamejibeba niwaambie kuwa sio tu 
kutuletea Ripoti ambayo wameiona bal i pia kulifua tilia hili swala i li haya mambo aliyoyasema 
humu ndan i yawe yatatendeka na yawe  yatafanyika kwa mud a upasao kwa sababu wananchi 
wanango ja jibu letu baada ya miaka matatu m aana kule kwetu sisi hatujibiwi baada ya miaka 
mitano tunajibiwa mitatu, je ulikuja na  Gavana  wako na ukatuambia  utatuleta Zahanati  ili na 
nyinyi mutibiwe Kamati husika tunaomba m tuletee matibabu na sio tu m tujengee mijengo ama 
mtuletee makontena bali pia na zile huduma ambazo zinahitajika za matibabu n a nyengine na 
madaktari  mimi naa mini ndugu yangu Ogutu na Kamati yako nyinyi hamjalal a haya maneno 
mwaka huu tu ikifikia Disemba najua tutafanya ground breaking  ya hiyo Zahanati  katika maeneo 
yangu.  Kwa hivyo mimi kubwa zaidi niwaombee Mungu  ili maisha ya wananchi yawe imara 
tusipate te na ta bu tu kitoka katika Wadi moja twende Wadi ya pil i kufuata matibabu ahsante sana.  
 
The Deputy S peaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Manuari . I think 
your question of why Bofu Ward does not have a dispensary  will be answered when the Finance 
Committee will table as to w hen they are going to bring  CIDP so be alert and take charge to 
bring t he CID P on this floor of the House . Yes, Honourable  Hassan?  
 
   
Hon. Hassan Mohamed:  Ahsante Bwana Spika kwa kunipatia f ursa hii adhimu, fursa 
muhimu ili  kuweza kuchan gia katika Ripoti  ambayo i meletwa  na Mwenyekiti  wa Afya, ndugu 
yangu mkubwa ambaye pia vile vile  ananisaidia kwa ushauri wa aina moja ama nyengine 
isipokuwa ushauri wake, ushauri wake haujaweza kunisaidia mim i binafsi lakini kwa maswala 
kama haya ambayo a meweza kuleta katika Jumba  hili, nina  imani kwamba yal e ambayo 
ameweza kuongea ndugu yangu Manuari  basi na vile vile mimi nitaweza kuchangia kidogo. 
Mimi Bwana Spika ni muathiriwa, nikisema ni muathiriwa ni kw amba wiki iliyopita na nilisha 
zungumza hili jam bo hivi punde ni kwamba ka tika mshahara wangu mwingi nautumia pale 
Makadara  hospital i kulingana na  zile kesi ambazo zipo katika eneo la Magogoni.  
Ripoti hii nitasema ni ya kweli na imeweza k upitia njia inayos tahili baada ya uchunguzi wa 
uhakika kwamba  ndani ya Magogoni hatuna Zahanati na hiyo ni kweli na kw a hivyo naomba 
sana hata hawa Waheshimiwa wa lioko mbele yangu kuunga Ripoti  hii mkono kuhakikisha 
kwamba afya ni kitu muhimu sana na  ni zawadi baada ya uhai  na thamani ya zawadi ni kuilea na 
kuitunza na hata maendeleo yakapatikan a ya namna gani ikiwa afya imezoroteka sidhani k ama 
mwananchi ataweza k utuelewa tukiweka cabro , tukiweka maendeleo, tukiwapatia pesa za 
biashara lakini ikiwa afya imedorora sidhani ka ma mwananchi anaweza kutuelewa.  
Mimi naiunga mk ono Ripoti  hii na naomba h ili Bunge ama hii Nyumba vi le vile iweze 
kuhakikisha kwamba tunampatia support  anaye stahili . Chini yako Bwana Spika tunaona 
kwamba kila kitu kitakuwa sawa na ahsante sana ndugu yangu  kwa Ripoti  ambayo italeta 
mafanikio hapa ndani ya  Nyumba hii. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor  Page 10 The Deputy Spe aker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Hassan. Yes , 
Honourable  Amriya Boy?  
 
Hon. Amriya  Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker. First of al l, I would like to congratulate the 
Committee on Health for a job well done ; I think it is one of the Committ ees that ha ve started 
overwor king early in time so there is normally the saying that the early bird catches the worm so 
kudos and keep it up. I wis h also to raise my voice on the same ; I think it is high time that such 
Reports are taken head on  by Hon ourable  Members especiall y in areas that have been m entioned 
in th is Report . It does  not just garner  dust in the wardrobe or in the stores but Members s hould 
take this Report and maybe  we should come up with statement or Motion based on this Report. 
Mine  would be on setting up di spensari es in areas where w e do not have ; Mjambere is one of the 
highligh ted areas that has no dispensary , has no ECD E, is a dar k spot  as there is no proper 
lighting, no transport ! I can stand here and say so much ; I can go on and on but  Mr. Speaker, am 
hoping to  see as the Committee comes  up with our Annual Development Plan (ADP ) and CID P, 
will be looking at this area being first of our priority .  
Mr. Speaker , so it just does  not end up with a Report ; we should not endea vor to work in 
vain so suc h recommendations should b e taken seriously by both Assembly and also by the 
Executive and also o n matters of a universal healthcare suffr age on matters of National Health 
Insurance (NHIF)  it is very important because we are consum ing so much of our little m oney,  
Mr. Speaker h ealth ca re of our citizens . So, if we  could have comprehensive care unit of 
Natio nal Health Insurance Fund it will go a long way, at least we have the pilot program having 
at least representative from each Ward will go a long way and I thin k that is in line and 
some thing is happening about it  so please Health Committee make sure that o ur people are 
covered so that we can benefit. Lastly , I would  not because I wish to support but I also have just 
one thing a reservation that at this point we h ave so much that is spendi ng at a Health but I 
wouldn ’t wish that this Coast General Hospital be a corporation  because we understand that 
corporation  are a limited liability, partnership are limited liability, partnership are not 
accountable directly becau se it’s a limited liabilit y with directors so and hav ing shareholding so I 
wish the Committee we should first look at our issues befo re we handover Coast Ge neral to be a 
full corporation  at least  our issues to have been handled before we give them full a utonomy, 
otherwise it  is a good Report. Thank you for allowing me to air my views.  
 
The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank y ou Hon ourable  Amriya. Yes , 
Honourable  Nyache?  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi kuweza kunipa nafasi ya kuweza 
kuchangia Ripoti  hii. Kwanza nampa kongole Mheshimiwa Og utu kwa kuweza kuja na Ripoti  ya 
maana kama hii katika Bunge hili ; mimi kwa upande wangu Mheshimiwa Spika katika Wadi  
yangu pia mimi sina Zahanati, sin a hata kituo chochote, hata kijihema cha kuw eza kuti bu watu 
wa Wadi ya  Kipevu  watu wangu wakiugu a wanakwend a Wadi nyengine , kwa mfano Wadi ya 
Chaani kuna h ospitali pale  wanakwenda w anatibiwa pale h ata kwa Mheshimiwa Ogutu pia 
Changamwe kuna Hospital i ya Magongo pia inasaidia sana watu wangu . Kwa hivyo pia 
nashukuru i nasaidia lakini leo Ripoti  imekuja hapa na katika uku rasa wa  tisa hapa nimeona pia 
Wadi ya Kipevu  imeangaziwa kuwa itaweza kupa ta hiyo Zahanati ya  kutoka serikali ya Kaunti  
nimeshukuru sana na nina unga m kono  mia fil mia watu wangu waweze kupata matibabu kwa  
njia ya karibu na wasihangaike . Kina mama pia walikuwa wakipat a shida,  wakati wa  kufika wa 
kujifungu a wam ama wanajifungulia katika n jia na hata gari yangu pia inafanya kazi ya kubeba 
wagonjwa saa zote kuwapeleka katika Wadi nyengine.  
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor  Page 11 Ningekuwa na Zahanati katika Wadi  yangu, nisingetumia g harama zote hizo za kuweza 
kubeba wagonjwa  kuwapeleka huku na huku. Wan gekuwa wanatibiwa pale kati ka ward yangu 
kwa njia ya urahisi, kwa hivyo mimi naunga hii report na naomba iweze  kutekelezwa kwa njia 
ya haraka watu wetu waweze kuona zile ahadi zetu tuli zo zitaja wakati wa kampeni ziweze 
kutimia. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fad hili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Maryam Baimu?  
 
Hon. Baimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii. Kwanza 
ningependa kuwapongeza Mwenyekiti, Mh eshimiwa Ogutu na timu yake  yote kwa kazi nzuri 
waliofanya. Kusema ule ukweli kuna mengi mazuri ha pa ambayo kama yatatekelezwa ama hii 
Nyumba tutapitisha yatakuwa kwa manufaa kwa watu wetu kule mashinani. Ya kwanza ni 
kuhusu hii mambo ya madawa kuwekwa kw a ma  Zahanati, ma  Zahanati ya le ambayo yamezeeka 
yaweze kurekebishwa, nye ngine kuhusu mambo ya ku dispose  ama vile vifaa vya zamani maana 
yake tunaona kama mimi Zahanati zangu zile ziko tu pale Frere Town ; ziko kweli lakini ukiingia 
ndani utashangaa vile vifa a ambavyo vinatumika pale n dani. Kwa hivyo kama tutaweza 
kubadilisha vi wekwe vya kisasa ambao zita saidia watu itakuwa jambo la maana sana. Pia kuna 
kitu kama walemavu, katika hii Ripoti  wameangazia vizuri sana. Kusema ule ukweli h ili 
litakuwa ni jambo la m aana wanapo  kwenda walemavu kupata huduma katika hizi Zahanati zetu 
ama hospitali zetu wawe wako na  sehemu zao kadha, kama ile njia ya kupitia wawe 
wametengezewa mambo mengi hata choo humo ndani , kwa hivyo itakuwa ni jambo la maana 
sana.  
La mwisho ambalo li menifurahisha zaidi, ni kuh usu hii Marimani Outreach  maana yake 
Frere T own kuna sehemu nyingi kuto ka hii Mombasa Kaunti ambapo vijana wetu wale wanataka 
kujinasua wanakuja pale ukumbi wa zamani wa Free Town wanakaa hapo kwa siku n zima 
kutoka asubuhi mpaka jioni wakinywa zile dawa, w anashinda hapo . Pale kuna shule  ya msingi 
ya Frere Town karibu  kwa hivyo  imekuwa ni kilio cha wananchi wa Frere Town kwamba 
tutafute njia hawa wa watumizi wa madawa wanao rehabilitate  waweze kutoka pale.  Kwa hivyo 
hii ikiwa itafa nyika kweli kwamba ifanywe outreach  ya drug rehabilitation  iweze kutumi ka 
huko, waende kule wakae kule watumie dawa kule ki mimi nimefurahi sana na naiuunga mkono 
leo nitakuwa kama Mheshimiwa mwenza mia fil mia. Shukran sana.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadh ili M akarani ): Naam  Mtumishi Madialo?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Mr. Speaker Sir, before I give my or le nd my support, I would like to 
unreservedly apologize to my sister, Hon ourable  Amriya if she fees, I have aggrieved her in any 
manner. I ri se to support and I have five reasons, very quickly ; I support because there are areas 
and Wards lik e Bamburi, Magogoni, Mjambe re, Kipevu, Bofu and Po rt Reitz, no is it Port 
Reitz? ! and Port Reitz which do not have dispensaries s o by adopting this Motion, I le nd my 
support . Two; the Co mmunity Health Volunteers ( CHVs) from the Report  will be given mo nthly 
stipend and that will  be a very big boost to them.  Number three t he automation of payments ; a lot 
of monies get lost or are misappropriated wh en payments  are given in cash s o when  this Report 
recommends pap erless transaction and through that there wi ll be no pilferage of cash.  Number 
four in  the Report also, there will be t he securing of the facilities ; most of the facilities or health 
facilities in our Cou nties do not have perimete r walls and we see that eve n most of them have 
been grabbed, s o this Re port recommends that those facilities be secured and also, I think am 
also in the Committee of La nds the recommendation is that title d eeds be issued to those 
facilities.   
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor  Page 12 Number five i n the Report also they encou raged capacity building for the workers in t his 
sector ; like our doctor s, if they would want to further their education, the nurses and all health 
practitioners . So, I would support so that their capacity  be build. Then lastly, as  a Member of the 
Committee on Labour and Public Service Administration,  I have not noted that ther e was  an 
oversight on the part of the appointing authority when appointing the taskforce . The team they 
did not appoint a person fro m the County Public Servic e Board yet such matter s also include also 
matters of  human resource s o I would encourage that ne xt time when such kind of appointments 
are made the appointing authority should be keen and also include Members or a Member from 
the Public S ervice Board. Th ank you so much  I support.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Honourable  Madialo. Yes , 
Minority Leader?  
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa nafasi hii . 
Mimi pia napongeza Kama ti hii ; langu tu ningepend a tu kuongezea kwa sababu t ayari mimi 
nishakubali yale yote amba yo yamenakiliwa h apa na Waheshimiwa  wenza waliyo  yazung umza . 
Kuna mambo ambayo pia nimejaribu kuyaona katika hizi Zahanati ambazo kama ile yangu 
ambayo iko pale  Mtopanga  ni kwamba ni ku ongezea tu katika hii Kamat i wajaribu kuleta huo 
msisitizo. Kamati iliy oko; ni Kamat i moja ambayo iko hospitali kuu k wa hivy o ni muhimu pia 
katika hii Kamati waangalie zile hospitali zitakazo jengwa  waweze kuhusisha Kamati za viji ji 
kwa sababu ni muhimu da ktari mkuu akiwa pale na ak iwa na Kamati iliyo pal e itakuwa pia ni 
vizuri wanajua  je shida iliyo h apo wanavijiji ni rahisi kufahamishwa na daktari . Pia anapohusika 
na ile Kamati ya vijiji ikiwa kuna jambo lolote la muhimu ambalo an atakikana kusaidika pale n i 
rahisi. Nikisema hivyo ni  kwa sababu gani ; Hospitali yeyote ya eneo l a Wadi pasipokuwa na 
Kamati  yeyote iliyo pale kwa kijiji ni ngumu sana daktari kupata usaidizi kama juzi hapo kuna 
kitendo kilitendeka…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Depu ty Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Minority Lead er, is that 
recommendation in this Report?  
 
The Minority Leader  (Hon. Matsaki): Naam , naongezea . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Then you are introducing another Motion 
on a Motion.  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki): Ni sawa. Kwa hivyo mimi pia n auunga mkono 
hii hoja ambay o imeletwa na Kamati hii. Ahsanteni.   
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Nyota?  
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity just I would ju st like to 
air some views regarding this Report especially on the obser vations and findings of the Report.  
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor  Page 13 Mr. Speaker , I would like to congratulate my brother Hon ourable  Ogutu and the entire 
Committee of Healt h for this Report.  Mr. Spe aker, there is a key note on  the observations and 
findings number 4 wher eby it was clearly stated t hat; the current establishment of Dispensaries 
in the County are inadequate to sufficiently meet the health needs of residents of Mom basa and 
the following sta tement was that the existin g Level 2 and 3 health facilities are in dil apidated 
state, ill equippe d in infrastructure, personnel and medical supplies.  Mr. Speaker , I would like to 
say that the Committee on Health should fast-track  for the Implementation Com mittee to ensure 
that espec ially these two are key points which are not ed here they are followed t o the latter 
because I specifically speak on behalf of Ziwa La Ng’ombe Dispensary whereby the Dispensary 
is in a very bad state when  it comes to personnel and  medical supplies . So, when I  saw this, I was 
very happy mine is just to e mphasize to the Committee o f Implementation to get hold of 
Honourable  Mwaura’s neck to make sure these observations are app lied to the latter so that at 
least sanity c an be brought to these dis pensaries. Thank you , Mr. Sp eaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Yes , Vice C hair Finance 
Honourable  Hamida?  
 
Hon. Noor:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I rise to support the Motion ; I want to congratulate 
my brother Og utu for doing a tremendous  job and I would emphasize on t he implementation to 
fast track on this . This is a beautiful recommenda tion from the Health Department, we all know 
that there are a lot of patients and work that is going on at Coast General and the burd en is going 
to be reduced in Coast General and we hav e our dispensaries working I think with that  we will 
have a b etter Coun ty that we will have h ealth y people I recommend this. Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Ho nourable  Hamida. Yes , 
Honourable  Juma M walimu?  
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  [Off mic rophone]  Nataka hii Taskforce ama Kamati ya Afya  
inieleze vizur i hapo kwa that Marimani Outreach and Shika  Adabu Outreach be repurposed to a 
function as a drug and substance abuse to be rehabilita tion centers as recommende d by the 
taskforce.  Mheshim iwa Spika , kuna Kamati ya Afya  ilitulete a makasha  ambayo yaliwek wa pale 
ofisini kwa Chifu  Shika  Adabu na lengo lake ilikuwa ni rehabilitation  lakini sasa hivi imemaliza 
miaka mitano Mheshimiwa Spi ka mpaka makasha yale ya meoz a. Sasa kwa hapa sijaelewa 
nataka nifafanuliwe vizuri ni mbinu gani ama ni namna gani ambapo huko k wangu Shika  Adabu 
Outreach  ifanywe iwe drug and substance abuse rehabilitation , hapa mimi naona kizungu mkuti  
tu sijaelewa Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante sana Mheshi miwa Spika.  
 
The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you and I think the mover of the 
Moti on has noted it down so when you reply it might be one of the things that you might reply. 
Honourable  Members , I can see that you have full y exhausted the good Report from Health 
Committee Cha ired by Hon ourable  Benard Ogutu , so I will let Hon ourable  Chair to respond to 
this M otion, please reply to this Motion . 
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . N ingependa kuchukua nafasi 
kuwashukuru Waheshim iwa kwa mchango wao kwa hi i Ripoti ; Mheshimiwa Spika , kuhusiana 
na utekelezaji wa hii Ripoti  tumew eza kuweka timeline ili isi fike 2026 ndio tunaanza tena 
kuangalia hayo mambo tunataka kuweka timelines  za miezi sita ama baada ya mwaka mmoja . 
Februa ry 15, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         8 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the O fficial Hansar d Report i s for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansar d Editor  Page 14  Lakini haya yote yat alingana n a ushirikiano we tu kama Bunge  ili tuweze  kusukuma haya 
maneno.  Pili Mheshimiwa Spika  kuna hiyo ishu ya Zahanati  zile Wodi ambazo hazina Zahanati 
lazima Waheshimiwa  wahakikishe katika County Integrated  Development Plan (CIDP) 
wameweza ku elekeza  kwamba katika W adi zao w anahitaji Zahanati.  Mheshim iwa Spika, tunajua 
kati ya harambee kumi , sita zinahusiana na mambo ya mati babu . Hapa tumeweza kuhakikisha ya 
kwamba tumeweka Mombasa Care ambayo itakuwa inapeana huduma ya afya kwa watu wetu . 
Kwa hi o hayo mambo ya  pesa ndogo ya mshahara wa tatumia vizuri nyumbani Mhe shimiwa 
Spika kuleta raha ndani ya nyumba . Mheshimiwa Spika , ningeomba Wa heshimiwa wenzangu 
tuweze kupitisha hii Hoja ili hii Ripoti  iweze kutumika kusaidia wananchi wetu wa Mombasa. 
Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speak er (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , before I put a 
question,  I would like to remind yo u that tomorrow the Committee on Appointments will have 
sittings on vetting of the County Executive Committee (CECs) so you are m ost welcomed.  
Honourable  Members , I now put a question that the Motion  on Report on the review of the 
taskforce on  Mombasa County H ealth care system be adopted in this Hon ourable  House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Having there no other Busine ss the House stands ad journed until 21st February at 
10:00a.m . 
 
The House rose at 3:57 p.m. 
 