March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 7th March , 2018  
The House met at 9:09a.m. 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Have your seats. Yes Clerk.  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Hon.  Members  I just want to  bring to the attention of the H ouse that the Mombasa 
County Assembly football team will be leaving for a peace  tournament in Nairobi . I take 
this opportunity to  announce to th e House and wish them safe journey,  the motive of the 
tournament is to bring peace in Kenya so all t he best for the Mombasa County A ssembly  
team . Yes Clerk ? 
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
Yes Hon.  Hatimy Mohamed.  
 
CENTRALIZATION  OF REVENUE COLLECTIO N ADMINISTRATION UNDER COUNTY 
EXECUTIVE MEMBER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNI NG 
 
Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this oppo rtunity to 
table the follow ing Notice of Motion  under centralization  of revenue collection  
administration under County Executive Member for Finance and Economic Planni ng. 
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved the Notice of Motion)  
 
THAT AWARE  that pursuant to section 104, 105, 157 and 158 of the Public 
Finance Management Act, 2012 the County Treasury is empowered to oversee and 
administer matters of public finances  and appoint receivers of revenue at the county 
government level;  
 
FURTHER AWARE  that the County Government has in the last two years been 
performing outstanding too well in on  - source revenue collection and has received 
awards on that score;  
 
NOTING  that departments in the first half of this financial year have not been  able 
to meet revenue collection targets occasioned partly by uncertainty over general 
elections and subdued business climate accompanying the same;  
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 FURTHER NOTING  that decentralization of revenue collection and multi - 
administration of the same may have also contributed to the situation and to reverse 
that revenue collection administration needs to be centralized for efficiency and  
effectiveness;  
 
Mr. Speaker , DEEPLY CONCERNED  that the state of poor revenue collection in 
the first half of  the financial year 2017/2018 may negatively affect implementation 
of budgetary programmes;   
 
Mr. Speaker I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE  that: 
 
All revenue collection activities ; receivers, collectors and officers are under the 
supervision and authority of the Co unty Executive Member for Finance and 
Economic Planning.   
 
Mr Speaker I beg to move thank you.    
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Next Order ? 
 
STATEMENT  
 
Yes Hon.  Kibwana.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon.  Hatimy what is it?  
Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy : Mr. Speaker because I can see Notice of Motion  is any  
way going to order number seven is statement so if you can g rant permission I want to seek  
leave to move this Motion . 
     The Deputy Speaker:  So wait when we come to order number nine Motion s you 
will be permitted to seek leave for the House to debate on your Motion . Yes Hon. Kibwana.  
 
CHIKUNGUNYA  DISEASE  
 
     Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh :  Thank you Hon.  Speaker. I wish today to highlight  or give 
my answers as the Chair of the Health  Committee on the issue of the d isease Chikungu nya, 
just to say that this Health Committee which comprise of Hon.  Members ; Hon.   Speaker, 
Members  of this Committee myself as the Chair , Vice Chair is Hon.  Fatma Kushe, you 
being also a Member Hon. Speaker and  other Members  are Khamisi Mwidani, Kombe Nzai 
Hon.  Speaker, Kizito Opeya, Lucy Chizi, Fahad Kassim and Murfad Amur. Hon.  Speaker I 
will just go directly to the issue that was raised. Hon.  Speaker Mombasa County is 
administratively divided into six sub Counties Hon.  Speaker; namely Mvita, Likoni, 
Kisauni, Changamwe, Nyali and Jomvu with a total projected pop ulation of 1,322,408 .  
Hon. Speaker the Chikungunya virus is spread commonly by a mosquito which bites 
during the  day with peak early  morning hours and late evening . The mosquito breeds close 
to human habitation specifically in clean water as those contained in the flower vases, water 
storage facilities , used tyres and discriminatory disposed plastic containers .  
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 Hon.  Speaker when this disease started  affecting people  the County initiated 
immediate response measures to prevent and control the outbreak in implementing the 
following  interventions.  One Hon.  Speaker it was case management ; this was about 
treatment of patients which was done to all facilities within this County ; the other issue, the 
other intervention was height ened surveillance and reporting . The Heath officers were able 
to monitor this disease and also report  back to the health facilities on how it has gone further 
in affecting the people. Hon.  Speaker the other it was just an active area finding by visits to 
the health facilities  and medica l record review. Hon.  Speaker so the Health Department was 
able now to send officers on the ground and monitoring these mosquitoes . Hon.  Speaker the 
fourth one was fogging ; you are aware that all the Wards were able to see the Health officers 
with their vans fogging this with machines which were procured and launched under the 
leadership of His Excellency the Governor Ali Hassan Joho . 
Hon.  Speaker the other issue that also was taken care of was environmental 
management ; bush clearing , garbage removal , and destruction of breeding sites. I was able 
to see all the other Members  also taking these activities that were able to clear the bushes to 
reduce the number of mosquito zone s. The other issue Hon.  Speaker was health education 
and pro motion  before the fogging was done by the health workers , they were able to educate  
the people on how to minimize  the spread of these mosquitoes . The other issue was 
monitoring and evaluation of the activities so you will find that through evaluation we are 
able to contain the spread of these m osquitoes. Hon.  Speaker I think that is the initiative that 
was also taken and through our observation of as the Chair and the other Members  we have 
found that the Chikungunya issue now have reduced to a considerable number.  
So Hon. Speaker I think the disease has been now contained but we also have our 
recommendation s as a Committee on this issue ; one is to employ more Public Health 
Officer s and Vector Contro l Officers to ensure that regular and sustained interventions . Hon.  
Speaker w hat we have observed as a Committee is that they should employ more people 
who will going to spr ay like what used to happen before during the existence of the defunct 
Municipal we used to see  the health workers going round fogging/removing t he mosquitoes . 
So we urge the Health Department to employ more p eople on this issue we call it Vector 
Control Officers to ensure that we have this regular sustain able intervention Hon.  Speaker.  
The other issue is community  sensitization and advocacy , it is also very important  for our 
people to be educated ; we are saying that to do the prevention should be there than curative . 
So once the people know how to prevent then  I think we will able now to protect  our people  
against  different disease s Hon.  Speaker.  The other recommendation is re gular maintenance 
of machines to prolong  their life span ; Hon.  Speaker  these machine s also need to have 
regular maintenance .   
This report containing the Committee observations , finding s, conclusion s and 
recommendation s be tabled before this House  for adoption Hon.  Speaker. Finally Mr. 
Speaker I say this is what we have come across and I think we will b e able now to see how 
we will follow it up when there is another disease coming so that would be able to inform 
our people. Thank you Hon.  Speaker . 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes thank you, the Chairman and the Committee on Health. 
Next Order ? 
 
POLICY ON SPONSORSHIP  OF WARD TOURNAMENT  
 
 Yes, Hon. Moses Aran . 
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Hon. Oindo : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir I wish to give the following 
statement respon se on Policy on sponsorship of Ward tournament.   Mr. Speaker Sir the 
statement was raised by Hon. Mwaka Bakari MCA Timbwani  Ward on 15th February , 2018 . 
The Department of Gender and Sports respon ded to the Committee as follows ;  
1. Currently there is  no policy in  place to sponsor Ward tournament though we have 
draft Sports Policy.  
2. According to Schedule Four of the Constitution, the National Government is 
mandated under part One (17) to promote sports and sports education, while under 
the same schedule, part Two 4 which reads – Cultural activities, public entertainment 
and public am enities including: (h) reads – Sports and Cultural Activ ities and 
Facilities. Schedule Four explains the functions of each arm of the Government.  
3. The Department has been supporting various sports activities in terms of transport, 
uniforms and equipment. Th ey have been sponsoring County soccer league for two 
years running. This has been done in conjunction with the local football federation, 
which is legally mandated to run soccer.  
 
 From 2010  to 2013, H is Excellency , The Governor sponsored trophies for 
the final event /match.  
 In 2014 , His Excellency  the Governor, through Hassan Joho Foundation 
contributed Kshs.900 , 000 /= ( Nine hundred thousand only) as part 
sponsorship of soccer activities in the County.  
 In 2015 , Mr. Speaker,  the Department sponsored the County league to a 
tune of Ksh s.2.8 Million.  
 In 2016, the Department prepared a sp onsorship to a tune of 
Kshs.3.4 Million, this facilitation has not been released by the Treasury to 
date, and this  complicated the sponsorship of 2017 season, which we did not 
prepare.  
   
4. The funds are us ed as follows:  
1. To pay match officials  
2. Prizes for the finalists  
3. Trophies  
4. Securing of kits for all participating teams  
5. The teams which benefits from this sponsorship are:  
 
Mombasa County Premier League which has 18 teams : 
 
a) County Division 1 League which h as 20 teams  
b) County Division 2 which has 20 teams  
c) County Women League, which has 16 teams  
d) FKF Mombasa Sub -branch youth tournament under 13 and under 15  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Thank you Hon. Aran and your Committee on Youth, 
Gender, Sport s and Cultural Affairs for the response ; the two reports will be discussed in the 
Liaison Committee. Yes Clerk?  
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 MOTION  
 Yes, Hon. Hatimy ? 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I seek leave  to 
seek permission from this Honorable  House to move a Motion .  
 The Deputy Speaker: Yes Hon.  Members  I propose a question that the House 
permits the Motion  on centralization to be debated today . 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 …And the Motion  to proceed . 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy  move d the Motion ) 
CENTRALIZATION OF RE VENUE COLLECTION ADMINISTRATION  UNDER  COUNTY 
EXECUTIVE MEMBER FO R FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING  
Mr. Speaker I wish to table  this Motion  pursuant to Section 104, 105, 157, 158 of 
the Public Finance Management Act , 2012 . The County Treasury is empowered to 
oversee and administer matters of public finance and appoint the receivers of 
revenue at the County Government level;  
FURTHER  AWARE  that the County Government has in the last two years been 
performing outstanding too well in on source revenue collection and has received 
awards on that score;  
NOTING THAT  the Departments in the first half of this financial year have not 
been able to meet revenue collection targets occasioned partly by uncertainty over 
general elections and subdued business climate accompanying the same;  
FURTHER NOTING  that decentralization of revenue collection and multi 
administration of the same may have also con tributed to the situation and to 
reverse that revenue collection administration needs to be centralized for efficiency 
and effectiveness;  
DEEPLY CONCERNED that the state of poor revenue collection in the first half 
of the financial year 2017 /2018 may neg atively affect implementation of budgetary 
programmes;  
I therefore urge this Assembly to RESOLVE that:  
All revenue collection activities receivers, collectors and officers be under the 
supervision and authority of the County Executive member for Finance a nd 
Economic Planning.  
   Mr. Speaker I beg to move. Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker:  Who’s to second?  
  Hon. Samba:  Mr. Speaker I beg to second.  
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  The Deputy Speaker:  Okay, I now propose  that the Motion  on Centralization of 
Revenue Collection Administrati on under County Executive Member for Finance  and 
Economic Planning be debated  in this House?  
 
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
 
Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy:  Naona kama ambaye Mheshimiwa Spika Mheshimiwa 
Samba anataka kuitoa kauli yake ya kuun ga mkono. Mheshimiwa Spika niko mbele ya 
Nyumba hii tunataka kuwacha shida tulizo  nazo kwa mambo ya ukusanyaji pesa za Kaunti . 
Kama tunavyojua Mheshimiwa Spika na  tumeeleza kwenye Mswada  kusema kuwa section 
104 inazungumzia juu  ya treasury  na treasury  ndio mambo yote juu ya mambo ya 
ukusanyaji,  mambo ya pesa yote ni chini ya treasury . Mheshimiwa spika miaka miwili 
nyuma iliyopita tumeweza kukusanya pesa vizuri sana ndani ya Kaunti hii na tukawa 
tumeongoza ndani y a Kaunti 47 sisi tukawa ni namba moja  mara mbili mfululizo.  L akini 
naona kuwa kidogo kuliharibika ule mfumo  ikawa kila kitengo kinataka kukusanya pesa ; 
sasa ukiangalia hata juzi nilikwenda mbio kutaka kupata quarterly report  ikawa pia nao 
wana  tabu kutengeneza quarterly re port mpaka wapate ripoti kutoka kwa vitengo vyengine 
alafu wao ndio watengeneze ile quarterly report . Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba 
Nyumba hii tukubaliane kwa sauti moja ya kuwa in charge  wa Fedha  awe atasimamia 
ukusany aji wa pesa na hizi pesa ziwe  zitakuwa chini yake na yeye ikiwa kitengo kinataka 
kukusanya pesa basi yeye atoe ofisaa kutoka kitengo chake waende wakaifanye hii kazi ili 
kusudi kujulikane kwa patikana nini . Kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Spika pesa hizi zina shetani 
watu watakuwa wanakusanya pesa alafu watu wa takuwa wanazifanyia mipango yao  hazifiki 
vile zilivyokusanywa zitakuwa pengine zimekusanywa mia zitaletwa ishirini , thamanini 
zipotee njiani.  
Kwa hivyo naomba Mheshimiwa Spika Nyumba hii ip itishe hoja hii ili tuhakikishe 
huyu Msimamizi wa Fedha tumempatia uwezo na ikiwa kuna jambo lolote sisi tuwe 
tutamchukua yeye tutamshika yeye kama kuna shida yoy ote. Kwa sababu leo ukimuuliza 
leo tumekusanya pesa ngapi , hawezi kukuambia mp aka aanze kupiga simu kila kitengo 
aulize alafu ndio aambiwe ndio akujibu swali lako. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika jambo 
hili ni jambo la umuhimu na ni la haraka kuwa sisi baada ya miezi mitatu twaingia kwenye 
bajeti mpya na twataka kuwa hizi pesa ziwe chini  ya kitengo cha Fedha . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Mwaka ? 
Hon. (Ms.)  Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante Bwana Spika mimi jambo hili kama 
Mwanakamati  wa Kamati ya Fedha  nasisi tiza Jumba hili liunge mkon o Msw ada huu k wa 
sababu jambo la pesa ndio kiungo kikubwa kabisa na kama mnavyoona kila mtu akiwa 
atachukua  pesa kwa u pande wake basi hayo mambo ya kila mtu anachukua  pesa itakuwa 
haitaleta natija. Kwa hiyo mimi jambo hili naliunga mkono na naomba Jumba hili liunge 
mkono kitu hichi cha pesa ili tuweze kusonga mbele kimaendeleo. Ahsante .  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Feddis ?  
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii ulionipa . Pia 
mimi nataka kuunga mkono Hoja hii ili oletwa mbele yetu k wa sab abu nataka kukumbusha 
kwamba kawai da Mweka hazina huwa ni mmoja . 
Kwa hivyo kusema kweli kama haya mambo ya ushuru kila mmoja ataingilia kati 
basi hakika hii pesa itapotea humu  humu mifukoni mwa watu na serikali y a Kaunti inaweza 
kuenda chini k wa sababu ya hi yo tabia. Kwa hivyo mimi naunga mkono mara moja n a pia 
wasimamishwe mara moja Mwekaji hazina awe mmoja kama kawaida. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Thoya ? 
Hon. Thoya : Ahsante Mh eshimiwa Spika nafikiri hii ni Hoja ambayo i napaswa 
uungwa ji mkono hususan kutoka kwangu kama mtu binafsi. Kwa hivyo hiyo kura yangu 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy ipokee  kwa moyo mkunjufu . 
Ninachosema ni kwamba ni lazima kuwe kuna mipango maalumu kuhusu ukusanyaji 
wa pesa na ni hoja ambayo pia sisi tunaiangali a hivi ; kwangu mimi naona itafu ngua 
mwanya kwa upande wa ajira  kwa sababu tukiona vile vibanda hata vya mama mboga 
ambavyo zinakusanywa ushuru zitahitaji vijana. Kwa hivyo endapo itapita ni  lazima kuwe 
kuna watu ambao watafanya hiyo kazi kule mashinani na  nafikiri Mheshimiwa Hatimy  ni 
lazima tua nze kujipanga kwamba tuko katika dunia ya kisasa  hivi mambo vya jirisiti risiti 
watu wanakusanya pesa mtu ana vitabu viwili anakusanya 50 anaandika kitabu hiki mara 
wanakuja mara hawaji ni jambo ambalo hata kule Mikindan i tulilijadili kwa sababu utakuta 
yule mtu wa Trade ambaye anazungukia vibanda anamaliza zaidi ya wiki mbili haji mara 
anakuja mara anakusanya shilingi 30 zawekwa kwa mifuko haieleweki . Ni bora tuje na 
mipango ya kisasa ambapo ile shilingi 30 ambayo yule ma ma mboga ataipeana iwe 
ameipeana kwa mina jili ya maendeleo ya Kaunti hii lakini isiende kwa mtu binafsi ipate 
vifaa vya kisasa ambapo zile pes a zikikusanywa zinafika katika Wizara husika mara nyingi 
zinabaki mifukoni mwa watu. Ahsante.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes the seconder Hon. Tobias Samba . 
Hon. Samba:  Yes thank you Mr. Speaker let me first of all start by thanking Hon. 
Hatimy for coming up with such a Motion . Mr. Speaker Sir as we are all aware that the 
backbone of any economy depend s on revenue collection and so far we have witness ed, as 
Hon. Members  have stated there are so many people with different interest s and when it has 
been centralized  each and every Department to do their own collection they might not be 
having clear record s as far as revenue collection is concerned and as per that respect I beg to 
support that all revenue collection be centralized  under the Department o f Finance and 
Economic Planning .  
We have witness ed several incidences in our respective places  where  Revenue 
collect ors have different receipts books that when they are issuing the receipts there are 
those that are given to those people who cannot pay the exact amount and  there are those 
people who pocket for instance th ese car park attendants they will tell you say if you don't 
have 100 shillings give me 30 shillings so that at least I can guarantee the security of your 
property . So in that respect if you have one responsible department that even when it comes 
to time of question or report we will have a genuine answer. Mr. Speaker I beg to support 
the Motion  thank you . 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Mwaka Zahoro . 
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Zahoro:  Ahsante Bwana Spika nimesimama kuunga mkono 
hoja ya Mheshimiwa Hatimy katika kuelekeza pesa zote ziweze kukusanywa katik a idara 
inayohusika.  
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 Bwana Spika Waswahili  husema , mikono mingi katika chakula huharibu kile 
chakula , hivyo basi mikono mingi katika ukusanyaji wa pesa zitafanya zisieleweke 
zinakusanywa kivipi na zinaelekea wapi? Kwa hivyo  basi tukielekeza pesa zote upande 
mmoja kutaboresha utenda kazi na itakuwa rahisi kuuliza na kujua kiwango cha pesa 
kilichopatikana katika ule ukusanyaji huo.  Hivyo basi ni muhimu kama pesa zote zitakuwa 
chini ya mkusanyaji mmoja kuhakikisha utenda  kazi unafanyika huko na uwajibikaji 
unapatikana k atika idara hiyo.  
  
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon. Nzai ? 
Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii na mimi niweze 
kusema mawili matatu sijui kama itakuwa ni kwa ufahamu ama ni utepetevu lakini 
ninavyofahamu mimi  siku zote tulikuwa na Bwana F edha  miaka yote na tumeona pesa 
zikikusanywa zengine wakienda kuripoti Inspectorate  chini huko, wengine wakija kulipa 
kodi za ardhi , wengine wakikusanya sokoni kule ninaamini hayo yote yalikuwa yakifanya 
wakielekeza hesabu zao kwa mtu mmoja . Sasa hichi ambacho kiunganishwe leo kwa huyo 
wa fedha  sijajua ni kipi lakini kwa mtazamo wangu naona kumekuwa  na utepetevu wa pesa 
kupotea.  
Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Point of Information ! 
The Deputy Speaker:  There's a Point of I nformation ! Hon. Member , do you want to 
be informed ? 
Hon. Nzai:  Mimi ninapinga kwa sababu naona kuna utepetevu...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon. Kitula . Hon. Nzai , do you want to be informed?  
Hon. Nzai:  Mimi nataka kujua  zile pesa zilikuwa zapotea wapi kwa sababu huyu 
Bwana F edha  amekuweko miaka yote...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  It seems that the Hon. Member does not want to be informed 
so continue . 
Hon. Nzai:  Mimi ninapinga huu Mswada kwa sababu hapa naona ni tuzingatie 
kufunga mashimo ya pesa kupotea lakini Kaunti hii inakusanya pesa nzuri sana kwa hivyo 
wale ambao wanaendelea kuzikusanya wahakikishe zinafika pale ambapo zinatakikana 
lakini tukisema hizi pesa zilikuwa zinapotea kwa sababu wakusanyaji ni wengi hapo mimi 
naona ninapinga. Ahsanteni.  
The Deputy Speaker:  The Mover , respond on your Motion .  
Hon. Moha med Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nasisitiza kuwa hawa walifanya kutoa 
hizi ruhusa za idara kukutana hizi pesa ni makosa kw a sababu ukiangalia sheria ya PFM 
ikitokea jambo lolote  anayesimamia kitengo cha fedha  ndio ataka e enda kujibu maswali . 
Kwa hiyo walijifanyia kwa kichwa chao  na ni kinyume cha sheria na nafikiri Kamati yetu 
ya F edha  imekaa ikafikiria jambo hili na ikakubaliana kuwa sisi tuje na  Mswada huu ili 
tupate kuipitisha hapa na wafuate vile sheria inavyotakikana.  
March 7, 2018                          COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                       8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kuwashukuru wale waliochan gia na 
kuendelea kupitisha hii Hoja ili tuweze kupata mtu mmoja ndiye atakayekuwa masuhulia wa  
kufanya ukusanyaji  wa h izi pesa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Deputy Speaker:  I now rise to put a question on the Motion  as per your 
resolution that all revenue collection activities , receivers, collectors and officers be under 
the supervision and authority of the  County Executive Member for  Finance and Economic 
Planning . 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
(Appla use) 
 
Next Order . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Yes Members  the House stands adjourned until toda y the 7th March, 2018 
Wednesday at 2 :30p.m.  
 
The House rose at 9:47 a.m. 