February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
  
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 21st February, 2019  
The House met at 3:20p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Good afternoon Hon . Members  we may be seated. Yes 
Clerk?  
 
MESSAGES  
NOMINATION OF MR JEIZAN FARU K AS BOARD SECRETARY , CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER TO 
MOMBASA COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE  BOARD  
 
 Hon. Members I have received a message from H.E. The Governor, Hassan Ali Joho 
on the nomination of Mr. Jeizan Faruk as the Board Secretary,  Chief O fficer Executive 
Officer to Mombasa County Public Service Board which I hereby read;  
 
The letter is dated 11th February, 2019.  
 
Dear Mr. Faruk , 
 
Re: Nomination as Board Secretary/Chief Executive Officer  
 
According to the powers conferre d to me by the County Government Act 
Sec.58(1 c), I hereby nominate you as the Board Secretary and Chief Executive 
Officer in the County Public Service Board.  
 
Subsequently, I have forwarded your name to the Mombasa County Assembly for 
vetting and approval pending formal appointment.  
 
Congratulations on a well deserved position.  
 
 Yes Clerk, Hon . Members pursuant to Standing Order 39(3C) I commit this 
message to the Committee on Labour and Social Welfare for necessary action. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  

February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  Yes Cler k? 
 
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE BY CHAIRMAN COMMITTE E ON  HEALTH HON . KIBWANA SWALEH TO A STATEMENT 
REQUEST BY HON . JUNIOR WAMBUA ON THE OFFICIAL OPEN ING OF CHAANI CLINIC  IN CHAANI 
WARD  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kibwana, the Chairperson Committee on 
Health, please the response.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker for giving me this opportunity. 
Hon. Speaker I as a Chai r of the Committee and also my Members would like to give a 
Statement or a response to a request made by Hon. Junior Wambua, Mem ber of County 
Assembly from Chaani Ward at the Fourth Sitting of the House on 4th February, 2019 
regarding the official opening of Chaani Clinic in Chaani Ward.  
 Mr. Speaker the following is my response on the issues raised by Hon. Wambua : 
1. The construction  and infrastructur e of the Chaani Clinic is ready;  
2. The County Public Service Board is in the process of advertising the vacant posts in 
the facility, this is in regards to the  issue of Human Resource issues;  
3. Procurement of equipment is on-going  at the Depa rtment of Fina nce and Economic 
Planning i.e. Procurement section ; 
4. County g overnment has slotted the first week of May , 2019 to officially open the 
Chaani Clinic.  
 Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kibwana Swal eh the able Chairperson 
Committee on Health, thank you very much. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE BY CHAIRMAN COMMITTE E ON  HEALTH HON . KIBWANA SWALEH TO A STATEMENT 
REQUEST BY HON. FEDDIS MBURA ON THE OFFICIAL OPEN ING OF MWAKIRUNGE MARIMANI  
CLINIC IN MWAKIRUNGE  WARD  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes again the Chairperson Committee on Health, Hon. 
Kibwana Swaleh please give the response.  
 
 Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Once again thank you Hon. Speaker. I arise here as Chair 
of the Health Committee to respond on the official ope ning of Mwakirunge Marimani Clinic, 
requested by Hon. Feddis Salama Mbura on the 4th of February, 2019 during the fourth sitting 
of this House.   
 Hon. Speaker as earlier stated the Department is planning also again on  the issue of 
opening this facility and  again the infrastructure of the Mwakirunge  Clinic  is ready. Hon. 
Speaker also the issue of the procurement is also on -going and also the issue of equipment is 
on the process through the Department of Finance and Planning which is in the procurement 
Sectio n. Hon. Speaker also the Public Service Board is in the process of advertising vacant 
posts in the said Clinic. Hon. Speaker I also want to add that the advertisement  if the 
Members will be very keen they will find that next week they will see that advert isent. 
Finally, Mr. Speaker Sir the County Government of Mombasa has slotted again the first week 
of May 2019 to officially open the Mwakirunge Marimani Clinic.   Thank you.  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3 (Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :Thank you again Hon. Kibwana Swaleh, the 
Chairperson Committee on Health. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON TRANSPO RT, INFRA STRUCTURE AND PUBLIC  WORKS 
HON. PRISCHILLA MUMBA TO A STATEMENT REQUEST BY CHIEF WHIP HON . CHARLES KITULA TO 
KNOW THE COMPANY SUP PLYING STREET LIGHTI NG EQUIPMENT AND THE MODE OF THE SUPPLY 
IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Yes Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works, Hon. 
Prischilla Mumba please give the response . 
 
 Hon. Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to give a 
statement in re sponse to a request made by H on. Charles Juma Kitula at the Fourth Sitting of 
the House on 4th February, 2019 in which he sought to know the company supplying street 
lighting equipment and the mode of the supply in the County.   
 Mr. Speaker Sir, this reque st was partly erroneously directed to me and I so ught a 
response from the Departmen t which referred me to the Department of Finance and 
Economic Planning for more details regarding t he procurement and supp ly of street lighting 
equipment . 
               Mr. Speaker Sir , with regard to the number of Technicians employed in the street 
lighting programme, I am pleased to inform this Honourable House that the electrical unit has 
one designated technician, one electrical engineer, four foremen, four artisans and five 
labourers.            
              Mr. Speaker Sir, further to a request for a statement on how the tasks are divided and 
assigned to the technicians , I wish to respond as follows:  
1. All 30 W ards are served in equal measure;  
2. Task s are sub-divided on Sub County ba sis; 
3. Every Sub County h as a technician in -charge with A rtisans who support the 
installa tion and repair of fault street lights. They also do routine inspection and 
maintenance of the lights.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, I have attached a letter  dated  20th February, 2019  from the Chief 
Officer…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
            The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Prischilla Mumba so are you saying in number 
three  every Sub County has a  Technician in -charge with the A rtisans ? So you mean they are 
how many technicians? I thought you said  there  is just one Techn ician so how can every Sub 
County have a T echnician? Yes Hon. Bwire . 
  
 Hon. Bwire : Thank you. Mr. Speaker mine is just a concern and I raised it here ; this 
is not the first time that whenever a M ember or a Chairperson of a Committee is i ssuing a 
report or rather a response we ought to have the copies so that we also go hand in hand with 
whatever the Chairperson is reading . 
 Unfortunately Mr. Speaker we do not have any copy so we do not know  even what 
she is reading , she might read the who le page and I may not be able to capture  all the 
information. Thank you.  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Clerk I think please take a note of that and  
I remember last time I even said that please make sure all the M embers have the copies or 
then if y ou have a problem with the copies we can go digital and  every M ember has a screen 
there  whereby you get all the information…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Prischilla Mumba I hope whatever you are reading you know what you 
are reading  and it is not what someone ha s written for you to come and read it here.  
 
 Hon. Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker . You know as a Chair once th e Honourable 
requested for any S tatement I honestly read what the Department has brought to me as a 
Chair because I should not put in my words so th at I should cover myself. So I have to read 
what they had written so that I can prove to what they had sai d but in technically if we go and 
look of what they are saying maybe practically then I have to go with my Committee after 
this and see what they have  written to me because I cannot go into the office now and tell 
them practically show me how they are working, so I first ….  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable M ember you know you cannot be a one -
man show ; you need to work with your M embers  so when this report comes you have to sit 
down with your M embers and read the report and understand before you bring it to the 
House. So whatever you are reading ..., I mean when you say I have a copy here , when you 
say you have  one designated T echnic ian... so you did not mention in each Sub County or he 
is just one in the whole Mombasa County? And this is what you wrote it is not the Chief 
Officer , this is what y ou wrote. So please Honourable Member … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Mumba : Mr. Speaker Sir with due respect  I have very much respect in you I 
do not write th ese thing s, neither do I know whether there are T echnicians or not this was a 
report… 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : But this is  your S tatement the  Honourable Member … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon. Mumba : I am copying from…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : No, you have sign ed this thing…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Hon. Mumba : There is a copy which  they had already written whate ver is there in 
their Transport Department it is written the re though we are just copying what they had 
already responded.   
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Kitula . 
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante Mwenyekiti. Mwenyekiti ukiangalia leo 
Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi ameweza kukiri rasmi kwamba hii sio yeye 
anayeandika ; kwamba inatoka katika Kitengo  lakini kwa maoni yangu ningeona  kwa kuwa 
yeye  hana majibu ka mili basi tuwaite wahusika watu patie  majibu kamili  Nyumba hii 
wenyewe.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Shebe . 
 
 Hon. Sh ebe Athman : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Hon. Speaker my fellow Chair has 
just confessed she is not pleased with the report. So I wonder in the first place why did she 
table the report in the first place? And also  this happens to be an eye opener to my fellow 
Chairs, we need to exercise our ful l mandate as oversight. If any M ember is not pleased with 
the report I do not see any reason why it should be tabled here Hon. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe. Yes Hon. Samba . 
 
 Hon. Sa mba : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I do not think whether it is proper wh en a 
Member has requested for a S tatement and then the Chairman just goes and receive s a report 
from the Executive. Executive and the Assembly are two different entities and that is why we 
have the formation of the House Committees whereby the report that is presentable in the 
House they should be ready to defend the report if at all , if they need to do their own 
investigation they have every given opportunity to do that .  
 So maybe I would r equest the House that this report  maybe  as it appears it is not 
complete because the Honourable Chair has just stated that she is reading a rep ort that she has 
been handed over or she has been given , maybe if we can excuse her they go for another 
sitting s o that the report they will present before us they should be ready to defend the report 
themselves.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Renson Thoya . 
 
 Hon. Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think there is an observation that I need to 
share her e, I think in every week you are going hear the Chair of Tra nsport or S tatem ent 
being requested from every M ember of this House .  To me I feel  like that Department has a 
lot, they have a lot to chew than they can afford ; it is the Department that  is concer ned about 
transport; l ighting of late I have  been seeing  some of the County Askaris  also being deployed 
there , another Department of Water and Natural Resource that sub section is going there. 
There is need that we need to sit down to align the functions  of this Department or the 
Transport Chair is being overwhelmed , she is being overwhelmed .  This is  because every time 
and I think all these St atements you will see the same person standing and answering and all 
those ques tions are not satisfying these M embe rs because what we are seeing apart from 
maybe from the Executive bringing this in formation our role is oversight, i s this Minister  
telling the truth to this House compared to what is on the ground?  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  Totally in Jomvu we have only one T echnician who is I t hink is disabled and I am 
very sad and you know it is about going up the poles so we are forced to hire a private person 
who wi ll be supervised by the County Technicians. The A rtisans as indicate d we do not know 
where they are, s o the information that has been brought before the House need to be a true 
represent ation  as huko mashinani  because it does not but truly I am saying the Chair is being 
overwhelmed because kila mmoja akisimama uchukuzi, uchukuzi  and she is my fellow Chair 
and I am very certain the C hair is being overwhelmed we need to discuss this.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya. Yes Hon. Fadhili 
Makarani, Deputy Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker 
first I wil l declare interes t that I am a M ember of Transport Committee but unfortunately we 
have not sat as a Committee to discuss this report . Secondly Mr. Speaker we are taking this 
Assembly for granted ; I do not have the report , I overheard my able C hair reading it and what 
I was  surprised is that one, a  whole Chief O fficer does  not know which com pany that 
distributed the light.  
 Mr. Speaker  it is in the report that the Chie f Officer is sending us back to the 
Finance D epartment and yet it was his mand ate to go to the Finance D epartmen t and give us 
a true picture of what has transpired . So Mr. Speaker i am seeing that the D epartment is 
taking the Assembly for granted ; it was also asked about employment and when this, the 
consignment for the street light when did they come and actually if really they came , and why 
we are not seeing any light distributed to our Wards . 
 Mr. Speaker and the issue of employment the Chief Officer or the D epartment could 
be wise enough to come or report to this Assembly as on when th ese people were employed, 
because I remember through the budget C ommittee the issue of employment was somehow 
stopped so we wanted also to know when did they  advertise and employ the said T echnician s 
and the supporting staff. Thank you Mr. Speaker.   
  
            The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank yo u Hon. Fadhili Makarani, yes Hon. Bwire.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Am very  tall Mr. Speaker and this mic rophone  is so humiliating me.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire.  
  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker first I have gone through the 
response a nd it must be taken clear that we are not again st the Chairperson neither the 
Committee, but we are just exercising our mandate s and th is mandate also they also have to 
exercise this mandate as well.  
 Mr. Speaker it  is very open that the C ommittee through some Members have 
confirmed the they have n ever seen the response, so the C ommittee in one way or another 
have failed this House, t hey have brought half baked information, the informat ion that they 
have no clue over.  
 The Chairperson has also confirmed that  it is from her e that she will go and confirm  
from the Department if there are T echnician s. I want to tell her that Mr. Speaker you can not 
bring an information neither a report or a response in a House on something you have no 
information over, if you are given  a response you must follow the respo nse before you table it 
in the H ouse them be sure to familiarize yourself with the response or the information  you 
want to table  before  the House.  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  So in other words i am saying the C ommittee of Transport and I nfrastructure ha s 
failed us, they have failed this House, they have failed the people of Mombasa County who 
gave us the mandat e to represent them in this Honourable  House, that is one .  
 Two Mr. Speaker I  want to second what the Chief Whip said that it seems the office 
bearers have also failed in their m andate we now no longer want the C ommittee to respon d, 
as a Member and as an officer who is in charge of oversight I would wish this House to 
compel the officer to appear before this House for questioning….  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Another issue is that  I have seen s ome resolutions from this response, resolution 
number one ; that all W ards are served in equal measure , it is a big no Mr. Speaker. If my 
mind serves me well, the other day last year we happen ed to have a report or a response  from 
the same Department whic h was indicating how many W ards have received how many bulbs 
and all that, and there were so many discrepancies,  there were so many differences. You will 
find there was a W ard with 10 bulbs, there is a nother  with 30 bulbs, there is  a Ward with 150 
bulbs, s o they have never served all Wards equally . That is why am saying this response is 
very half baked.  
 Another one Mr. Speaker is resol ution number three, that every Sub County has a 
Technician in charge with  Artisans  who suppor t the installation and repair of f aulty s treet 
lights, they also do routine inspection of the light s. Mr. Speaker I lost eight people  last year in 
December , eight people in  one week and it has taken the Department four  months to come 
and rectify the faul ts in my W ards. So the issue of routin e maintenance  does not happen in 
some other W ards, may be if it happens in some other Wards but in my Ward it has never 
happened. S o Mr. Speaker I see no reason as to why we are discussing this half baked 
response, we would rather suggest and compel this Commit tee to s ummon  the D epartment  or 
office bearers on our behalf so that we question them. W e do not have to compel the Madam 
Chairperson because she has no clue  over what is happening in the D epartment, that is as my 
opinion, thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Kha tri): Thank you. Y es Hon. Fahad Kasim.  
 
 Hon. Fahad  Kassim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii, n i dhahiri ya 
kwamba Mwenyekiti m wenzangu mpendwa amethibitisha ya kwamba ameleta ripoti ndani ya 
Bunge hili ambalo tuko hapa kutumikia wananchi wetu ya kwam ba hawaja hakikisha wala 
hawajapitia hiyo ripoti kama K amati na alikuwa anasoma kitu ambacho kimeletwa na upande 
wa executive  ambayo inawezekana ni uwongo . Na mimi kama mtumishi ama M wakilishi wa 
Mjambere nathibitisha ya kwamba hiyo  taarifa ni ya uwongo ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa sababu  kama ni mataa kwangu hayajawahi kuletwa hata siku moja na pesa 
tunapanga kila mwaka hapa lakini hatuoni kazi kufanyika.  
 Jumba hili tumekuwa na kilio  Mheshimiwa Spika kuhusiana na W izara ya Transport 
infrastructure and  public  works ; nilikuwa Mwenyekiti kwa W izara hiyo nafikiri Bunge 
linakumbuka vizuri sana na nikatoka nafurahi kuwa leo mimi sio Mwenyekiti wala 
Mwanakamati wa Wizara hiyo kwa sababu W izara hiyo imeanguka na haifai na ni lazima 
tuwajibike ili  tuweze kufanyia kazi  walio tutuma hapa .  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  Mheshimiwa Spika ni dhahiri kwamba kuna watu hapa tukita ka kufanya kazi yetu 
wanatuzuia  na wanapeleka salamu ambazo sizo.  Mheshimiwa sisi kama Bunge au mimi kama 
Mheshimiwa Fahad sina shida wala hatuna shida na Mhesh imiwa G avana lakini kuna watu…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kuna watu ndani ya Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika ukiwaita waje wawajibike, 
wanakwambia yeye ni mtu wa Gavana , pia sisi ni watu wa Gavana ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa hivyo tungepend a kuweka uwazi Mheshimiwa Spika;  tumelia hapa kilio zaidi ya 
mwaka, tumeweka tumetenga pesa za kuleta maendeleo mashina ni, kwangu Mjambere 
mpaka  leo wacha kuwekewa cabro  hata moja, hapajakuja hata tinga kucho nga barabara. 
Mheshimiwa Spika W izara ya  Uchukuzi  ndani ya  Kaunti ya  Mombasa ime shindwa  na 
tunaomba ukaraba ti wa hiyo W izara ifanywe haraka iwezekanavyo, hatulaumu M wenyekiti 
kwa sababu leo mimi ningekuwa kwa nafasi hii basi n ingekuwa mimi ndio nashambuliwa. 
Kwa hivyo kama K amati imeshindwa kuchukua hatua , naomba Bunge hili liweze ku muita 
Waziri na wahusika wot e wa Kitengo  hicho wote waweze kuja hapa ili  tuweze kujua ni nini 
kitakacho fanywa na nilisema kabla, kama wameshindwa na kazi waende nyumbani wakakae 
sio kutuumiza akili hapa…  
 
(Applause)  
  
 Mheshimiwa Spika naongea na uchungu sana kwa sababu tukifika mash inani sisi ndio 
tunawajibika kujib u watumishi wetu  na ningeomba W enyekiti wenzangu kabla hujatuletea 
taarifa  ndani ya Bunge hili  uhakikishe wewe kama kazi yako ni kuhakikisha hiyo taarifa  ni ya 
ukweli , uhakikishe wewe kama mtumishi  na siwasha mbulii ndugu z angu  lakini usituletee 
taarifa ambayo si o kwa sababu tukitoka hapa tutalaumiana kuwa umenishambulia, 
umenifanya nini ..., usituletee kitu cha uwongo wala hatukuja kufanya kazi ya upambe, 
tumekuja kufanya kazi ya kutumikia wananchi, tutumikie wananchi, ahsan te Mheshimiwa 
Spika . Nikimalizia Mheshimiwa Spika naomba utoe amri leo kwa sababu haya ni mambo 
ambayo tumezungumza ma ra nyingi sana na hayajafanyika; t unataka Waziri wa Uchukuzi , 
tunatak a ma Chief O fficer  wake wote hapa na tunataka wanaohusika tuje  tuwaho ji tuwatoe 
makosa yao na wakishindwa kujitetea Bunge hili liko na nguvu ya kuwapeleka nyumbani, 
ahsante sana . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fahad . Yes Hon. Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti  nasimama kwa masikitiko na nataka inukuliwe ya kwamba sisi sio wa kwanza 
kuwa katika Bunge hili na wala hatutakuwa wa mwisho kuhudumu katika nyadhifa hizi, 
tukifa leo baada ya miezi mitatu wengine watakuja, swali la kujiuliza baina yetu ni 
tutakumbukwa kw a kipi Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika tuna  dhamana chini ya 
kiapo tulichokula kuwa kilisha wananchi wetu sawa sawa  na majukumu haya yako kwetu, na 
sisi hatuna uwezo wa kuyatekeleza moja kwa moja bali ni kuyatungia sheria na kuyapitishia 
bajeti ili yatek elezwe kwa mustakbal wa wale waliotuchagua na kuwakilisha katika Bunge 
hili kama wasemaji wao, kama sauti yao.  
  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  Mheshimiwa inasikitisha ya kwamba tunahudumu miaka miwili sasa imepita na 
hakuna la msingi ; mathalan  sehemu ninayotoka sina uwezo wa  kukadiria japo ni elfu ku mi na 
tano zimetumika kwa  ajili ya mataa katika eneo lang u, hesabu hiyo sina Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti. Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti nitasimama kujibu nini watu wangu ama nitakapo 
ondoka nitakumbukwa kwa lipi ikiwa tumewajibika kupitisha bajeti mgao sa hihi kwa ajili  ya 
yale ambayo tumetumwa kwayo . Mheshimiwa mtu hukaa katika idara ama katika ofisi na 
mamilio ni ya pesa kuwajibikia wananchi  na ashi ndwe kuwajibika kwa kisingizio  ya kwamba 
yeye ni mtu wa  Gavana,  basi akakuwe house boy  au house girl  katika n yumba ya  Gavana … 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Lakini sio katika serikali ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa . Mheshimiwa pesa zinazotumika 
hapa sio pesa za mamake mtu ; hizi ni pesa za wato zwa ushuru , wananchi maskini hohehahe 
wa Mombasa ambao wanalipa ushuru , tena wa hali ya juu. Tukianga lia Finance Bill  yetu 
Mombasa sisi ni  miongoni twaongoza haswa Kenya nzima kwa kutoza wananchi wetu ushuru 
wa juu ilhali hakuna huduma kabambe wanazozipata. Mheshimiwa tusiendeshe serikali 
kishikaj i, tusiendeshe serikali tusiwe W aheshimiwa wa hapa wa  kukaa  hapa kuzingatia ama 
vibaraka wa watu fulani, huo ni ushenzi nasikitika tukumia lugha hiyo.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Member please use t he right language , just 
withdraw.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Nafuta kauli kwa hesh ima yako , naomba radhi.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  
  
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa naona n i wakati muafaka nitaungana na 
Waheshimiwa wenzangu ili  tupate majibu sahihi kwa sababu…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mimi nasik itika wakati Mheshimiwa mtu amejawa na hisia kuna 
maneno mengine si  kwamba ni matusi ya moja kwa moja, lakini ni kiwango cha hisia ile 
ambayo imemjaa na je msemaji amb ae sasa hivi anaendelea kuongea wewe kama 
Mwenyekiti Spika ungempatia aseme ne no gani amb alo linge fanana na hasira ambazo ziko 
moyoni mwake?  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya.  Hon. Members I think 
hapa ni Jumba ambalo sisi sote tuna heshimu na ni Jumba la sheria, kwa hio  ningeomba, 
najua huzuni tuko na zo nyingi, watu wamekanyagiwa na wenye kukanyaga wako hapa hapa, 
na tunawajua kwa hio Mheshimiwa m uache Mheshimiwa amalize atoe kauli zake lakini 
tutumie ile njia ya kisawa  sawa, tusitumie njia ya matusi. S isi tumechaguliwa na watu, 
Mheshimiwa mumechaguliwa na w atu m je mufanye  representation,  kwa hio m lete 
malalamiko yale ambayo munayo pata, ndio maana mkaona majukumu yetu tumeambiw a 
representation.  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  Representation  tuko hapa  ku represent wananchi wa Mombasa ambao kama vile 
tumesema tumeapa ya kwamba tutawatekeleze a kila  kitu kwa njia ya  haki na ndio tufanyeni  
hivyo W aheshimiwa, kwa hio  twendeni kwa njia ya haki, hayo matusi tutafanya nje ya 
nyumba sio hapa, ahsanteni. Yes Mheshimiwa Mwamwiri malizi a please . 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika labda ni fafanue  japo nimefuta kauli 
hiyo lakini ni chambue maana ya ne no shenzi, ufafanuzi wa ushenzi ni hali ya kuwa nyuma 
ki maendeleo na kutenda matendo ya kijinga na kikatili hali ya kutokuwa kistaarabu, kwa 
hivyo yeyote anaefanya jambo pasipokuwa na haki kwa ukatili  ama ustaarabu basi hilo jambo 
ni la ushenzi na yeye mwenyewe ni mshenzi.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Ahsante Mheshimiwa, sina Kamusi lakini na kuamini 
vile umesema.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika nitaungama na W aheshimiwa 
wenzangu ya kwamba imefi ka wakati wa sasa kutowahukumu  ama kuwahujumu  Wenyeviti 
kwa majibu wanay oleta au majawabu wanay oyaleta isipokuwa, Idara husika ifike mbele yetu 
watujibu ana kwa ana, watudanganye tukiwatazama usoni kwa sababu ripoti hii sina sababu 
ya kunukuu kipengele kimoja hadi  cheng ine yote ni urongo mtupu na alieandika ripoti hii ni 
katika kundi lile lile la wale washenzi, ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Shebe.  
 
 Hon. Athman Shebe:  Naam, ahsante sana Mhes himiwa Mwenyekiti . Wavyele 
wasema yataka nafasi  Mheshimiwa kula nanasi ; swali tu, tunafaa tujiulize hususan 
Waheshimiwa wenza  je nanasi twalila? Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti vile vi le narudi kwa wazazi 
wa kale wa vyele wakisema ugumu wa biskuti kiboko yake ni cha i, sasa nasema Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyek iti kuwa sisi t umepatiwa nafasi na wananchi ambao wametuchagua na wale vile 
vile pia waliteuliwa kuna juhudi kubwa wamefa nya ndio maana leo wako katika B unge hili . 
 Mheshimiwa Spika wananchi wametupatia mamlaka  za nguvu za  kidola, Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyek iti je nafasi tunaitum ia kula nanasi? Sim aanishi nan asi za kuliwa Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyek iti nama anisha majukumu yetu , je tunayatekeleza? Wale ambao rasil mali ziko juu 
ya mikono yao sisi majukumu yetu ni kuha kikisha rasil mali zile wanazitumia kufaidisha 
umma . Hii ni changamoto Mhesh imiwa Mwenyek iti, vile vile sisi ni chai ndio maana biskuti 
hata ikawa ngumu vipi ukiitia ndani ya ch ai tayari inaye yuka .  
 Mheshimiwa Mwenyek iti tayari nawaambia Mwenyekiti na Waheshimiwa ambao 
mko hap a sisi ni chai na hakuna mtu amba e ana vita na Mheshimi wa Gavana wetu , ndio 
kipenzi chetu na Mungu amjalie ndoto yake itimie l akini tunataka watu wawajibike . Kila mtu 
anataka  kuingia katika kumbukumbu y a historia kuwa alikuwa katika B unge na alitoa 
mchango katika kadamnasi ya wanan chi kuwa kuna faida moja au n yengi ni imepatikana . 
 Kwa hivyo sioni lawama kwa Mwenyekiti mwenza wa Uchukuzi , daa anawajibika 
lakini sisi kama alivyosema m moja hakuna siku kidole kitavunja chawa Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ; maji yakizidi unga watu washirikiane tuangalie vipi tutasaidia umma , vipi 
tutashir ikiana. Kwa hivyo ni  wajibu kila K amati ...mimi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wanijua 
siwezi kuleta  ripoti ambayo tayari sijaivalia njuga manake haina maana watu kufungana na 
kamba za migomba Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  na tunajua tayari kwa hizi ripoti si za kweli . 
 Kwa hivyo ni changamoto  Waheshimiwa wenza mwengine yeyote akitaka kuleta 
ripoti ahakikishie amezamia amepigia mbizi ; toka wewe nenda tembea uangalie yale 
yanayozungumzwa ni kweli na kama si kweli .   
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti yangu ya mwisho wewe uk ijua kwamba si ukweli naf ikiri 
umefikia wakati Mheshimiwa ni miaka miwili sasa hakuna lolote tunaishi milele naona 
tutakufa bila kelele , watu wawajibike na kama mtu hawajibiki Mheshimiwa mimi nina imani 
Gavana atas ikia raha W aziri akienda nyumbani ikiwa ha wawajibiki ... 
  
(Applause ) 
 
 Kwa sababu gani , watachelea watakuwa kikwazo kumwacha Gavana kuwacha 
kumbukumbu amba yo anaitarajia yeye kuiwacha katika K aunti yet u ya Mombasa . Kwa hivyo 
mimi niko tayari kuchangia katika mpango mzima wa maendeleo siko tayari k atika maswala 
ya vikwazo nasimama utegwe Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Shebe. Y es Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho.  
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nimefurahi na mimi pia 
kuchangia kidogo kuling ana na  taarifa  ambayo imeletwa ; sisi kama W aheshimiwa wa Kaunti 
ya Mombasa hii wananchi wetu wamekata tamaa sana kwa huu uongozi wetu tulio nao kwa 
sasa na shida sio sisi na shida sio Wenye V iti wa Kamati . Kuna pahali ambapo watu 
wamezembea na sisi kama J umba hili tukufu ni muhimu tuwe na umoja tuonyeshe mfano 
katika mji wetu kwamba viongozi katika Kaunti ya Mombasa wameweza kufanya jambo kwa 
wale ambao wamezembea katika kazi zao ...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Leo hii shida kubwa ni kule kwangu ; kama unavyosikia  na nafi kiri ndio  makao 
makuu  ya vipanga , tukizungumza kuhusu mambo ya mataa twa ambiwa gari halina mafuta 
twaambiwa gari lifanye hivi sisi kama W aheshimiwa t waambiwa tuvukishe gari feri na pesa 
zetu tutie mafuta ndi o tuweze kufanyiwa kazi na hii W izara iko na pesa  nyingi sana 
zimetengwa lakini shida ni kwamba watu wamezembea katika kazi zao . 
  Mheshimiwa Gavana amepatia watu kazi kwa moyo msafi si kwamba pengine 
wamepatiwa walale katika kazi kwa sababu wako karibu sana na Mheshimiwa Gavana ndio 
wasiweze kufanya kaz i zao vizuri , hili ndio tatizo lazima J umba hili lionyeshe mfano siku ya 
leo tuonyeshe mfano mzuri kwamba twaweza kumtoa mtu kumpeleka nyumbani ili wengine 
wataweza kufanya kazi zao vizuri . Kwa sababu sisi kama viongozi wananchi wanatuangalia 
sisi sana , kazi rahisi jamanini mataa tu mataa mitaani  kule kuna giza , leo Mheshimiwa  sisi 
tukikaa  twazomwa mitaani utaambiwa wewe Mheshimiwa gani wafanya kazi  gani?  
 Sio uwezo wangu kw amba mimi nitengeze mataa , kuna W izara maalumu ya 
kutengeza mataa na kuna vote yake imewekewa kwa sababu ya kufanya hio kazi vizuri 
hatuwezi kumlaumu Mheshimiwa . Kazi ya  Mheshimiwa ametoa ripoti hii kulingana na  
alivyopewa , sisi leo twaitwa rubber stamp  kule mitaani , tumechaguliwa na wananchi il i 
tuweze kuwafanyia kazi kuwa wamekua  iman i na sisi saa zengine waona haya kutembea 
mitaani kwa sababu kuna giza , giza liko mpaka nyumbani kwangu . Mimi mwenyewe 
Mheshimiwa nyumbani kwangu kuna giza jee yule mwananchi wa kawaida itakuwaje ?  Kwa 
hivyo ndugu zangu nasema J umba hili ... ahsante sana Bw ana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwalimu Mgwisho . Yes Hon. Moses 
Aran please ... 
 
(Consultations ) 
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12  Hon. A ran: Hon.  Speaker t hank you  for acknowledging my presence even though I 
did not  raise my hand or  my reque st to speak but as a M ember of Transport C ommit tee I will 
humbly request this H ouse to give us one week then we will come back with our well 
detailed report ...  
 
 Hon. Members:  No. 
 
 Hon. Ar an: Hon. Speaker I am on the floor kindly protect me .  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you Hon.  Aran but I th ink this is not the first time 
Members have been talking about the issu e so maybe if you think you cannot  do the  job you 
can resign from that C ommittee and the ot her M embers can come into that C ommittee . So 
please Hon. A ran make sure  you do your mandates .  Anyway I think you have asked for one 
week so let u s give the other M embers a chance to talk then we can conclude on that , thank 
you Hon. A ran. 
 
 Hon. A ran: Thank you Hon. Speaker . 
  
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Abrari Moha med. 
  
 Hon. Abrari Mo ham ed: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ni dha hiri sha hiri 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti wa Idara wa U chukuzi kul ingana na ripoti yake aliyoileta  tunaona 
kuna watu wamezembea katika kazi zao kwa sababu kuna kitu cha kwanza kuwa kama 
wahusika haw ajui hata ni kampuni gani inayo leta mataa na w ao ndio wahusika na hawajui ni 
kampuni gani , hawajui ni idadi gani ya mataa ambao sisi W aheshimiwa tunapata kwa sababu  
mara mwisho mimi kama kutoka W odi ya K ongowea taa niliyopata ni bulb tu kumi mwaka 
nzima . Bulb kumi kila wakati wakija ni sisi twatoa pesa kwenye mifuko yetu tukinunua bulb 
lakini wakituambia kuwa wako ma Technician  hawa ma Technician  wakija katika W odi zetu 
wafaa waripoti katika ofisi zetu tujue ni kazi gani wanafanya ili sisi kwenye oversight  tuwe  
ni kitu gani tutakuja hapa tuseme kitu gani kinafanyika .  
 Lakini kuse ma la ukweli mimi nakumbuka na W aheshimiwa wote watakuwa shahidi 
kuwa tuliitwa tukachukue bulb kumi peke yake na mimi mpaka sasa kwenye oversight  yangu 
ambayo najua ni bulb kumi pe ke yake nimepokea mwaka nzima lakini Mheshimiwa Spika 
hapa kuna sulu hisho na suluh isho Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti tutengeneza Ad Hoc C ommittee  
ndani ya J umba hili ili tuangalie hasa ni jinsi gani tuta saidiana kwa sababu Mheshimiwa 
Chairlady  wa Idara wa U chukuzi  itakuwa si vyema sisi sote ikiwa tunamrushia cheche na ile 
hali sio yeye aliyepeana hii  ripoti yeye amepewa tu aje asome . 
 Kwa hiv yo wale wahusika walioandika hii  ripoti wakaileta hapa Mheshimiwa 
tukishirikiana pamoja na  Kamati ya  Ad Hoc ambayo itatengene zwa katika B unge hili naona 
itakuwa vizuri tuwakabil i mwanzo tutengeneze Kamati ya Ad Hoc halafu  wale wahusika 
waitwe tuwakabil i maana watasema heri mvua inyeshe tujue pana po vuja , ama sivyo? Na 
sasa vile  leo imenyesha basi tutajua ni wapi  ambapo  panapo vuja ili tupazibe , ama sivyo? 
Mheshimiwa ni hayo tu shukrani.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Abrari, yes Hon. Kombe Nzai.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii na mimi niseme 
yangu mawili . Mwanzo kabisa nataka nimshukur u Mwenyekiti  kwa kuleta  taarifa  hii maana 
asingeileta tungeendelea kuwa gizani na naona limekuwa giza la tititi . 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13  Sasa taarifa  hii ambayo majibu hayo yameletwa Mheshimiwa  Spika yamenishtua 
kusema ule  ukweli nikiwa mimi mwenyewe nimekuwa mu athiriwa mw ezi uli opita kwa 
kupoteza watu 15 . Cha kushangaza Mheshimiwa Spika watu 15 walikufa M akadara pale  
malipo  hayo yote y a mamia kuendelea nikaletewa mimi kama ambaye  mimi ndio niliwaua .  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kushangaza sana ikiwa kipenzi chetu Gavana wetu 
aliaajiri watu hawa wote hawa kwa jina la ma Technician  ambao wako kila Sub County  
wakiripoti kwa W aziri wao na hawawezi kutembelea Sub-County  zao na wakajua ni se hemu 
gani zina giza , ni sehemu gani zipewe kipao mbele majibu yanayotoka ni sisi kulaumiwa na 
kuambiwa Kaunti ya Mombasa haifanyi choc hote wanaenda tu kwa mambo ya m uziki na 
mambo mengine . Hio Mheshimiwa Spika huwa inatutia sisi uzito sana ndani ya roho zetu , 
ikiwa Mheshimiwa Gavana anapata maneno ambayo anatukanwa nayo mitaani kwamba 
hawajibiki Mom basa imelala na kumbe wanaozembea ni watu ambao wanakula tu pesa tu 
sehemu f ulani na hata ikizidi material  hizi hizi ambazo ni wazifanyie kazi wawe 
wanazipitisha na milango ya nyuma . 
 Hii Mheshimiwa Spika yatakikana ikome kwa sababu ni kweli oversight role  
hatukupelekwa induction  yake lakini  sasa tutaivaa hivyo hivyo wenyewe ili tuwe tutaifanyia 
macho wenyewe japo hatukupelekwa hio induction  yake lakini sasa twavalia njuga macho 
kwa macho maana sasa juzi hapa tulipi tisha pesa za mambo na vijana Wodi ya Kadz andani 
ina na kiwanja kimoja tu ambacho tena tulifanya kukiomba kwa Mheshimiwa hapo na 
akaruhus u wale watoto wacheze  cheze  basi kuja ku wekewa magoli tu pale na kuwekewa kile 
kiwanja  vizuri nayo imekuwa kazi . Sasa hawa  tuliowapa hivyo vyeo vya Executives  
wanataka sisi tu ambiweje mitaani ? Mimi naona wakati umefika na  mwamko huu wa leo  
nataka uendele hivi hivi  ili angalau  wawili watatu wakirudi nyumbani Mhesh imiwa Spika 
heshima ya Kaunti ya Mombasa itapatikana ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Gavana wetu ataheshimiwa na pia s isi nasi  mitaani angalau tutapata aidha tena tano 
tena ama kumi na tano tena ahsante . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Kombe Nzai. Y es Hon. Ahmed Hamisi.  
  
 Hon. Ahmed Hamisi:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika bila kupot eza wakati naona 
Waheshimiwa wameo ngea sana ...  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Tukiongea ni mengi ni ya masikitiko lakini  twaomba I dara wahusika waje kam a 
walivyo amrishwa ili tujue mikakati gani waliotupangia ama waliotufanyia Mheshimiwa 
ahsante  sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Junio r. 
  
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika maswala ambayo ya ko mbele yetu 
ni ya kusikiti sha sana , mimi natoka sehemu ya C haani ambayo mataa haya jafika , hayo 10  
ambayo ndugu yangu amesema hapa ni sehemu ambayo iko na shida sana na s ehemu hio 
najua ni vijiji ambavyo  vinakaa w ale wetu ambao hawajiwezi kama M lolongo na sehemu  ya 
Kalahari na tukipata ripoti kama ile tumepata na Mwenyekiti ya kuwa kuna Technicians  
ambao wanakaa katika sehemu zile .  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  Mimi nashangaa  sana sababu mimi ni mkaaji wa C haani sioni ha o watu na sijui 
wanakaa mahali wapi lakini niunge mkono Mwenyekiti kwa sababu hizi ripot i Bwana Spika 
huwa tunapewa na Chief O fficers  tuje tulete katika B unge . Najua zengine zinakuwa na 
matatizo mengi sana kama hii ya leo tumeona na mimi nimewahi kuletwa n a nyengine hapa 
nikahangaishwa ina  maana kwamba vitu kama hivi B wana Spika tunataka ziangaliwe sana  na 
zizingatiwe sana na Bwana Abrari alikuwa amependekeza pendekezo amba lo labda ni zuri 
linaweza kusaidia katika B unge hili ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon . Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Ali Shariff . 
 
 Hon. Ali Shariff:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii kuchangia . 
Mheshim iwa Spika leo sina budi kuunga W aheshimiwa wenzangu na kusema kuwa I dara ya 
Uchukuzi  imezorota kabisa , nataka tum uite W aziri mbele ya B unge  hapa  atujibu  yale 
amefanya kwa miaka miwili ukilinganisha mwaka huu ama Bunge hili na B unge lil ilopita 
Mheshimiwa Spika naona Bunge hili tumeandika M awaziri wanaoji paka poda maofisini 
kama maguhi...  
 
(Applause ) 
   
 Mheshimiwa Spika naf ikiri kuna  taarifa  nyingi zinazofuata kwa hivyo kama tuna 
madukuduku yetu mengine tuweke  taarifa  nyengine , ahsante sana .  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon. Maimuna.  
 
 Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nitasema ya kwamba 
ni ma sikitiko k wa sababu sisi tumekuja katika B unge hili ili tuhakikishe watu wetu chini 
wanapata huduma na ikiwa hawapati huduma basi  ni lazima tutafute suluhisho muafa ka la 
kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba  wale watu wetu wamepata huduma.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni habari  za mas ikitiko  kwangu pia kuliwahi kuvamiwa 
majambazi wak aua watu kadha na hapo mahali i likuwa kwa sababu kuna giza totoro na si eti 
kulikuwa hakuna mataa, mataa yako lakini hatupati hata zile huduma za service .  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nimesimama hapa kwa ajili ya watu wa S hanzu 
na nitasimama tena kwa  ajili ya watu wa S hanzu yeyote yule anayetaka kunivuta mimi chini 
na mimi  nitahakikisha nimemvuta yeye kabla ya mimi kuanguka ...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Maimuna, thank  you Honourable 
Members I think we can all see the mood of the H ouse so unless someone is blind and deaf ..., 
yes Hon. Lucy you want to say something ?  
 
 Hon. Chi reri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika naona langu ni  kuongeza. 
Mheshimiwa Spika naona umeona N yumba ambavyo imetokota; u kiona watoto wako 
wanalia iko haja uingilie kati. Haya yote Mheshimiwa Spika tumekuachia wewe na wewe 
nguvu zetu ni sisi ukituona sasa hivi tunalia ulie na sisi.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni jambo la kuhuzunisha yale ambayo yanatendeka ndani ya 
Kaunti ya  Mombasa kwa ujumla ni jambo la kuhuzunisha sana, y ale tunayoyafanya hata ile 
azma ya Mheshimiwa wetu Gavana wetu ambayo yuko nayo tunaidunisha . Nimechaguliwa 
na wananchi wa M topanga , nguvu za wananchi wa Mtopanga ni mimi . 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  Lakini yale ambayo wam etutuma kuwafurahisha ni mambo yaten deke Mheshimiwa 
Spika, leo hii M awaziri wetu wamekuwa sasa ndio mabosi ambao waliochaguliwa na 
wananchi kuliko sisi ...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Ambayo yanafanyika hii tahadhari Mheshimiwa Spika tungependa w ayasikie 
tunakutuma , Mawaziri hawa ambao wamejibeba ni ma babe amb ao wako kule kwa viti mpaka 
wanasahau sisi tumetumwa na wananchi. Twataka yaa chike kama hayataachika waende 
Bwana tupate wengine ambao tutafanya nao kazi ili azma yetu ya Gavana na hata sisi 
iweze…  
 
(Interruption ) 
(Technical hitch ) 
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika ni hali ya kuhuzunisha sana mimi kama Mheshimiwa wa 
Mtopanga (Technical hitch) ...ni jambo la  kuhuzisha sana mimi Mheshimiwa wa Mtopanga 
nitakuwa muombaji, ninaomba lakini pia sisikizwi .  Niko na sehemu ya St. Joseph 
Mheshimiwa Spika kuna shule , kuna Kanisa mpaka juu kuna nyaya za stima ; mwaka ni wa  
pili watu wanakatwakatwa kwa mapanga hapo kama unavyojua Kisauni huko tuliko toka wee 
ilikuwa ni  tenge thaanani  Mheshimiwa Spika ! 
 
(Laughter and Applause ) 
 
 Vijana wamekatak ata watu imebidi niende mp aka Yard nimeomba kazi haijafanyika , 
kwa nini mimi niombe na mimi ni Mheshimiwa? Nikisema  lifanyike kwa  nini halifanyiki?  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 Watu Mheshimiwa S pika wamezembea na kazi na mimi sitataka niregeshwe 
nyumban i kwa sababu ya mt u alozembea yule alozembea aende mwanzo halafu na sisi 
tufanye kazi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Lucy Chizi.  Hon. Members I 
think as I said earlier unless you are blind and you are deaf then maybe you  will not read the 
mood of the House. So we can see  the mood of the House and Honourable M embers 
whatever th ey are saying it is their right, s o please do not  take us round and if I may say Hon. 
Prisc hilla Mumba the Chairper son of Transport I know I did not  give you time to finish your 
statement but I think you had already read almost 80  per cent of it.  
 So what I am going to tell you Hon. Prisc hilla Mumba please we are going to give 
you time until Wednesday morning; next week Wednesday morning which you wi ll have 
enough time and the procedure Hon. Priscilla Mumba it is very clear normally the response 
from the E xecutive when they bring it you need to sit d own with your Committee and  discuss 
the report  and then the Committee if the M embers agree on th e repor t well and good then that  
is when you bring it to the House . 
 But you have t o sit down with your M embers first to discuss the report maybe some 
Members they w ill not  be happy with the report you will have to write it back to them. Yes, 
so please as today is Thursday if it is possible by We dnesday morning; yes afternoon, 
Wednesday afternoon! Yes Hon. Priscilla Mumba?  
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16  Hon. Mumba: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika, k wa huo muda ambao ulionipa na hii 
kazi vile ilivyo na  kulingana n a hali ilivyo halisi ambayo  nimeiona ni naona ule muda kidogo 
utakuwa umenitetelesha . Ni afadhali unipe muda ambao nifanye hii kazi hata nikiileta hapa 
iwe itakuwa ni kazi imeridhisha watu kwa sababu hata wakati Mheshimiwa alipoleta hii hoja 
nafikiri katika Jumba hili kama mnakumbuka ilipoletwa na Mheshimiwa Kitula nilikuwa siko 
Naibu  ndio alikuwako na wakati ripoti imekuja, imekuja wakati ndio mimi nimefika . Kwa 
hivyo ningependa W aheshimi wa wenzangu mu nipe muda na hii Kamati k wa sababu 
nilipokuwa sipo ndio ripoti iliulizwa na mimi nimeingia tu s ikupata hata muda wa ku.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Prisc hilla. Mheshimiwa 
Prisc hilla nafikiri Idara ya  Uchukuzi  haiko Dubai ama haiko Kisumu ama wapi bali iko humu  
Mombasa. Kwa hiyo kile unatakikana kukifanya ; hata si lazima ya wewe u ende kule, muite  
Afisa mkuu wa idara hio , Jumatatu , mpatie leo ni Alhamisi  kesho asubuhi pele ka barua 
Jumatatu  aje mukae na Kamati  nyote mumuulize maswali kufikia Jumanne  mutengeze hiyo 
ripoti,  Jumatano uko na ripoti , na mumuambie ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Because the message is very clear. You can see the mood of the House kwa hiyo 
Mheshimiwa twajua hi yo si makosa yako na ni wewe um uandikie baru a hata si wewe uende 
kule,  maanake mwanzo ukienda huko uta wekwa nje utaambiwa Waziri hayuko, amesafi ri si 
mnajua vile kunavyokwe nda? Kwa hiyo  wewe si  lazima ujisumbue  wewe bakia zako andika 
barua muambie Jumatatu  aje m uite akikataa kuja  Jumatatu Afisa Mkuu  una Jumanne , 
Jumatano  ukishindwa u na barua unakuja unatuletea kwa N yumba tunajua wewe umewajibika 
sasa tutajua muelekeo wa kufuata . So please by Wednesday afternoon we need that report 
then we will know from there .  
 Halafu jambo jengine la  kusikitisha nyinyi mukiangalia hii ripoti iko wazi  hapa watu  
ambao wanafanya kazi kwa hiyo Wizara hawafiki hata 20  halafu nyinyi kila siku munalia 
mna ahidi  wananchi tutawapa kazi tutawapa , sasa kazi gani  mutawapa kama hapa hamuwezi 
kurekebisha mukare kebisha hii Wizara kila W odi i we na watu wake wa kushughulikia 
mataa ...? 
  
(Applause)  
 
 Kwa hio hiyo ni kazi ambayo W aheshimiwa nyinyi wenyewe mutajua kujipanga. 
Naam muwe na Electrician  kila Wodi  watano ama wawili kwa kuanzia , nyinyi ndio 
mnatengeza bajeti muhakikishe bajeti ikija mumeweka hizi pesa maanake  sasa hivi  
mutaambiwa kuwa hakuna bajeti muhakikishe mwaka ujao  bajeti ikija watu wameaandikwa 
kazi kila W odi wa we na Electrician  wawil i, watatu kwa kuanzia .  
 Kwa hio Waheshimiwa  tafadhali  nyinyi mumechaguliwa na wananchi na ninajua 
mukienda huko wananchi wanawasubiri pia mupeleke salamu nzuri na kama kuna vizuizi 
mwael ewa nyie wenyewe vile vya kufanya na kuna watu wengine ambao hawakuchaguliwa 
na wananchi na ambao mimi ni  mmoja wao . Mimi nimechaguliwa na nyinyi na kuna wengine 
pia Waheshimiwa  ambao hawajui zile shida mnazopitia ndio unapata  maamuzi  yanatoka 
kwao na hamu jui hayo maamuzi yanaelekea wapi?  Kwa hio  Waheshimiwa tafadhali muamke  
mufanye kazi yenu...  
 
(Applause ) 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17  Tafadhalini Waheshimiwa  sisi tuko na majukumu na kesho kwa M wenyezi  Mungu 
pia tuko na majukumu si hapa duniani tu; k esho tukienda kwa M wenyezi  Mungu p ia 
mutauliz wa wewe ulikuwa Mwenye Kiti wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi  watu walikuwa w akipigwa 
wakii bia watu vibeti , wakivunjiwa wakii biwa masaa , masimu  ulikuwa wapi? Na pesa 
zilikuwa, p esa za bulb zilikuwa , pesa muli weka kwenye ..., kwa hio  Waheshimiwa tafadhalini  
kwa hayo machache  nafikiri Mheshimiwa  Prisc hilla hio Jumatano mchana utaleta ripoti ndio 
tujue kwenda mbele tutafanyaje . Ahsante sand . Naam Karani ? 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRMAN EDUCAT ION HON. OMONDI ON STATEMENT REQUEST 
BY HON . ATHMAN SHEBE ON THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF JOMVU EARLY CHILDHOOD 
DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION CENTRE  
 
(Silence ) 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) left the Chair)  
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) assume d the Chair)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes the Chairperson Committee on 
Education ? Or  any other from Education C ommittee , any response? Yes Hon. Ali?  
 
 Hon. Ali Sharif:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, first of all Hon. Members this is a true 
statement , it is not a false  statement.  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 Mr. Speaker S ir I wish to give the following S tatem ent on the official opening of 
Jomvu Early Childhood Development Education Centre in response to concern raised by 
Athman Shebe Mukono  in the House on the 4th Sitting seeking to know the Committee on 
Education , Information T echnology and MV2035 on this mat ter. 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, t he County g overnment of Mombasa has constructed eight ( 8) State 
of the Art ECDE Elimu C enters across the County, f our (4) of the Centers are ready to be 
opened officially. However, all the four (4) facilities have been occupied and are being 
utilized because of the need for the ECDE children in the respective Primary Schools prior to 
the official opening or launch Mr. Speaker Sir. These Elimu schools are located in the 
following areas Mr. Speaker S ir; Kwa Jomvu, Utange, Likoni and Ka zandani.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, The four (4) schools that are at various stages of completion are in 
Buxton, Chaani, Long o and Digirikani ECDEs and the D epartment is working with the 
contractors for official hand over as soon as possible.  
 Mr. Speaker  Sir, The  Department of Education is working with various stakeholders 
to set an official launch date for Kwa Jomvu and the other three (3) completed schools which 
will be done by H.E. the Governor.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Hon. Ali ? Yes Hon…  
 
 Hon. Mbura: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, tungeomba kupata hizo copies  ndio 
akisoma na sisi tutasoma . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Sawa . 
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18  Hon. Mbura:  Kwa sababu anasoma peke yake sisi hatuoni hatujui ni  kweli wala ni 
urongo ndio hayo ambayo tumekataa. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : We have noted and instructed the Table 
Clerks next time t o make sure all the Hon. M embers  get copies but if you will need a copy 
you can visit the office of the C lerks  and they will give you the copies. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRMAN COMMITTE E ON WATER AND NATUR AL RESOURCES 
HON. FAHAD KASSIM ON THE C OMMENCEMENT OF KISIMANI PIPELINE PRO JECT 
 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim , Chairperson Water.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Proceed.  
 
 Hon. Fahad Kassim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. I will like to give a Statement in 
response by Hon. Charles Juma Kitula Member of County Assembly from Frere town Ward 
at the 4th Sitting of the House on 14th February 2019 regarding to the commence ment of 
Kisimani pipeline project.  
 Mr. Speaker I am pleased to provide a response that I have confirmed it is true and it 
is not false to this Hono urable House that the  County g overnment is currently at the tender 
evaluation stage and award of contract w ill be done by mid -March this year and the process 
will start from June , 2019. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRMAN TRADE , TOURISM AND INVESTME NT HON. KIZITO 
OPEYA ON MAMA  NGINA FACELIFT  
 
 Hon. Kizito Opeya . 
 
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker this is in response to the statement that was 
asked by Hon. M oses Aran about the Mama  Ngina face lift. We had a meeting last week with 
Chief Officer and it came about that this is a Kshs.460 million pro ject which is been done by 
the N ational g overnment in conjunction the County.  
 The Coun ty is pro ving the land and the National g overnment is doing the facilitation 
of the finances so th e Chief Officer has written to T ourism CS Balala and a lso his PS to give 
us:  
1. The list of contractors so that we can know if they are from local or from o utside;  
 
2. The list of suppliers ; 
  
3. They should also give us the list of the casuals so that we can know whether they are 
from here or they have sourced outsid e; 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19 4. We are also waiting for a reply on how they are g oing to accommodate once the 
facelift  is done so we have  not yet got a reply but today we had a t rade meeting with 
CEC of Trade and I told him about it so probably next week Thursday we can get the 
reply  because the reply is coming from Nairobi it is not here. So probably you can 
give me until next week Thurs day and I will get back to the H ouse if I have got a 
reply or not. Thank you . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you it has been noted next w eek 
Thursday you will respond on the same issue. Yes Clerk . 
 
 Yes Chairperson Hon . Shebe Athman?  
 
 Hon. Shebe Athman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiw a Mwenyekiti . Naomba Mheshimiwa 
mwenza ambaye alileta hoja hii aweze kunipatia takriban muda wa w iki moja kwa sababu  
Mheshimiwa Waziri na Afisa Mkuu  wake hawapo wako katika ziara yao ya kikazi lakini 
katika harakati ya kujituma nili hakikisha nimewasiliana na wao na nikawajulisha katika 
maswala mazito ambayo Mheshimiwa mwenza wa Kongowea ali yaleta na akanihakikishia 
kuwa  Jumatatu atakuwa yuko Mombasa na nitakuwa na mkutano na yeye .  Vile vile pia 
nimepata duku la Mheshimiwa mwenza wa Junda pia analia katika mpango mzima wa taka 
na kwa ruhusa yako ukiniruhusu pia nitaweza kujumuisha Mheshimiwa wa Junda katika 
suala hilo la  ukusanyaji wa taka .  
 Kwa hivyo amenihakikishia Waziri J umatatu atakuwa hapa na tutakaa na yeye kitako 
vizuri tuangalie  suala hili vipi tutaweza kulite gua. Hivyo basi  naomba Mheshimiwa m wenza 
aweze kunipatia wiki moja sitaki kuleta ripoti ya ganga jamna  hapa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Abrari?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Naregelea tu 
kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti  wa Environment  ama Mazingira kuwa taarifa  yangu 
niliyoweka wiki iliop ita ilikuwa ni kuondoa jaa la Kongowea, kuliondoa kabisa kwa sababu 
gani?  Lile jaa halijakuwa Kenya g azetted  kama jaa .  
 Kitu cha kwanza liko kati kati ya mji ambao kuna vibanda, kuna watu wapika vyakula 
na pale mvua ikinyesha na kama tulivyopata habari kari buni tutakuwa na mvua kubwa sana.  
Kwa hivyo tungependa hili suala hili liwe haraka iwezekanavyo kabla mvua kubwa haijafika 
kwa sababu jaa liko kati kati ya mji liondolewe kabisa.  
 Halafu suala la pili katika hiyo hiyo taarifa ilikuwa tumezungumza jaa kubw a ambalo 
limekaa ndani ya soko , haya ni masuala mawili tofauti.  Kwa hivyo kuna jaa la Kwa Karama 
Kongowea naomba haraka iwezekanavyo hala hala Mheshimiwa lile jaa liondoke kabisa na 
lifungwe halafu na hilo la sokoni twataka kujua ni njia gani ambayo wataku wa wakija 
kuondoa taka kama ni kila wiki  ama ni kila siku ama ni lini? Ili mradi yule mwananchi 
ambaye yuko pale ajue haswa hawa watu wa taka taka itakuwa tunawangojea aidha baada ya 
siku mbili ama baada ya siku tatu kwa sababu soko lile Mheshimiwa ni kubwa  na taka taka 
zinazotoka kwa siku ni nyingi ajabu ambapo ni lazima iwe kuna mpango maalum ya kutoa 
zile taka taka , nadhani amenielewa vizuri.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you and it is well noted. Yes Clerk?  
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 20 RESPONSE TO S TATEMENT  BY VICE CHA IRMAN COMMITTEE ON W ATER , SANITATION AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES  HON. MWALIMU HAMADI  ON THE STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION OF 
VIKWATANI KASHANI PI PELINE PROJECT  
 
 Chairperson Committee on Water, Sanitation and Natural Resources, Yes Hon. 
Mwalimu Vice Chair? Proceed . 
 
 Hon. Mwalimu Hamadi : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Spea ker Sir I would like to 
give a S tatement in response to a request made by Hon. Robert Nyiro Member of County 
Assembly of Bamburi Ward at the F ourth Sitting of the House on 14th February,  2019 on the 
status  of Vik watani Kashani Pipeline Project.  Hon. Nyiro is also a Member of Water 
Committee.  Mr. Speaker Sir am pleased to  provide a response to this Honourable  House as 
follows;  
1. The construction of Vikwatani Kashani Pipeline Project was budgetted in the 
Financial Yea r 2018/2 019 at a cost of Ksh.56 million;  
 
2. In the Budget allocation funds w ere not adequate at the County g overnment and 
had to implement the project in phases;  
 
3. Out of the total number of kilometres that is 10.5km will be covering 6km this 
financial year. The current status is the tender documents are ready with the County 
Procurement Department.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Vice Chair Hon. Mwalimu. Yes ? 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRMAN COMMITTE E ON LABOUR AND SOCIAL  WELFARE HON. 
THOYA ON MANAGEMENT OF PRI VATE COMPANIES  
 
 Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker as you are aware this statement was requesting the 
management of private companies and is very sad that at the moment we have not gotten in 
touch with them because there were out of the country , we believe that you give us one week 
we will have a response. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Noted. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY HON . NGARE ON BEHALF OF CH AIRMAN COMM ITTEE ON 
EDUCATION , INFORMATION TECHNOLO GY AND MV2035  HON. OMONDI ON STATUS OF BURSARY  
IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Chairperson Committee on Education or any other Member?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I would like to read a Statement on behalf 
of our Chairman and the Committee in response to a question that was raised by Hon. Renson 
Thoya.  
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 21 Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to give the following Statement on Status of Bursary  in 
response to concerns raised by Hon . Renson Thoya  in the House during the Fourth  
Sitting seeking  to know from the Committee on Education, Information T echnology 
and MV2035 on the actual status of Bursary in our County.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, The Elimu Fund gave out application forms last week for the 
Governors Form One (1) bursary across a ll the six (6) Sub Counties in Mombasa 
County. This special bursary is for the needy students who scored three hundred (300) 
and above in the Kenya Certificate for Primary Education (KCPE). The returned 
applications are being processed and will be vetted a nd deserving students will 
receive their awards before 15th March , 2019.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, t he Elimu Fund requested one hundred million (Ksh. 100,000,000) in 
October,  2018 from the County Treasury for the General bursary for FY 2018/2019. 
The Treasury has processed fifty million shillings (Ksh 50,000,000 ) which should be 
in the Elimu Fund account this week. This amount will be used for beneficiaries in the 
special needs and secondary schools category. Once this is confirmed, arrangements 
will be made to pr epare the application forms to be given out to the deserving students 
as soon as possible.  
 
Mr. Speaker  Sir, t he final fifty million (Ksh 50,000,000) will be used for College and 
University beneficiaries. College beneficiaries include driving schools, sho rt and  long 
courses, Certificate and D iploma students.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
natangaza msimamo mimi pia ni Mwanak amati katika Kamati ya masuala ya elimu na 
nasikitika na ripoti hii . Mimi binafsi sijaridhika nayo na siwezi kuikubali , Mheshimiwa Spika 
tunajua ya kwamba hakuna pesa zinazotumika pasipokuwa na kanuni na kanuni inayopeana 
fursa ya serikali gatuzi ya Mombas a kuweza kuwa na mgao wa basari ni kanuni ya Mombasa 
County Education Development Bill, 2014 iliyoweza kupitishwa tarehe 3 Mwezi wa 12 
mwaka 2014 na kufanyiwa baadhi ya marekebisho Mwezi wa 4 Mwaka 2017.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika kanuni hiyo iko wazi katika sehem u ya 9 ndogo ya kwanza  
sehemu ya tatu ya kwamba kila G atuzi ndogo ya Mombasa Kaunti litakuwa na Kamati 
ambayo itakuwa na Kamati inayosimamia masuala ya ha zina ama fedha wenyewe wakaita 
Financial A id ikiwemo suala la basari .  
 Mheshimiwa katika sehemu hiyo hi yo ya 9 sehemu ya 5 inazungumzia ama inataja 
wawakilishi ama wanakamati katika masuala ya financial aid ikiwemo suala la basari katika 
kila sub county ambayo kwamba kwanza Mheshimiwa Spika ni masikitiko ya kwamba 
department ama idara haijafuata sheria inay ohusiana na masuala hayo.  Sheria hiyo katika 
sehemu ya 5 (b) inataja kila...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 22  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : There  is a point of order, just read the 
Standing Order. Okay Hon. Mwamwiri am giving you one more time to finish whatever tha t 
you are talking about, use your minutes.  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Sawa Mheshimiwa.  Mheshimiwa kwanza taarifa 
iliotolewa hapa kwa  majibu wa K anuni hiyo niliyokuwa nikisoma tukienda sehemu ya sita 
ambayo wenyewe wanaita Miscellaneous  sehemu ya tatu inasema ..., any individual knowing  
(Inaudible ) altering or falsify any information with intend to defraud the cooperation or to 
obtain any benefit that is not entitle under this Act commits an offence and is liable on 
conviction to suspension and prosecution.  
 Mheshimiwa hapa tumetajiwa ya kwamba zoezi hili la basari ni special b ursary  ya 
Mheshimiwa Gavana , twataka kujua Mheshimiwa Spika hii special bursary  ya Mheshimiwa 
Gavana inatoka kwa sheria ipi? Na kama hakuna sheria kama hiyo wanatumia sheria ile ile 
iliopit a mwaka wa 2014 ni kumaanisha aliyetoa taarifa hii anataka kuhujumu Bunge hili na 
kuhujumu wananchi wa Mombasa ya kwamba kuna mgao maalum wa basari za Gavana 
ambazo haupo kisheria.   
 Kadhalika Mhes himiwa vile vile pia ya kwamba W awakilishi katika Kamati zi le 
katika Sub County  hazijafuata sheria na sisi ama mimi kwangu simjui Mwakilishi 
anayeniwakilisha katika Kamati ile na hali kadhalika wale  sehemu zengine tujue kama 
Wawakilishi wa kila ofisi MCA alipata ruhusa  kwa mujibu wa sheria vyenginevyo taarifa hii 
na ripoti hii ni ripoti butu isiyokuwa na maana , na hali kadhalika ni kupotezeana muda na 
kupoteza...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Your time is up, you are up on a S tatement  
or what, so proceed with that S tatement?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker considering the state of road of 
Safari -Junda -Mwembeni -Junda Misheni I remember last year I also issued a Statement here 
and I had asked the Committee to have a site v isit to see the state in which my roads are but 
they neve r responded . Mr. Speaker I wrote a letter after some few weeks I was given a 
contractor and to my surprise the contractor managed to rehabilitate 500Metres and then he 
claimed that he had ran out of cash .  
 So according to him Mr. Speaker is tha t he was to  be paid by the County g overnment , 
now my statement is c an the C ommittee through their D epartment confirm to me through this 
House w hen will the contractor be paid  so that they come back on sit e to rehabilitate the said 
road? Mr. Speaker we are nearing March  and as per the weather forecast D epartment is that 
we ha ve very heavy rains so can the C ommittee co nfirm to me when will the D epartment pay 
the contractor so he comes back to finish up his work.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Bwire th e Committee will 
respond on your S tatement putting in mind that they  have got several statements so we are 
going to give them two weeks for them to respond. Hon. Members ... 
  
(Silence)  
 
 Okay proceed . 
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 23  The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika ningependa 
kujua kama kweli ni ukweli kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti wa Mifugo kwamba Idara hiyo inagawia 
mifugo ya kuku katika sehemu kadhaa hapa Mombasa Kaunti. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ):  Thank you and Hon. Member do you have a  
respon se? 
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Tumeanza kugawa hiyo mifugo ; kuku 
na sungura kwa Wizara  yangu , mimi na wale wanaohusika wameanza na ndio tunasema wale 
ambao vile vikundi  amba vyo zime omba  ama zimekamilisha kuleta makaratasi yote 
tunaende lea kuwapatia.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  So in a weeks time we would like to see the 
beneficiaries of the project that you have started distributing the chicken and whatever that 
you have said.  
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Mheshimiwa Spika si maombi  amba yo wamefanya ni vile vikundi  
amba vyo vimefuata sheria au zile taratibu lakini kwa wiki moja tutaweza kuleta ripoti . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The beneficiaries okay . 
 
 Hon. Wambua:  Wale ambao watakuwa wameidhinishwa kupata . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi ningependa 
ufafa nuzi zaidi nijue ni taratibu zipi haswa ndio tukawaambie watu wetu kule pia wao 
wanufaike na mradi huu. Sasa hatujui ni taratibu zipi , sisi tunasikia tu kuna t aratibu lakini 
hatujui ni zipi hizo taratibu;  yaani kwa kifupi aje na ripoti haswa atuletee ni taratibu zipi kwa 
sababu hata sisi ambao habari hizi zimekuwa geni kwetu tumezipata hapa tunataka kujua 
haswa ilikuwa ni mambo ya chini chini siri ama ni vipi tuyaweke wazi ili kule chini 
mashinani tuwaelezee  wale watu haswa ama wananchi wetu kuwa kuna taratibu hizi ukifuata 
kuna kuku ama sungura wa bure ambao tunawapa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is well noted so Hon. Chair Agriculture 
when you respond back you will  come with full details on how people manage d to qualify to 
be beneficiaries of the project. Yes Hon.  Ogutu and we will wind up the Statement with you, 
yes Ogutu? S tatement?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I rise to seek a S tatement from t he 
Chairperson Committee on Health on whether the funds that were allocated in the Budget 
2018/2019 to construct the storm water drainage system at Magongo Clinic was essentially 
utilised for that purpose and if not, what plan does the County g overnment ha ve to ensure that 
the project is i mplemented, matter of urgency considering that the rainy season is 
approaching. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you and it is noted the Vice Chair 
Health is around , do you have any respons e or do you need to push it for more one week . 
  
 Hon. Fatuma Swaleh:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Naomba Mheshimiwa 
Ogutu aweze kutupatia wiki moja mpaka wiki ijayo tutamjibu. Ahsante.  
 
February 2 1, 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        8 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 24  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  It is the House to give you th e time that you 
are requesting for , so the House is giving you and your Committee one weeks'  time for you to 
report back to the House.  
 
 Hon. Fatuma Swaleh:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
 
 Yes Hon. Moham ed Hatimy?  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I seek leave under 
Standing Order 48 ... 
 
(Silence)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk? What is it Hon. Members, why 
are you up? Yes Clerk proceed.  
 
(Loud Consultations)  
 
 
ADJOURN MENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no other Business the House stands adjourned until the 
26th of February, 2019 at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 5: 10p.m.       
 
       
 
      
 
 