November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 14th Novem ber, 2023  
Third Assembly – Ninetieth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  12:02p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Temporary  Speaker ( Honourable  Abdirahman  Abdul kadir ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : You may take your seats.  
Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
Yes, Honourable  Jacktone Madialo MCA Mikindani Ward you look confused, do you have 
any Notice of Motion to issue right now? Yes?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I think maybe the y should substitute the name 
Honourable  Juma Mwalimu....  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Pardon, do you have any Notice 
of Motion to make today ? 
 
Hon. Madialo:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : I can see okay;  okay I think there 
is a slight correction .  
 
Hon. Madialo : Yes, but I can go ahead...  
 
[Silence ] 
 
It will be noted under my name so let us go ahead if you permit me . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Okay, yes just confirm whether 
that is your Notice of Motion...  
November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 2 [Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Madialo: That is my Notice of Motion Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Then I want to believe that has 
been a typing e rror so it should read Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Madialo: Yes Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Please proceed.  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
DECENTRALIZATION OF SEWER SERVICES TO JOMVU CONSTITUENCY  
 
Hon. Madialo: Thank you  Mr. Speaker Sir for the opportunity . Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg the 
following Notice of Motion . 
 
RECOGNIZING that paragraph 11 (b) of Part Two of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution 
of Kenya , 2010 mandates the County government to provide County Public Works and 
services, including water and sanitation services;  
 
AWARE that Section 6 (3), (a), (c) and 4 (c) of the Mombasa County Water and Sewerage 
Services Act, 2016, stipulates that the County Water and Sewerage Services Strategy must 
outline measures and mechanisms for the progressive expansion of water and sewerage 
services coverage in the County government of Mombasa and expedite the development and 
expansion of water and sewerage infrastructure;  
 
TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION the fact that the Mombasa Water Supply and Sanitation 
Company Limited (MOWASCO), responsible for providing sewer services  has decentralized 
its sewer services across various parts of the County, such as the island sewer network and 
West Mainland sewer network among others;  
 
FURTHER OBSERVING that the West Mainland sewerage network caters to both 
Changamwe and Jomvu Constituencies, encompassing a total of eight  Wards including five 
Wards in Changamwe and three  Wards in Jomvu Constituency;  
 
EXPRESSING CONCERN that the ballooning population in Jomvu and Changamwe 
Constituencies has exacerbated the sewerage problems in the area and has also affected the 
ability of MOWASCO to provide sewerage services.  
 
I, therefore, urge this Assembly to  resolve  that:  
 
MOWASSCO to establish a sewerage network In Jomvu Constituency to alleviate the 
persisten t sewer problems brought about by high population density in the area.  
 
Thank you .  
November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 3 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you Hon ourable  Jacktone 
Madialo. Yes Clerk ? 
 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF THE COUNTY PUBLIC INVESTMENTS AND ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CPIAC ) REPORT ON 
THE AUDITOR GENERAL ’S REPORT FOR THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 
2020/2021  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Is Honorable Kai around?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Okay . Yes, Honourable  Nyota Vice Chair on Public Investment and Accounts Committee 
please move the Motion ? 
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you Honorable Speaker.  I would love to move the following 
Motion: Adoption of the County Public Investments and Accounts Committee (CPIAC) Report 
on the Auditor General’s Report for the County Assembly for the financial year 2020/2021.  Mr. 
Speaker , 
That the  House adopts the Report by the County Public Investments and Accounts 
Committee (CPIAC) on the Auditors Generals Report for the County Assembly for 
financial year 2020/2021 as laid on the Table on Tuesday, 7th November , 2023 . 
 
    I wish to call upon Hon ourable Nusura to second the Motion . 
 
   The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Yes, Honourable  Nusura . 
 
   Hon.  Nusura Mwinyi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I stan d to second the Motion.  
 
   The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Hono urable Members , I now 
propose the question  that the Motion by Hon ourable  Hamisi Nyota on Adoption of the County 
Public Investments and Accounts Committee Report on the Auditor General’s  Report for the 
County Assembly for the Financial Year , 2020/2021 be considered by this Hono urable House in 
the same terms as moved .  
 
[Interruption]  
 
    Order Please!  Order! Hon ourable  Ogutu !   
 
[Question propose  and agreed to ] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Hamisi Nyota , please make your contribution to the Motion . 
 
Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , first of all I would like to 
commend the  entire County Assembly Staff and leadership for archiving this kind of report from 
the Auditor Gen eral. Hon ourable  Speaker , it is to our k nowledge that the County Assembly 
received a qualified Report for  the year 2020/2021 which in our view is a report that is good , it 
shows health position of the County Assembly . 
November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 4 Except for a few discrepancies which as the Chairman of Committee we called upon the 
management , we sat down with them and we raised the queries which were raised by the Auditor 
General . And Mr. Speaker I can attest to you and I can attest to this House that  with the 
management we had a very fruitful engagement and they expressed the willingness of addressing 
the queries which were raised by the Auditor General .  Mr. Speaker , according to this Report you 
can see evidently that the concerns that happened in the prior year’s most of them has been 
corrected in the subsequent years. This shows a positive impact and positive g esture to the work 
which this A ssembly has been doing ; so, Mr. Speaker  without further ado  I would wish to 
recommend this Hon ourable  House to adopt this Report because it has shown some positive 
improvement in as much as the County Assembly is handling its accounts and having seen very 
few queries from the report of the Auditor General it shows that we are on the right track . 
Honourable  Speaker , some of the queries which were raised by the Auditor General they are not 
minor queries which some did not only originate from t his A ssembly but some originate from the 
Executive part of the arm of this County government . So, Mr. Speaker , I’m just urging Members 
of this House to adopt this Report as the recommendation shows positive track, positive 
improvement and we even further if I can note that the subsequent year this A ssembly receive d 
unqualified Report which is even the best Report an entity can receive from Auditor General .  
So, Mr. Speaker from the trend of the queries and whatever happened in the subsequent 
year we have seen that this A ssembly has already achieved the most of the Report which reflects 
a healthy and position of this County Assembly of Mombasa . Mr. Speaker , I can attest to you 
getting unqualifi ed report from Auditor General i s not an easy task ; if this House in the 
subsequent year managed to get unqualified Report from the Auditor General then we can say 
we are on a much -improved  status . So, Honourable  Speaker with few reservations from the 
queries which were adequately addressed by the management and which were captured in this 
report. Hon ourable  Speaker , I wish  to ur ge the Members of this House to adopt this Report 
because already as the County Assembly fraternity we are on the right track . I’m urging every 
Member who is here in this House to agree with me that we are moving in the positive direction 
Mr. Speaker . Thank you so much Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman  Abdulkadir) : Thank you . Honourable  
Ogutu you were shouting at the top of your lungs saying  ayes, please make your contribution. 
Honourable  Ogutu please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Chair. Chair , I think sometimes we should understand that when 
I bow am still going through the Report but I want to congratulate the Committee for doing a 
good job but on page 2 the Committee recommended , ‘that the accounting officer should ensure 
that from now and henceforth no funds are released to Ward offices until cash books are 
maintained , monthly bank reconciliation is satisfactorily done and bank statements are submitted 
to the accounting officer’ . Mr. Speaker , this is a process that cannot be completed within a 
month ; owing to the fact that sometimes we get the funds not on time hence we  cannot complete 
the process within the time is required at least they would have put it that in quar terly or maybe 
half a year is when we do the reconciliation and we also do the cash book. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Members , any 
other Member willing to contribute? Hon ourable  Nusura the seconder of the Motion please 
contribute?  
 
November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 5 Hon. Nusura Mwinyi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nataka kujipo ngeza 
kama Mwana  Kamati wa PAC ; nafikiri tulipitia Ripoti  na tulikuwa na wale wenzetu ambao pia 
walikuwa ni wahusika wa Ripoti  hii, na tulipitia Ripoti  tukaiona Ripoti  iko sawa japokuwa 
kulikua na changamoto kidogo kidogo lakini ziliweza kurekebishwa. Kwa hivyo Ripoti  hii ni 
nzuri iko sawa na ningependa pia Jumba hili Waheshimiwa walioko hapa waniunge  mkono 
Ripoti  hii. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Yes, Honourable  Jacktone 
Madialo.  
 
Hon. Madialo: Thank you Mr. Speaker . While supporting this Motion I would want to 
lay emphasis on Committees’ , recommendations especi ally recommendations number two ‘that 
the accounting officer should ensure that Ward office Managers are trained in basic book 
keeping and accounts to prevent recurrence of such errors in future and ensure ward office 
records are properly maintained ’. I would like to admit here that not only the Ward Managers 
and I think three months ago through the Speaker I had requested that the Board should organize 
for the training of all our Wards staffs and also staffs around here so in supporting not only the 
Ward managers even our staffs the other two should be trained. Thank you so much.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) :  You mean the Secretary and 
the security as well?  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Yes Mr. Speaker we should organize maybe a seven days tra ining where 
the members of the C ounty Assembly will als o join them for proper training b ecause they are 
also the face of the County Ass embly at the grassroots level s o, their behaviors touch  on the 
Assembly and also their good behavior touches on the Assembly not only the Member of County 
Assembly from that Ward. Thank you and also the nominated ones.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you. Yes , Honourable  
Milka.  
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance. I su pport the Report as 
presented a nd I also want to echo the sentiments by my fellow colleague Hon ourable  Madialo 
that the s taff should be given training t he managers, the P A’s and Secretaries’ securities so that 
they are able to take on their mandate appropriately. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Yes, Honourable  Maimuna.  
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Nimesimama kuunga Ripoti 
hii mkono. Mapendekezo yetu kulingana na Ripoti hii tumeifurahia ni nzuri lakini tunajua katika 
hili Bunge kuna wafanyikazi ambao hawajaenda mafundisho  kabisa. Wame wekwa ha pa lakini 
hawajui cha kufanya n a katika Bunge  hili tunawahesabu wao kama VIP kwa  sababu 
wanatuangalia sisi na wanatulinda sisi na sisi wen gine isipokuwa Commissionaires  wanatak iwa 
waweze k wenda mafundisho  kwa NYS wa fundishwe  vizuri w akija hapa wakipiga salute 
wanaipiga ki vizuri sana. Kwa hivyo tunaomba Public Investment s Committee waweze 
kuwafikiria p amoja na hao wafanyikazi wetu wa Ward offices . Kwa sababu saa zengine 
kunatokea changamoto kwa ofisi za Wadi  ama sisi ambao ni wateuliwa wafanyi kazi  wetu kuleta 
returns  hua ni shida ikifika  muda umeisha  tunat aka kuondoka .  
November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 6 Kwa hivyo mambo hu a ni mengi sana , ningeomba ya kwamba wakipelekwa mafundisho  
wajue ya kwamba kila quarterly report wanatakikaniwa walete  proper report kwa sababu ya 
mambo ya ukaguzi  na ikifika wakati wa sisi tunataka k wenda nyumbani kuweza kutafuta  kura 
tena isiwe ni changamoto.  Wakati uliopita i likuwa ni changamoto nyingi sana kwa sababu 
tunaambiwa  wafanye hivi , wafanye hivi na h uku wewe mwenyewe unataka k wenda mitaani 
ukaweze kuomba kura. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ombi langu kubwa wakienda na watu wa 
accounts , watu wa audit  waende isifike dakika za mwisho wakaanza kupelekana na watu wetu 
wafanyikazi wa  Wadi na walioteuliwa  mbio kama  muhula uliopita . Mheshimiwa  Spika , naomba 
kwamba waweze kwenda training  na wachanganywe kulingana na vile vitengo vinawahusu wao 
kama wafanyikazi wetu wa m ashinani. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you for you r 
contribution. Yes, Leader of M ajority  I am sure you have  a few observations and you may want 
to make your contribution s, please proceed.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Mheshimiwa Spika nipongeze Kamati kwa jitihada zao za kuweza kudukuu na vile vile kuleta 
Ripoti  hii. Mheshimiwa Spika maswala ya mahesabu na maoni ya Mkaguzi Mkuu wa mahesabu 
ni maswala teti ambayo wengi wa wanasiasa huwa hatupendi sana maswala na hesabu lakini h ii 
ni taaluma ambayo zaid i ina Mawakili  Mheshimiwa Spika  lakini pia mambo mawili  ambayo 
nipongeze nayo Kamati waliwe za kuyanukuu hapa na ni bayana moja ; ya kwamba kama Bunge 
tumekuwa na changamoto kutokana na kutekeleza azi mio letu ama mipango yetu kama Bunge 
kwa sababu mgao tunaopata kutoka kwa Serikali kuu hauji kwa wakati unaostahili kama 
alivyonuku u hapa katika ukurasa wa tano, kwamba kuna kipindi na mara nyingi ilikuwa 
ikijiregelea pesa ya kwanza Bunge ambayo tumekuwa tukipata tumekuwa tukipata kuanzia 
mwez i wa kumi ambayo hiyo ni robo ya  pili  ya matumizi ya kifedha wakati tuna robo nzima 
ambayo Bunge tumekuwa tuking ’ang’ania kuendesha shughuli ambazo hatukuweza kuzikimu 
kwa sababu robo nzima ya kifedha tumekuwa tukiend esha shughuli kabla kupata pesa yeyote 
kutoka kwa Serikali Kuu.  
Pili, Mheshimiwa Spika  amesema maombi yetu kupata idhini kutoka kwa utawala wa 
Serikali Gatuzi  wakati mwengine tunapeleka maombi kwa hazina kuomba kupata mgao wetu 
kutekeleza majukumu lakini mara nyingi na hii si kwetu Mabunge mengi ya Gatuzi yamekuwa  
yakisubiria mgao kutoka kwa Serikali kuu ndio wapeane asilimia kumi  kwa Mabunge ambayo 
sheria haijasema ni lazima mgao kutoka katika Serikali kuu . Hata yale m apato ya ndani ambayo 
Serikali i naokota Mheshimiwa Spika pia inaruhusiwa Serikali tawala ya Gatuzi kuweza kuachia 
kima fulani ili Bunge pia liweze kujiendeleza na shughuli zake ikiwemo haya mapendekezo ya 
kwamba maafisa wetu Mheshimiwa waweze kupata mafunzo ya kuboresha ufahamu walio  nao 
kwa sababu si kwamba hawana ufahamu ama hawana elimu . Nafasi hizi kwa mfano za wale 
wakurugenzi katika afisi za kata Mheshimiwa Spika zilitangazwa na vigezo na wakakimu vigezo 
wakaja kutahiniwa ndio wakapata fursa zile. Kwa hivyo ki elimu Mheshimiwa Spika wako 
sawia, lakini pia katika kukua ambalo ni swala ambalo liko katika sheria za waajiri ya kwamba 
waajiriwa ni lazima wawe wanapata fursa ya kupata mafunzo ya ziada na pia kama kuna mbinu 
mpya zimekuja waweze kupitishiwa katika mbinu zile waweze kuboresha na pia kukua katika 
fursa zile ama nafasi zao za kikazi. Kwa hayo mengi Mheshimiwa Spika nipongeze Kamati na 
kuunga mkono Ripoti hii ambayo imeonyesha taswira kamili na vile vile pia nipongeze katika 
utekelezaji ya kwamba tumetoka katika Ripoti  fuzu, ama maoni fuzu ya Ripoti  mpaka tukaja 
kwa Ripoti  ambayo ni bora zaidi ya ile ya kwanza .  
November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 7 Mheshimiwa Spika, hii ni kumaanisha mapendekezo haya ya Kamati yaliweza kufanyiwa 
haki na tukaona matokeo yake. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika , nauunga.  
 
 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abd irahman Abdikadir) : Thank you. if there is no other 
Member wishing to contribute now , I may ask the Mover of the Motion, Hon ourable  Hamisi 
Nyota to respond to the Motion.  
 
 Hon. Hamisi Nyota:  Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker . First of all I would like to 
congratulate all Honourable Members in this House who made their contribution s; Honourable  
Speaker , I would just like to note  like the way the Leader of Majority stood up and made his 
contribution that the County Public Investments and Accounts Committee as very critical dealing 
with figures  is a very technical issue . We thank God that we had to sit down went through all the 
queries made very substantive recommendations and like I told already there is an impact or a 
progressive in the way that the Assembly does his business in as much as the Auditor’s General 
reports for subsequent years have shown Hon ourable  Speaker.  Honourable  Speaker , there was an 
issue of ward managers to go for trainings which was captured by one of my colleague, 
Honourable  Speaker I think that is a good recommendation and as a Committee we shall further 
recommend that because these ward managers carry the duty of the accounting officer of the 
County Assembly who is the Clerk of the County Assembly Hon ourable  Speaker so I think the 
way the issue was raised by my good colleague Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo and that these 
ward managers and other staff who resides at our ward level offices should go for training on 
capacity building because in accounts it is all about quality improvement whatever you, you do it 
to improve more in the subsequent years Hon ourable  Speaker.   
Honourab le Speaker , I will also want to comment on the issue that was touched by the 
Majority Leader on the issue of receiving funds from the other arm of the County government 
which it was depicted in the report that it hindered our operation because the funds which we 
might anticipate to be received in time so that this Assembly can run its business smoothly it was 
received late almost after a quarter has gone which hampered the operations of this House 
Honourable  Speaker but Hon ourable  Speaker on the same note I would just wish to notify 
Members that going forward this issue is almost a bygone case because there is a Bill in Senate 
which sets to make County Assemblies autonomous this means we shall be receiving our funds 
direct instead of coming through the Executive Arm of the County Government so Hon ourable  
Speaker some of recommendations which were varied I think Hon ourable  Speaker as I said 
earlier in as much as accounting part is concerned in this County Assembly we are on the right 
track and we as the Committee me being the Vice Chair we are working tirelessly to see quality 
improvement in each subsequent year Hon. Speaker. Thank you so much Hon ourable  Speaker.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you Vice Chair. 
Honourable  Members , I now put the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Hamisi Nyota on 
Adoption of Report on County Public Investments and Accounts Committee Report on the 
Auditor’s General Report for County Assembly for Financial Year 2020/2021 be adopted by this 
Honourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
November 14, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         90 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 8 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 14th November, 2023 at 
2:30p.m. Thank you.  
 
The House rose at 12:32 p.m. 
 
               
 
 
 
 