November 13, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          91 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday , 13th November , 2018  
The House met at 2:39p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated. Yes Clerk.  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Hon. Member s, good afternoon . First and foremost let me take this opportunity to thank 
God for seeing us through the recess. I trust that you all had a wonde rful rest during the recess 
and permit me to cordially welcome you back. ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Members, during the recess  the County Assembly was privileged to host l egislative 
counterparts of the National People’ s Congress (NPC ) from the People Republic of  China (PRC). 
The legislatures  were visiting the country as part of China – Kenya Parliamentary Exchange 
Program. It is my hope that we were able to learn and exchange ideas with our counterparts.  
Hon. Members, I want to appreciate all the efforts that you  have exhibited so far as Members of 
the Mombasa County Assembly in carrying out your mandate. A s we come to the end of the 
year, i urge you to prudently oversight , legislate and represent the people of Mombasa as 
expected of us by the Constitution of Kenya , 2010. Hon. Members, once again  may i take this 
opportunity to welcome you all and all  back and pray that we shall have productive engagement 
and deliberations for the ben efit of the residents of Mombas a. With those few remarks, I 
welcome you and i look forward to us having a fruitful deliberation for the reminder of the 
session.  Thank you...  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk.  
 

November 13, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          91 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 MEDICAL INSURANCE SC HEME AT COUNTY ASSEM BLY OF MOMBASA  
 
 Yes Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy.  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika naomba uniruhusu chini ya  Kanu ni za 
Bunge nambari  41 (c) kuna jambo muhimu ambalo linatuhusu , nataka kumuuliza ndugu yangu 
Mwanachama wa Bodi  Mheshimiwa Amur aweze kutueleza mambo ya afya yamefikia wapi ili 
na sisi tuweze kuji weka kisawa Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy. Hon. Amur Murfad  do you have a 
reply for that statement?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes Mr. Speaker sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Please go ahead and tell us ... this House.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  The position Mr. Speaker sir as we stand by Fr iday all Membe rs 
will be covered, God willing . It’s just a matter of signing the document Mr. Speaker and they 
have confirmed to us by Friday each and every Member will be covered.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Which Friday?  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  This coming Friday.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : This coming Friday . 
  
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes Mr. Speaker sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Which will be on? Is  it 15th ? 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : 15th. 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Yes 15th Mr. Speaker sir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So hopefully by 15th all Members will be covered . 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  That is wh at we believe Mr. Speaker sir, it’s only a matter of 
signing  the agreement other things have been done . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : 16th? So it should be 16th. 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur : Yes, by Friday Mr. Speaker sir. 
 
November 13, 2018                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          91 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Murfad  Amur. Yes Hon. Mohamed 
Mohamed Hatimy.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, namshukuru Mwanachama  wa 
Bodi na twaomba Mungu  ifike hio  Ijumaa  tuweze kupata hiyo  bima ya afya .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Yes Clerk.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members  this House shall stand adjourn till 14th November, 2018 at 9 :00a.m. Thank 
you. 
 
The House rose at 2: 46p.m. 