October 15, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official H ansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 15th Octo ber, 2019  
The House met at  10:27 a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Hon. Members we may be seated . Yes Clerk, next Order?  
STATEMENTS  
STATUS OF  PETITION ON TRADERS EVICTED AT MAMA NGIN A DRIVE  
 Yes Hon. Murfad Amur?  
Hon. Murfad Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson 
Committee o n Labour and Social Welfare and the Chairperson Committee on Trade, Tourism 
and Investments on the status of petition on traders evicted at Mama Ngina Driv e, which was 
committed to both Committee s on Wednesday, 31st July, 2019 during the 70th Sitting.  Than k you 
Mr. Speaker.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon. Kizito Opeya  or any Member on Committee on 
Trade, Tourism and Investments ? Yes Hon ourable , are you a Member of Tourism  Committee ? 
Do you have the answer for  the Statement?  
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Mheshimiwa Spika  sina jawabu isipokuwa t utawangojea  
Wenyekiti  tukae nao tuwaelezee .  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): But I think we gave 60 days the other time for the petition, 
have they elapse d, the 60 days?  
Hon. Murfad Amur:  Mr. Speaker when t he issue was brought in the Hon ourable  House, 
the Hon ourable House went for recess that  is why maybe it took a different sight of the 
Committees because we had gone for recess, maybe if we count from the day we went for recess 
maybe 60 days have not elapse d Mr. Speaker Sir .  

October 15, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official H ansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): So Hon. Maimuna maybe if you can tell us when we can 
have the answer  
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Next week Insha’Allah . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Next week, also after one week . 
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Yeah. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Maimuna. Yes Clerk ne xt Order?  
STATEMENT  
DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES IN TUD OR WARD  COOL BREEZE AREA   
 
Yes Hon. Bwire?  
Hon. Bwire:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I s tand in for Hon. Tobias Samba , the 
MCA Tudor Ward.  Hon. Speaker I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works on the demolition of structures in Tudor Ward Cool Breeze  area  
near Buxton considering that these people were already served with the notice to be evicted in 
that place . So I would wish to ask the Chairperson on Transport to communicate back on 
whether the process has taken the proper procedure Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon. Charles Kitula, are you up on a….? 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula) : Point of information  Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa 
Spika Taarifa  hii kwa ufahamu wangu natumai inafaa kwenda kwa Kamati ya Labour  and Social 
Welfare  si Kamati ya Transport and Infra structure  kwa sababu Inspectorate wako chini ya 
Kamati ya Labour and Social Welfare. Ahsante.  
(Silence)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Yes Hon. Bwire?  
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker just like I said I stood in for Hon. Tobias Samba and I just read 
the Statement as it  is so maybe you give the direction on the same. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ):  Yes Hon. Fadhili?  
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker first I 
happen to be a Member of Transport, Infrastructure and Public Wo rks. Mr. Speaker as per the 
Statement it clearly shows that the person concerned wanted Transport Committee to look upon 
this issue and bring back a response and am surprised to hear from the Hon. Member who is 
saying that the same  Statement came and it was directed to the Labour Committee . 
October 15, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official H ansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Mr. Speaker am hoping that this might be a new Statement as there  is evidence from the 
Hon. Member himself writing the Statement and delegating that the Statement be read by Hon. 
Raphael Bwire today and am sure the Statement is as it is in this Order Paper.  So Mr. Speaker on 
behalf of my Committee even if you have not directed we are ready to look upon this Statement 
and bring back a report in this Hon ourable  House. Thank y ou. 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Fadhili. Hon. Members I think I will direct 
the Statement as it came although we know that Inspectorate is not under the Committee of 
Transport but as the Member has directed the  Statement to go to the Committ ee on Transport so I 
will direct the Committee on Transport which the Chairperson is Hon. Prischillah and I think she  
is absent, she  is not here today so we have the Deputy wh o is Hon. Mwaka. Hon. Mwaka do you 
have the response for this Statement or maybe yo u need sometime?  
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa sababu Taarifa  hii ni geni 
naomba Nyumba hii iweze kunipa nafasi kuweza kufuatiliza hili jambo kupitia kwa Mwenyekiti  
wangu. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): So tutaw apatia nafasi by kesho mtakuwa nayo hiyo Taarifa ? 
Because I think it  is a serious allegation ! Kesho mtaweza ipata ? 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Tutajaribu . 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Kesho eeh a hsante. Yes Clerk , next Order?  
ADJOURNMENT  
Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 15th October, 2019 at 2 :30p.m.  
The House rose at 10:40a.m.  