August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednes day, 2 4th August , 2016  
The House  met at 2.39pm.  
(Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Members have a seat. Clerk ? 
PETITION  
       Yes H on. Membe rs, the House  has received a petiti on, from residents of Tononoka W ard, 
the approval  of their petition  states that;  
"Approval given for construction of a building within an illegal space plot space plot no. 56/XVII 
located at Kaloleni Mombasa. The residen ts and tenants are against the approval by; The 
National Construction Authority, The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 
and The County Government of Mombasa Department of  Lands Planning and Housing ". 
 Due to the ci rcumstance surrounding the p lot; 
1. An electrical pole with underground cable;  
2. It is through way;  
3.Playing ground for the children  
4.The size of the plot is questionable  
5.Rain water way  
6. Entrance to the neighbors will be difficult  
(End of Petition)  
       Hon. Members the peti tion is signed by ...; it’s signed by 35 residents from that area, and 
Hon. Membe rs before I commit the petition  to the Sectoral Committee concerned It is under our 
Standing order that the S peaker can allow any comments from this petition . 
       So if ther e is any comment before I give it to the Sectoral C ommittee under the grounds that 
I have stated  the floor is open, and if there is no comment, yes Hon. Wangudi.  
       Hon. Wangudi : Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity.  Mr. Speaker i' m trying to loo k 
into my Standing O rder and Honorable the manner in which a  petition is authorized  in this Hon. 
House  as per the petition  in the Standing O rder, maybe we re ceive a communication from the 
Honorable C hair. 
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Which S tanding O rder, Standing O rder number?  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Number  194, Mr. Speaker.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :…Standing order 194, there is nothing wrong with 
Standing O rder 194, unless there are  comment s concerning this issue . 
       The land i ssue that has been raised by the residents from this area but I can see they are no 
comments under  Standing O rder number 200 . 
       Hon. Wangud i petition is in order under Standing Order N o. 200 to 202 ; just go through the 
Standing O rders . 
       I can se e that the petition is in order so I commit this P etitio n to the C ommittee on Lands and 
Housing but the C ommittee sho uld put in mind that under our Standing O rder 202 we give you 
60 days for you to respond back to the P etition and so we will also need the House  to know what 
has transpired. Yes C lerk. 
PAPER  
       Hon. Kibwana .  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker I stand before this H onorable House  
saying that the report on  lack of drugs in Maweni dispensary is not yet ready because it lacks 
some clarity on the report that I have received . 
       So I have directed my Clerk to take it back to the Health department that we have been 
asked by H on. Member , that is Hon. Opeya who is  representing  Maweni  I mean that area . 
       So Hon. Speaker I would just ask to give me two weeks so that w e prepare this report for 
this H onorable House , thank you Hon. Speaker.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : So in two weeks time  the report will be ready, yes 
Clerk? 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Hon. Moham ed Hatim y. 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  Mr. Speaker am surprised to see that 
this is a Notice of Motion ; it is supposed to be under 49 (i) . 
       This is a Motion and will need to go back and ask why action has not been taken in this 
House. Thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : So it is not a Notice of Motion?  
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3        Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  It should be a Motion Mr. Speaker .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : It has pass ed in this Hon . House . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes Mr. Speaker long time ago .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Motion am sure it h as passed the six months 
period, it has elapsed . 
       So Hon . Hatimy it will be in o rder for you to first give the N otice then i will give you a 
privilege of  bring ing it as a Motion in this House  in this session.  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker in fact I want to be granted so that I can 
bring it as a Motion before giving a Notice of Motion . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I have alre ady granted Hon . Hatimy , I have already 
granted you the opportunity to bring it as a Notice of Motion and then proceed it to a Motion so 
you can proceed , just bring it procedurally .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker;  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy r ead Notice of Motion)  
       "THAT AWARE that the County A ssembly on Wednesday 3rd December 2014 approved a 
Motion for the establishment of a Conflict of I nterest register;  
       FURTHER AWARE that on Tuesday 23rd August 2016 the County Assembly Members s igned 
the Leadership and Integrity Code binding M embers to upho ld high standards of integrity M r. 
Speaker.  
       Mr. Speaker CONCERNED THAT failure to open the Conflict of I nterest register will 
render the efforts to enforce the law useless ; 
       Mr. Sp eaker I THEREFORE  urge the County Assembly to resolve that the County Assembly 
Clerk to open  and maintain as per the law a Conflict of I nterest register at the County Assembly 
Mr. Speaker . 
       I move Mr. Speaker and I request this House  to grant leave t o amend or to change the 
comma to a full stop. Thank you Mr . Speaker.  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy ended reading the Notice of Motion)  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Thank you, yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4        Yes Hon . Hatimy ? 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I wish to t able the following 
Motion ; the opening of Conflict of Interest R egister.  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read the Motion)  
       "THAT AWARE that the County A ssembly on Wednesday 3rd December 2014 approved a 
Motion for the esta blishment of a Conflict of Interest R egister;  
       FURTHER AWARE that on Tuesday 23rd August  2016 County Assembly Members signed the 
Leadership and I ntegrity Code binding M embers to uphold high standards of integrity  and ethics 
Mr. Speaker.  
       Mr. Sp eaker CONC ERNED THAT failure to open the Conflict of Interest R egister will 
render the efforts to enforce the law ; 
       I THEREFORE urge the C ounty Assembly to RESOLVE that the County Assembly C lerk to 
open and maintain as per the law a Conflict of Inter est R egister  at the County A ssembly ".  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy ended reading the Motion and tabled)  
       I beg to move Mr . Speaker . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Any seconder ?  
       Hon. Faraj : I second Mr. Speaker .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : I now take this opportunity to propose a question 
that this House  debates the amended Motion on Conflict of Interests Register.  
(Question p roposed and agreed to) 
       Yes any comments from Members, yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatim y: Mheshimiwa Spika natumai kuwaambia kwenye Nyumba hii  
waheshimiwa  wenzangu kwamba niliileta hii MswadaT arehe 3 D isemba mwaka 2014 na mpaka 
leo Mswada u le haikufanyiwa kazi Mheshimiwa Spika na sisi twaomba Karani  wetu ahakikishe 
kwamba hii rejesta imefun guliwa . 
       Na kama tulivyoona jana Mheshimiwa Spika sote tuli tia sahihi ya kukubali chini ya 
Leadership and Integrity . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika na ukiangalia Third Schedule  kuna vitu vingi sana ambavyo 
vinatakikana sisi kama waheshimiwa tuweze kurekebis ha hivi vitu na pia kwenye Code of 
Conduct  tuliotia sahihi.  
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5        Pia utaona pia kuna zawadi ambazo sisi tutapatiwa lakini Mheshimiwa Spika zile zawadi 
nyingi mtu huwa ni zake anachukua na anakwenda nazo.  
       Kwa hivyo n aomba Mheshimiwa Spika Nyumba h ii tuweze kuchukua..... safari hii 
..inavyosema ili tuweze kufungua kitabu hiki na tuweze kutia yale mambo ambayo inatakikana 
kufanywa . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika kwenye Bunge  letu kumekuwa na mambo me ngi kuambiwa hakuna 
pesa, mambo ya nini ya nini tuna sheria  hakuna mtu anayekatazwa , hakuna mkenya yeyote 
amekatazwa na sheria ku ongoza  ama kufanya jambo lolote  kama yeye hajakaa kwenye Kamati 
ya… 
       Kwa hivyo hii sheria iko wazi yule mtu ambaye hata kama ni partners wa kampuni ambayo 
…madamu hana  asilim ia moja ya ile kampuni au kusema hana hisa katika kampuni ana haki 
kujihusisha.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hivyo twataka tufungue kitabu cha conflict of interest  leo mtu 
akionana jambo lolote aende ajisajili aweze kuu…  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : What’s your point of order?  
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi:  I am on a Point of Order on Standing O rder 73, you speak in one 
language if its Kiswahili , you speak in Swahili if it is Engli sh you speak in English so the 
Member on the floor is mixing the languages.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Hatimy , stick to one language . 
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa S pika sijui anasema nini kusoma ama kusema 
conflict of interest  sijaona kwa Kiswahili . 
       Sisi tunazungumza conflict of interest  sio maneno yangu lakini wewe ile karatasi uliyo tia 
sahihi ukisoma na mbari 15 utaona imeandikwa K iingereza , kwa hivyo sidhani kutumia neno 
ambalo silo ni kama nimedanganya ama ikawa ni vibaya . 
       Kwa hivyo sijui kama yeye aliyesimama kwa Point of O rder anieleze neno conflict of 
interest  atumie neno gani Mheshimiwa S pika. 
       Nikiendelea Third S chedule  ya stakabadhi  tuliyoi tia sahihi  ina mambo mengi sana , kwa 
hivyo kitabu kufunguliwa ni lazima kifungu liwe sisi tufany e kazi inavyotakikana . 
       Kama unavyojua Mheshimiwa S pika watu huzungumza mambo am bayo hayana maana ; 
maneno ambayo ni ya uzushi , yule afanya hivi huyu afanya vile tukifungua hiki kitabu maneno 
haya yote yatapotea . 
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6        Kwa hivyo naomba Mheshimiwa S pika Karani tu mpe masaa 24 ili aweze kufungua hichi 
kitabu.  Ahsante.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy it is not in the prayers , the 24 hours or 
is it another amendment asking the House ?  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa S pika naf ikiri ukiwa unajaribu kujenga ile hoja yako 
unaweza kuo mba jambo lolote ijapokuwa haiko  kwenye ombi lako . 
       Ukiangalia Mswada u liopita utakuta aliambiwa kwa haraka inavyowezekana kitabu 
kifunguliwe lakini kitabu hakikufunguliwa . 
       Kwa hivyo nilikuwa  nasema tufung ue kita bu Mheshimiwa S pika, hio masaa 24 iwe 
itawezekana.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Opeya.  
       Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Hon . Speaker . I also support the M otion that has been brought by 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy  about the Con flict of Interest R egister . 
       In fact it was passed in 2014 and I am even wondering why it was not implemented , and as 
the new Chairman of the Implementation C ommittee I will ensure that it is implemented , I will 
be in the Clerk’s office to make sure it is implemented.  
(Applause ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Amur?  
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker, to add or to elaborate on t he issue any gift given to 
any M ember within the limit of Ksh s.20, 000 is allowed.  
       So we should know  the range that we are given by any person . it should not reach more than 
Ksh.20,000 , within Ksh.20, 000 that gift is allowed by the constitution . 
       Mr. Speaker there is no objection about it, other than those gifts of cars and other things it is 
not allowed by the law. Thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Amur do not try to introduce a law that does 
not exist , it clearly says that you can be allowed but there are ways of the person intending to 
give,  if it is a bribe then it will b e abuse of the law,  be it a gift then it is another. .. 
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker I was attending another occasion and the Senator of this C ounty 
was given a gift he inquired in front of the public , ‘Is this gift more than Ksh.15,000 ? Because in 
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 the integrity chapter it says any gift given should not go beyond Ksh s.20,000  and should be 
accepted and beyond that it is questionable ".  
       I just wanted to put it clear so that when you go as a guest in any function you are given,  like 
me if  I go Lamu C ounty I am given a Muslim  hat;  there are those of Ksh s.20,000,  Ksh.15,000 
will I take it?  I was giving more information to M embers that within Ksh s.20,000 it is allowed 
more than Ksh s.20,000 it is questionable Mr. Speaker. Thank You.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Amur but I am emphasizing that it 
be a gift not a bribe even if the value is Kshs.20,000 but if it is a bribe then that is abuse of law 
but if it is a gift as you have said that someone has gone for an officia l visit and receives a 
personal gift for him to declare back to the House  that you have been given a gift of this amount 
there is nothing wrong . 
       If you receive something that is expensive more than the Ksh s.20,000 and you do not report 
back it might  be used against you because it is going against the code of cond uct that you have 
signed H on. Members. Yes Hon . Simi nyu? 
       Hon. Simi nyu: Thank you Mr. Speaker, if you look at part 13 of the Act, ‘It shall be the 
respons ibility of the S tate officer  to ensure that entry of register , able interest under this section . 
       For us to be able to practice this we have to have thi s registry even in our disposal  Mr 
Speaker , any state officer working under the same unit should register any conflict of interes t 
issues.  
       Mr. S peaker it is ve ry important because since the M otion was brought early this year 
nothing has been done and it is very important for this House  to make sure that each an d every 
thing that we do as an A ssembly  goes according t o the law . 
       I fully support the M otion that ha s been brought by our able F inance Chair Hon . Hatimy 
because this will  make sure that each and every S tate officer including us fo llow the due process 
of the law.  
       Mr. Speaker i urge this House  to make sure b ecause it is into the first time that this thing has 
been brought to this House  and nothing has been done , i think 24hrs has been long it has to be 
now i support fully. Thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Saad.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii , nimesimama kuunga mkono 
Mswada huu ambao kwamba ni mswa da uliokuwa umepitishwa katika Bunge hili Disemba  
2014 . 
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8        Mheshimiwa S pika tumekuwa tukilalamika kila leo katika N yumba hii kwa kuwa yale 
mambo ambayo t wayapitisha mambo ambayo ni muhimu yanakosa utekelezaji na hili jambo ni 
moja kati ya mambo mengi ambayo kwamba hayajawahi kupata ms ukumo ambao unahitajika ili 
ipate ms ukumo unaotakikana . 
       Ni lazima tuwe na mfumo ambao kwamba utaleta mabadiliko ambay o yanahitajika kutoka 
kwa zile sharia ambazo tunazotunga katika hili J umba . 
       Mheshimiwa S pika, kama ilivyosisitizwa na wenzangu hapo awali ni kuwa sisi tuliweka 
sahihi mkataba baina yetu sisi na wale ambao kwamba wanaohusika na maswala ya ufisadi na 
mojawapo wa mambo ambayo kwamba tumeweza kuwekea sahihi.  
       Ukianga lia sharia ambayo ilioko katika katiba  ni swala hili la kuweza kujitam buliza ama 
kujitambua k uwa wewe unataka kufanya jambo f ulani , na ni lazima uwe umejitangaza rasmi 
ueleweke kuwa lil e jambo utalifanya, ni haki ya kila  mmoja kufanya biashara katika K aunti yetu 
hii na kati ka nchi yetu hii.  
       Hata kama ni kiongozi ana haki pia ya kutekeleza majukumu yake yeye na watoto wake kule 
majumbani Mheshimiwa  Spika na ndio maana mtu anatakiwa  tu ajitangaze aseme kuwa mim i 
niko na interest  na hili jambo akae pembeni asiwe ni mmojawapo wa wale ambao kwamba 
wataweza kutoa uamuzi katika kupe ana ile.  
       Sharia imempa nguvu kila mmoja ; mwananchi , kiongozi na kila mmoja kule mashinani 
kuweza kuji husisha na mambo kama haya na  ni muhimu hili jambo liweze kutekel ezwa moja 
kwa moja . 
       2014 mpaka leo ni siku nyingi sana na m imi naunga mkono maongelezi ya M heshimiwa 
Hatimy ya kuwa kupitia kwa Kiti chako u peane masaa 48 kama alivyoomba M heshimiwa 
Hatimy ili kusudi tuweze kufanya mambo vi le inavyohitajika, inaonekana Nyumba hii ni 
Nyumba ya kuzungumza peke yake kwa sababu kila tukizungumza tukipitisha miswada 
hatuyaoni kule mashinani yakitekelezwa na ndio twaonekana sisi hatuwajibiki katika kazi zetu.  
Ahsante.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon Amir.  
       Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, ni mesimama kwanza kumshukuru 
Mwenyekiti wa F edha kwa ku weza kuleta hoja hii muhimu na Mheshimiwa S pika ni  masikitiko 
kwa sababu hili ni J umba  la sharia lakini 2014 , miaka miwili imepita kwa utekelezaji wa 
maswala ya kufunguliwa kwa register maalumu na haikufa nywa na hili ni moja tu.  
       Iwapo kiti chako hakitaweza kuchuku a hatua katika kutekelezwa hoja nyin gi zile ambazo 
zinapita katika N yumba hii tukufu basi itakuwa hakuna hata sababu ya kuja hapa na kuchukua 
mda kujadili na kupitisha hoja ambao mwisho wa kuisha hakuna kweny e zinaenda.  
August 24 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBA TES                                         91 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9        Kuna Kamati ya Utekelezaji nafikiri ie nde moja kwa moja kuhak ikisha kwamba mambo 
haya yote yanatekel ezwa lakini kiti chako moja  moja iweze kutoa amri ambayo itakua sio hoja 
hii peke yake kwamba ipitishwe bali kuna nyingi ambazo zime weza kufika katika B unge hili 
kuhak ikisha kwamba zimetekele zwa. 
       Ndio  na sisi tutakua na sababu y a kutumia fedha ya mw ananchi kwa s ababu ni haki yao 
kuhakikisha kwamba hoja ambaz o zinapitishwa na Bunge kutekelezwa katika Kaunti yetu ya 
Mombasa. Ahsante sana M heshim iwa S pika naunga mkono . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon Hatimy respond to the M otion.  
       Hon. Mohamed  Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika, nachukua fursa hii kuwapongeza 
wenz angu kuwa wanajua kwanini hi i yataka ifanyike . 
       Kwa hivyo yangu n i machache kusema kuwa tupatiwe uamuzi w a kusema kuwa Mwenyekiti  
wa Utekelezaji  yuko tayari kesho kuwa nac ho hicho kitabu . 
       Kwa hivyo naomba uamuzi wako uwe u taenda kwa ule msemo tuliosema sisi ili ombi 
tuliloleta iwe kitabu h iki kionekane tayari kimefanywa.  
       Kwa hayo machache naomba kuwashukuru wenzangu kwa kuweza kutambua hii, a hsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika. 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) :  As it has been said by the Hon . Members the bu tton 
is in the Implementation C ommittee ; to make sure to track down the M otion that passed in this 
House  that are yet to be implemented . 
       So the I mplementa tion C ommittee take charge and track down these M otions that have not 
yet been implemented, and I know I stand to put a question on the Conflict of Interest R egister as 
amended by this Hon . House , the Clerk to open this Conflict of Interest R egister as soo n as 
possible . 
(Question put and a greed  to) 
(Applause ) 
       Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
       The House  stands adjourned until tomorrow afternoon.  
The House  rose at 3.09pm.  
             