August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 25th August, 2016  
The House met at 2.34pm.  
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk? 
PAPER  
       Any Member from the Energy , Trade, Cooperatives and investments Committee.  
(Silence ) 
       Any Member from that Committee ? Any information?  Clerk . 
(Matter deferred ) 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Yes H on. Hatimy?  
       Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. S peaker I wish to give a Notice of the following Motion;  
SIGNING AND COMMITMENT TO LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY CODE BY STATE 
OFFICERS  
       THAT AWARE that Members of the County Assembly of Mombasa signed and swo re to 
commit themselves to the Leadership and Integrity Code at a ceremo ny officiated by the Ethics 
and Anti -Corruption personnel on Tuesday,  23rd August 2016.  
       FURTHER AWARE that  the Leadership and Integrity Code is a requirement under Section 
40 of the Leadership and Integrity Act ( Cap 182).  
       Mr. Speaker, NOTING  that the County Executive Members of Mombasa hav e not yet done 
similar to what Members have done in signing and  swearing  to commit to the Leadership and 
Integrity Code. 
       CONCERNED  that failure by any State Officers to sign and commit to the Leadership and 
Integrity Code will be in breach of the law.  
       I therefore urge the County Assembly to resolve that:  
       1. All State Officers under County govern ment to sign and commit to the Leadership and 
Integrity Code. 
August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 2. This House congratulates and notes with approbation the Act by t he County Assembly 
Members of  signing and committing to the Leadership and Integrity Code on Tuesday, 23rd  
2016.  
(End of Notice of Motion)  
       Mr. Speaker I wish to seek leave to ask this House Mr. Speaker and allow this House to 
deliberate this Motion . Thank you. 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Before we allow you is the second part , part of 
the prayer?  
       Hon.  Moha med Hatimy:  Yes Mr. S peaker this Motion is just to notify Members that, there  
are no prayers but to notify Members for  those who have not  signed the Code must sign.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes that’s p rayer number one, number two?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Even number two Mr. S peaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok. Yes Clerk.  
       Hon. Dancun.  
       Hon. Onyango : Mr. Speaker, I have a statement on a letter from the Department of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries ; we discussed at the fisheries level and resolved to bring it 
in this Honorable  House as a statement , if you can allow me to read?  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes proceed.  
       Hon.  Onyango:  Thank you. 
(Hon. Onyango read the Statement)  
BRIEF FOR COUNTY ASSEMBLY ON PROGRESS ON 2016 ASK MOMBASA 
INTERNATIONAL SHOW  
A) 2016 ASK Mombasa international show -Department of Agriculture , Livestock and 
Fisheries  
       The Mombasa international show is scheduled for 31st August to 4th September 2016 at ASK 
ground Mkomani .  
       The County stan d where all departments of the County will exhibit will undergo final 
renovations.  
August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3        The department of Transport and Infrastructure has provided the Bills of Quantities for this 
purpose.   
       This year each department will take care of the entry tickets of their staff and stakeholders as 
well as t he County Assembly Committee Members dealing with that department.  
       The costs for each category of entry tickets and essential ca r stickers have been issued to the 
departments.   
       Equally, the departments will share the cost for the renovations of the stand.   
       The sharing of responsibilities will be extended to cleaning and payment for the utilities.  
       It is expected that the stand this y ear will be even more attractive considering that the major 
renovations  were done last year and very little in way of beautification is outstanding.  
b)  2016 ASK Mombasa International Show – Department of Agriculture, Livestock & 
Fisheries  
       The food crops as well as the fodder crops in the Department of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Fisheries stand have already been established while the recruitment and sensitization of 
stakeholders who will exhibit alongside the technical staff is finalized.   
       A tot al of 36 stakeholders from crops, livestock and fisheries have undergone these 
processes , and include women, youth and Persons with Disabilities involved in various stages in 
the various food value chains being promoted in the c ountry.  
       The animals that will  be exhibited in the departmental stand include dairy cattle, dairy goats, 
poultry and rabbits.   
       Emerging livestock, crocodiles, quails and ornamental birds have also been recruited.   
       They have been vaccinated for notifiable diseases and are undergoing gro oming and 
livestock parade -training.  
       The department will compete in three classes:  
i) Large government stand  
ii) Theme interpretation  
iii) Environmental conservation  
iv) Agro -processing  
       In the remaining four days, the logistics for transportation of exhibits, access to the 
showground by staff and stakeholders and general participation matters have been finalized.  
August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4        Thank you . Mr. S peaker.  
(Hon. Onyango ended  his Statement ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Dancun with your Committee we would 
like the Clerk to communicate with the CEC Agricultu re because it is just recently Members 
have signed a code o f conduct and we are not ready to misuse  funds because they say that every  
department to cater for every Member that deals with every department . 
       It is a misuse of public funds to at least do the way they were doing so that at least for them 
to buy two tickets for the Honorable Members as  usual . 
       I think to me it would be inappropriate to use funds in buying for every Committee because 
every Member is in v arious Committees that deal wi th various departments and the Member will 
end up w ith almost ten entry cards Honorable Dan . 
       So please let the Clerk to communicate to the department for them to give a reasonable 
answer . So Clerk?  
       Hon. Onyango:  Mr. Speaker it is due to lack of funds in the department  and I  am told that 
the department has com municated to other departments and they have agreed.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : They should look for a way that they will not 
misuse public funds, they  should come to  a conclusion that each and every Member and the staff 
should not get more than what they used to get . Yes Saad?  
       Hon. Faraj:  Thank you Mr. S peak er mine is a concern, from  the statement  that was brought 
by  my brother here, Mr. S peaker in my view ……  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Saad you cannot debate on statements  
unless you have your own statement then I will allow it.  
       Hon. Faraj:  Yes I do have my own statement Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Then proceed  with the statement.   
       Hon. Faraj : Mr. Speaker my statement is  with regards with a recent visit with different  
Committees including an Ad Hoc Committee . 
       The Kenya Ferry and the Kenya Ports Authority M r. Speaker  part of the cooperation we 
have with these institutions is we agreed with the officers that we met there  that we as Members 
of the County Assembly will be provid ed with stickers for the Kenya Ferries as well as the 
Kenya Ports Authority . 
August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5        Mr. Speaker my question is the position and the status of where we are in regards to this 
particular issue because we tend to forget on what we agree upon and this is something which 
was passed in a meeting as agreed but up to now we have not seen any movement in regards to 
this matter . 
       Mr. Spea ker, that is my statement and thank you very much for the opportunity.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you. Committee on Implementation , 
take charge . Yes Hon . Nyamvula ? 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I wish to make a brief statement  if you will 
allow.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes? 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  I wish to make a brief statement if I am allowed.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes you are allowed . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I stand before this Honorable House to ask 
the status of th e County Budget Review and Outlook Paper. 
       Mr. Speaker in accordance to the Public F inance Management Act 2012 the County Budget 
Review and Policy Paper should  be tabled for approval by the County Assembly by the 26th of 
August which is tomorrow . 
       Mr. Speake r I just wanted to know what is the status of the noting that today is 25th. Thank 
you. 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think the Chairman of the Finance  Committee 
is able to inform the House on the position of the Budget Outlook Paper, y es Hon. Hatimy just 
inform the House.  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I think Mr. S peaker today is 25th,  so we wait until 26th which will 
be on Monday  or Tuesday, the  interpretation is when a day comes before Saturday  or Sunday 
Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : What is the position?  
       Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  We have not received the document M r. Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok. Yes Hon . Tom Ogalo.  
       Hon. Ogalo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, niko na taarifa yangu kuhusu shamba ya Waitiki . 
August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6        Mheshimiwa Spika kuna siku tulipitisha hoja hapa kwamba serikali  ya Kaunti italipia wale 
squatters  wako pale pesa . 
       Mheshimiwa  Spika imefika wakati tete si imeingia kwa hiyo shamba ya Waitiki , wengine 
wanasema ni siasa , wengine wanasema ni uongo . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba Mwenyekiti wa Ardhi waniitie ile Kamati ya shamba la 
Waitiki  na waite executive  ambaye anasimamia ardhi ili watu wangu wawe na hakika kwamba  
hiyo kitu sio uongo . 
       Sababu tuliitisha hapa Bungeni na ni ya ukweli na kwa vile siasa iko Mheshimiwa Spika saa 
hii siasa imeingililia huko . 
       Ningeomba kwamba Mwenyekiti wa  Kamati ya Ardhi na Waziri wa Ardhi waende kule ili 
waongee na watu wa pale. A hsante.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon . Tom but in my view I think 
you are directing it to the wrong Committee because the Motion has passed in this Honorable 
House . 
       So the perso n in charge  of it will be the Implementation Committee , so the Implementation 
Committee will work hand in hand with the Lands Committee to come up with a good reply on 
the issue of Waitiki Land . 
       So Implementation Committee we need that report in two weeks time . Yes Hon . Enock 
Mwinga . 
       Hon. Mwinga:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama hapa 
kutoa taarifa yangu fupi kuhusiana na masuala yetu ya Nyumba hii . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika kama tunavyojua sisi Waheshimiwa wote huwa kila mwezi tunapatiwa 
pesa ambazo tunanunua salio la simu yaani airtime  ili kuweza kuzungumza na watu wetu ama 
kurahisisha kazi yetu . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika kama vile unavyojua sisi waheshimiwa ni watu ambao huwa tuna kazi 
nyingi na kama tunavyojua pia airtime  hii huwa hailipwi kwa wakati ., basi hivyo kutufanya hata 
tumechanganyikiwa hatujui sasa kama watatulipa miezi mitatu ama miezi mingapi . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri suala hili linaingililiana na lile na kodi za ofisi zetu mashinani . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika sisi ni watu wa mambo mengi basi tungetaka kujua tutalipwa mie zi 
mingapi na tumebakisha miezi mingapi?  
August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7        Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba Nyumba hii kupitia kwa kiti chako kwa wale wanaohusika ili 
tuweze kupewa ratiba ama tuweze kupewa ripoti kamili ili na sisi tuweze kujua tunadai nini na 
tunadaiwa nini . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika  hiyo ndio taarifa yangu fupi ambayo ningependa kupeana katika 
Nyumba hii. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  I direct you to Social Welfare Committee and 
Clerk will communicate to the Social Committ ee and the issue of lunch allowance of staff to start 
because it is not the issue of airtime alone but I understand and my office understand s that the 
issue on lunch allowance to staff have  also not been paid . 
       The matter should be brought back in thi s House on Wednesday Morning. Yes Honorable 
Siminyu  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker thank you my statement is about land rates ; I would like you to 
rectify with the Implementation Committee because time is not on our side . 
       There's another statement that I brought  last time o n land rates waiver Mr. Speaker , and I 
think this should be taken on a serious note plus there's another Bill which is important . 
       Mr. Speaker these Bills are needed ; we have the participation of our people to get the law 
and it is high time people s hould speak up so that our people can apply the waivers like any other 
County. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Also Implementation Committee take care of 
that issue, yes last statement from Hon . Zainab Said . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Zainab Said:  Ahsante sana Bwa na Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii , mimi nataka 
kuongea kuhusu wale watoto . 
       Huu ni ule Mswada  wa Mheshimiwa Hatimy na ikapitishwa hapa lakini hakuna kitu lakini 
utekelezaji  hakuna na wale watoto wa usiku kina mama wanawatumia kutafuta unga kwa 
kusumbua watu k wenye magari ama wanakuja mpaka kwenye madirisha ya magari kwa 
kuomba . 
       Wanatuharibia jina letu la Mombasa manake ni wageni wengi wanaokuja Mombasa na  
kuona vituko kama vile vinavyofanyika ; si sawa watoto wanajifundisha tabia mbaya , watoto wa 
kike usiku waomba . 
       Sasa wale wazazi wafi kiria nini kuhusu wale watoto? Wale watoto watakuja lazimishwa 
watafanya mambo sio mazuri na wale kina mama yaweza kuwa hata labda si wa hapa Mombasa 
ni watu pengine wametoka nje kama wale walemavu walikuwa wanafanya kazi ya kuomba na 
waliposhikwa ilikuwa wanatoka nchi ya Tanzania wakasafirishwa . 
August  25, 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8        Kwa nini hili jambo tulichukulieni kwa uzito na kuchukuliwe hatua nzuri. A hsante.  
(Applause ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I also direct the statement from Hon . Zainab 
Said to the Committee on Security and Ho n. Ndanda you take charge and by Wednesday 
afternoon we will like to hear something from the Committee. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       Hon. Hatimy ?  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I seek leave under Standing ... 
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Hatimy use your microphone put it on . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker I seek leave from this House under Standing Order 
51 (5) that the word  ‘approbation ’ to be left out and the word , ‘appreciation ’ be included  and 
two I take this opportunity under Sta nding Order 48 to withdraw the Motion. Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The Motion having been withdrawn ……   
(Laughter ) 
       We will proceed with our business. Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
       The House stands adjourned until next week Tuesday at 2.30 pm. 
The House rose at 3.59pm.  