October 15, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 15th October, 2019  
The House met at 2:47p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk next Order?  
MOTIONS  
ADJOURNMENT  OF THE COUNTY ASSEMB LY 
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mw idani, Majority Leader?  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . May I have this 
permission to move adjournment of the County Assembly on 28 (1) that a Member may at an y 
time, for reasons stated, seek leave to move , ‘‘that , this County Assembly do now adjourn.’’  
As you are aware Mr. Speaker, we are having a very big function in Chaani which is 
going to be presented by His Excellency the Governor Ali Hassan Joho so Mr. Spe aker am 
moving this adjournment just for this afternoon session. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Maybe we are still learning but I think the 
function was scheduled for 2:00p. m, I think the best time that the Motion could have come it was 
during the morning plenary session…  
(Consultations)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya?  
Hon. Renson Thoya:  I can see the Clerk is instructing that is how is not supposed to be  
done… 
(Interruption)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It is okay you can continue . 

October 15, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Hon. Thoya:  Yes as much as I support but in the near future depending on the timings, 
the function is supposed to start at 2:00p.m and we are now at around 3:00p.m am seeing th e 
adjournment of the House and the function am not getting . So I expect in the near future the 
Leader of the Majority should be moving the same Motion in the morning plenary session other 
than afternoon session. Thank you.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank y ou Hon. Renson. Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa?  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I think am in order b ecause the 
function starts at 2 :00p.m but the As sembly resume its Business at 2 :30p.m so I think Mr. 
Speaker am in a very proper order so that now  even the Members they can gain the issue of this 
day otherwise if I could have done it in the morning then we could have miss ed the afternoon 
session . So I think Hon. Members am still on the same track so I hope the Honourable  has 
already said that he is support ing the Motion so it means that he has also second ed it. Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  
(Applause)  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Renson Thoya, are you seconding the 
Motion?  
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I do second the Motion .  
The Speake r (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members . I want  now to put the question 
that the Motion by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani  for the House to be  adjourn ed in today’s  
afternoon session . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you  Mr. Speaker . Kama tunavyoelewa  
kwamba kuna Clinic ama Hospital  ambayo inafunguliwa na Hospital  moja ya katika zile ruwaza 
Gavana katika hali ya maendeleo yetu ya Mombasa Kaunti  kwa hio  ningeomba Wanachama  
waweze kuhudhuria angalau  kumpatia support  Gavana kwa ule mradi  amba o anaenda 
kuuanzisha  leo. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nimeshukuru kwa wale ambao wameunga mkono 
huu Mswada  ikiwezekana tukitoka tuelekee huko Chaani tuweze kumpatia  Gavana wetu support . 
Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani. Yes Hon. Ramla?  
Hon. Said: Ahsante Bwana  Spika . Mimi naunga mkono h uu Mswada  kwa sababu ni 
muhimu kumpa support  Gavana wetu kwa dakika hii kwa hivy o naunga mkono. Ahsante.  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ramla. Yes Hon. Faith?  
Hon. Mwende: Thank you Mr. Speaker . I am in support to  go and accompany our 
Governor as he launches the hospital  in Chaani , its good for us as legislators and over sight  to see 
what is being launched, so I support the Motion  Mr. Speaker . Thank you.  
October 15, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEB ATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon. Members I now put the question that this 
House do now adjourn  as moved by Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani . 
 (Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members the House is adjourned until Wednesday 16th of October at 10:00a.m.  
 
The House rose at  2:58p.m . 
  