November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 1 4th November , 2018  
The House met at 10:41a.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated, yes Clerk.  
 
NOTIC ES OF MOTION  
 
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Ha timy please give the notice of M otion.  
 
PROHIBITION OF BARS A ND NIGHTCLUBS OPERAT ING IN RESIDENTIAL A REAS AND EDUCATIONAL  
INSTITUTIONS  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to give the  
follow ing notice of M otion on prohibit ion of bars and nightclubs operating in residential areas 
and educational i nstitution s. Mr. Speaker S ir, I beg t o give the following notice of Motion:  
 
WHERE AS b ars and night clubs are allowed  to operate in the C ounty subjec t to certain 
conditions and restriction s; 
 
WHEREAS the operation of these entertainment establishments emit noise pollution and 
have adverse influence to youth s and other residents;  
 
WHEREAS if the current status of the affairs whereby these entertainments  are left 
uncontrolled will continue to pose a  big thr eat to safety, tranquility and good moral the 
youth s and th e faithful in residential areas;  
 
Now  THEREFORE, be it RESOLVED  by the County Assembly of Mombasa that the 
County g overnment of Mombasa to proh ibit the o peration of bars and nig ht clubs within 
the radius of 300 meters in all residential areas and places of worship after due notice has 
been served.   
 

November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2  Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to apply lea ve under  Standing Order 45 to include some words . 
Mr. Speaker  with your permission.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Moh amed Hatimy you can take that lea ve. 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I want to include after 
residential area to  read that any nursery, primary, secondary or other le arning institution included 
in the notice. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk.  
 
MOTION  
RESPONSIVENESS  ON GENDER BASED VIOL ENCE  
 
 Yes Hon. Milka Mora a please move  the M otion.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker fo r giving me  that opportunity to move the 
following M otion, responsiveness on gender base d violence . Mr. Speaker S ir, I beg to 
move the following M otion;  
 
THAT AWARE that the right and fundamental freedom is we ll stipulated in part two 
Chapter  Four of the C onstitution fo r Kenya, 2010 which place significant emphasis on 
huma n rights, equality and justice;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT the sustainable development goals include a specific target 
to eliminate all form s of violence against women and girls in the private an d public 
spheres;  
 
CONCERNED THAT the phenomenon of gender based violence is rampant within our 
County and with no specific dedicated body to address the comp lexities of gender based 
violence, no safe houses or shelters, no specific budget or basic health care service. This 
means many victims do  not get much needed services;  
 
I therefore urge this Honorable House to RESOLVE that;  
 
1. The C ounty government provide adequate resources and enhance partnership for 
comprehensive response to incidence of gender based  violence;  
 
2. There is need for our County to have a technica l gender working group to address 
issue concernin g gender based violence in our C ounty to do home visiting programs to 
combat this issue;  
 
3. Gender violenc e responsive unit at Coast Provincial G eneral Hospital should be 
open 24/7.  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 4. The Health department to have trained nurses who can be on call to early forensic 
exams to collect evidence for possible using prosecution of the offenders and most 
importantly provide psychological support treatment for po ssible STIs and refer them to 
social services to help get res ources for continued cancelling , am sorry the word has been 
misspel t but I hope you can correct later.  
 
5. The H ealth department needs to do collaboration with other more established 
health faciliti es within and outside the country for greater achievement.    
 
Mr. Speaker I want t o ask Hon. Thoya to second the M otion.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka Mora a. Yes Hon. Thoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir, I second.  
 
 The Speak er (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you Hon. Thoya. Hon. Members I now  propose the 
question that the M otion on , Responsiveness on Gender based V iolence  by Hon. Milka Moraa be 
considered by this House in the same terms as moved . 
 
 (Question proposed)  
 
 Hon. Members the  floor is open now  for debate , yes Hon. Amur . 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Milka Moraa.  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Ngare : Mr. Speaker  Sir there is one point I want to make it clear first before 
I continue debating ; that gender does not only  define the women.  It is about  male , female, men 
and women, boys and girls…  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
 I know they wer e waiting for me , especially  our Majority Leader and Hon. Amur so that 
is why I am saying  i want t o make it clear that gender does not only mean women, it is about 
men, women, boys and girls . So together as a House we should put measures that are going to 
protect our  men, our women, our boys and our  girls; w e have seen many  instances  where even 
men hav e been clobbered  not only by their  wives but also by other people  even in this House 
alone I know that we have visited victims of violence at various  hospitals…  
 
(Off microphone ) 
 
 Thank you  I did  not realize that I had gone off  until I saw Members looking  at me and 
like...what is she talking about?  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  So I am saying that even in from this ver y House we have had Honourable M embers 
visiting hospital like Coast General Hospital where there were victims of violence to try and give 
some moral support, to try and find out what transpired but then after we have  visited, after we 
have given moral support what next? It ends there so we need to have a centre , a concrete center  
where we can have these victims taken to for treatment first and then later they are sent to rescue 
center s where  they can get further support, they can get counselling  so that they are not 
psychological ly affected for the rest of their lives . And  when I say  not psychologically  affected  
throughout  their lives  we have se en victims who after getting  infection s from rape cases on  
certain abuses in our social  sphere  they even r an mad . This is  because they did not get the much  
needed support wh ich was going to calm them down and  accept themselves as normal human 
being s that nothing ever happened to them  and they carry on with their lives. S o that is why I am 
urging  this House that you all have wives most of you , you have husbands, you have daughters 
and sons at home;  we do not want our daughters, our husbands, and our wives to go through such 
suffering w ithout getting the  support that they are supposed to get in life  for them to continue 
living a comfortable li fe like you and I are doing.   
 Finally , I want to say that having a nation  free of violence means having a n ation  that is 
going to develop; having a nation free of drug  cases, rape and such k ind of thing means the 
people in  the n ation are going to have more time and  they are going to dedicate m ore time to 
build the development issues so that our c ountry can  prosper, specifically now our County can 
prosper because we  know that at Mombasa County we do have various issues that have come up 
on drug abuse,  rape cases, battering of wives and children and girls and boys either by people 
who are care givers or people at their homes who are not taken seriousl y, the consequences of 
violence towards t he young people or their partners.  
 So am begging this H ouse that we do have, we pass this M otion so that we can now go to 
that next stage  of implementation to help our young boys and girls and also to help ourselves  and 
our people at home who are un dergoing such kind of violence. A nd Mr.  Speaker I hope that I 
have made myself clear and also finally the last point, that when we do pass this M otion and 
people get a chance to  meet  other department s in other C ounties or technical  working  groups in 
other Counties or even out of Country we even  have dono rs who can set up base at the Coast 
General , give us donor money that can  be able t o carry out this kind of work like for the 
technical  working  group I know that they are do nors who may will be willing to assi st us set up 
this base  at the Coast General H ospital and other Sub -County hospital s as far as Mwakirunge  
where we have violent cases of women a nd young girls and boys being ba ttered with no 
prosecution that has taken  place and no rescue centre around that area. Thank you so much Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka Mora. Yes Hon. Amur.  
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur:  Thank you M r. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I am in support  of this 
Motion, the major  problem is not only about the gender based violence issues  it is that the system 
of this country is where by the victims do  not get fair hearing in our courts, the cases take  a lot of 
time to the tune that at the end of the day those who have been  dealt with such issues t he 
offender s go free after two to three years , the case s take so long, so  our system of l aw is not that 
active . Mr. Speaker we need to emphasize  and make our law s that on such cases when we have  
such cases the case s should not take too long, two years, th ree years, the offender is set free 
when the se cases take long.  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  So we need to enforce the law s as much as we have all the se department s but the law 
enforcers  it is where we fail ; the offenders are let free some of them after two years, three years. 
A case l ike rape has to be dealt with within one week or a month and that i s it, we need to 
emphasize  that the whole enforcement  of law be also included  in this M otion Mr. Speaker . 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank yo u Hon. Amur, yes Hon. M wamwiri, L eader of 
Minority ... 
 
(Laughter ) 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimi wa Spika, japo naom ba kuweka mambo  
sawa;  ya kwamba mimi nilichaguliwa kwa chama  cha wengi katika Jumba hili chama cha ODM 
na haij atokea  kujiuzulu na kurudi na chama ch engine . Kwa hivyo  waliochaguliwa na vyama vya  
watu wachache ni miongoni mwao M heshimiwa Nyundo na Faith lakini mimi chama changu ni 
cha ODM.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri  for correcting me on that thank 
you. 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you may continue . 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa vile umenitanguliza na kunipa sifa 
ya uchache ama upinzani itabidi nipinge hoja hii … 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 Na naipi nga kwa sababu haipendezi kama s erikali kufanya marudio ya duplications  kwa 
ile lugha  nyengine ; haya yanazungumzwa hapa itakuwa ni aibu katika karne ya sasa tangia 
tuanzishe vita vya dhul ma za kijinsia alafu sisi kama Kaunti gatuzi ama Serikali g atuzi 001 ama 
nambari  moja  iwe haya yanayosemwa kwetu hayapatikani . Hii ni aibu na haipendezi maswala 
haya kuletwa kwe tu; ninavyofahamu mimi kila kituo kikuu cha polisi kwa kila Sub C ounty  
kunayo dawati la kushu ghulikia maswala haya ya kijinsia  ambalo liko na free call  ama simu ya 
bure na hatua hufunguliwa mara moja taarifa inapofika kuh usiana na utekelezaji wa  maswala ya 
dhulma ya kijinsia .  
 Mheshimiwa S pika katika hospitali zetu kule M akadara tunao wahud umu waliobobea 
katika nya nja tofauti na tukisema  ya kwamba twaajiri tena manesi  wenye  mafunzo ya 
kushughulikia wagonjwa walionyanyaswa  kijinsia  na walioko pale hawana ufahamu ama hawana 
ukabambe wa kutekeleza majukumu ambapo itakuwa tunawahini wananchi wa Mombasa 
kuhudumiwa na wafanyikazi madaktari na ma n esi ambao  hawajahitimu katika tajriba ile. H oja 
zeng ine kama hizi zinaturudisha nyu ma tunaon yesha kama Mombasa hatuna wataalamu wa 
kutekeleza baadhi ya majukumu na zaidi tumekuwa tukiwa hadaa wananchi wanaolipa ushuru  
lakini huduma kabambe hazipatikani . Hoja hii M heshimiwa ni hoja ya kichekesho ya kuhitaji 
kuwekeza zaidi katika maswala a mbayo tayari serikali imeshachukuwa hatua na ya natekeleza.  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Kadhalika M heshimiwa kuna vote nzima katika ofisi ya Mw akilishi wa kina mama 
ambayo wanapata mgao maarufu Ngaf  ama National Government Affirmative A ction  fund 
inayopewa dhamana ya kufwatilia maswa la haya ya dhulma za kijinsia. I ngekuwa bora kama 
mdhamini wa hoja hii angefanya utafiti wake  kabambe na akakaa na ofisi ya Mw akilishi wa kina 
mama akajua vote ile ambayo serikali kuu inapeana mashinani kwa ajili ya kukabiliana na 
maswala haya inatekelezwa je, inatumikaje na kufikia sasa wamepiga hatua gani pengine 
angepeana mawazo yake kabambe katika ofisi ile ya kuona pesa hii inatumika barabara kuliko 
kutundukizia lawama  serikali gatuzi ya kuitaka itekeleze majukumu ambayo tayari yapo, na 
kama hayapo bas i itakuwa hakuna sababu yoyote ya sisi kujivunia ya kwamba tuko katika 
serikali gatuzi ya Mombasa na huduma muhimu kama hii kwetu haipatikani . Kwa hayo naomba 
mdhamini wa hoja hii wakati mwengine amakinike na kufanya utafi ti kabla kutuletea hoja katika 
Bunge hili ambazo ni za kinaya kwetu . Ahsante M heshimi wa S pika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Y es Hon . Feddis . 
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. M imi naiunga mkono hii hoja;  
kati na mwenzangu  kwamba anapinga amesema sa babu zake lakini kusema kweli hazieleweki 
sababu zake ni kama kuna. ..Mheshimiwa S pika anaeleta hoja hii kusema kweli alimakinika na 
alifanya utafiti kwa s ababu kila uchao hua tunaingia M akadara tunaingia mahospitalini tunaenda 
polisi lakini huduma kusema k weli bado ziko chini na tukiangalia hapa kwa hoja yake amesema 
kwam ba anaomba Coast General H ospital iwe wazi masaa 24, kumaanisha huduma iko lakini 
haijatutosheleza sisi kama wamama...  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Mimi pia ombi langu ni kwamba sote tukaunge mkono kwa sa babu kama ni vituo vya 
gender based  Mwakirunge hakuna iko Coast G eneral hata huko Likoni anakosema sio  vituo 
vyote vya polisi v iko na vituo vya gender based  nakwambia mheshimiwa ujue. K wa hivyo 
watoto wetu wa kis ichana wanapodhulumika hua wanapata shida , watoto wetu wa kis ichana 
wanapodhulumika hua ushahidi unapotea maanake kuna masaa 72 yakii sha ushahidi unapotea. 
Kwa hivyo nataka kumkumbusha mwenzangu ali yesimama kwamba hii hoja ni nzuri tuipitishe 
ili tutie mkazo hizi huduma zipatikane mashinani na kuna kesi nyingi sana kama alivyosema 
Mheshimiwa mwenzangu kwamba kesi hizi zinapofika polisi wakati mwingi kesi hutupiliwa 
mbali wakati mwingi ule mhalifu hutolewa anapotolewa akionekana tena mashinani mtoto yule 
aliefanya dhulma kusema kweli akikosa kuingia w azimu hua anachanganyikiwa . Sisi tunaomba 
katika B unge hili tuweze kuweka mkazo ili hizi dhulma ziweze kupungua , dhulma hizi zipate 
tiba kwa hivyo tafadhalini tuweze kuipitisha hoja hii tuokoe jamii mashinani tuwache siasa 
ndogo ndogo, a hsante sana Bwana S pika. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Feddis . Yes Hon . Hamisi Musa Mwidani 
the L eader of majority party . 
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Mimi nasimama 
kuunga mkono hii hoja … 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 (Applause ) 
 
 Kunacho k itengo kinachoshu ghulikia hi li jambo  lakini ukita zama nimeshukuru ali yeleta 
hii hoja kwa sababu utakuta maombi y ake ombi la tatu na nne h ata tukiwa kwenye K amati ya 
afya walisisitiza sana tuweze kuweka sheria ya kuweza kupata hicho kipengele … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Kwa hivyo Bwana S pika ni kweli saa zengine mtoto ananajisiwa Ijumaa jioni unakuta 
Jumamosi hakun a hicho kitengo hakifanyi kazi J umapili h akifanyi kazi mpaka J umatatu ndio 
maana imewekwa kuwe na angalau masa a 24 iwe mtoto akihuju miwa sasa hivi anapigiwa sa a 
hio hio na pia ukiangalia nambari nne ni kweli ni wachache sana wanaojua kuangalia hi cho 
kitengo . Sasa ni vizuri hata manesi  wakipewa mafunzo  iwe hakuna shida ya kusemekana 
kwamba daktari ana yeweza kutatua hili tatizo yuko  off mpaka Jumatatu. K wa hivyo B wana 
Spika ni vitu ambavyo pia mimi naviunga mkono na ningependa hii hoja ipite kwa sababu ni 
mambo yanafanyika kule hospitali na yanahuzunisha sana kwa hayo ningeomba sana bunge letu 
tuipitishe hii tuweze ku wasaidia watu wetu wa Mombasa. A hsante sana.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon . Ogutu . 
 
 Hon. Ogutu: Ahsante sana Bwana S pika mimi ningependa kuunga mkono hoja hii moja 
kwa moja sababu ya kwanza tangu ile Gender and Equality C ommission  iundwe wanaume 
wamekuwa hawana amani na hii hoja ita kuwa inatutetea sisi kama wanaume maanake leo sisi 
ndio twapigwa ndani ya many umba tuko mabingwa tukiwa huku nje tukirudi kwa nyumba zetu 
unakanyagwa na hakuna mahali waweza k ukimbiwa, sasa hii ombi la pili  inatusaidia hata na sisi 
tutembelewe tuangaliwe i li angalau tusiwe totally mental. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon . Renson Thoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya: Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama nikiunga mkono hoja hii lakini wakati 
naunga mkono nataka ni muambie alieweza kuileta hapa  ni vizuri tukumbuke kwamba jinsi 
itakavyotekelezwa ni muhimu  sana. Hii ni  kwa sababu wengi walioko nje ya kuwa mambo ya  
jinsia  inaangaliwa ni nini ama ni jinsia ya kike na unaweza kutangulia ukaeleza jinsia i naweza 
kuwa ya kike au ya kiume  na jambo hili l imeanzishwa hapo juu tukaambiwa mtoto wa kike 
hajasoma na mikakati yote ikawekwa kwa mtoto wa kike . Sasa tunaona watoto wa kiume 
wanabaki majumbani hawaendi shule, sasa tunarudi hapa hatutaki tuipitishe hii kisha baadae 
irudi iwe ni wanaume wanapigwa, wana lawit iwa, Maanake nashukuru mulienda Makadara lakini 
nataka muende Makadara kwa sababu kuna mwanam me alipigwa makofi au mtoto wa kiume 
amelawitiwa kesi nyingi ambazo mu naenda kuzishuhudia ni kesi za ubakaji na hoja hii iwek e 
hata vigezo maanake hata wakati  mtu anaenda kumbaka mtu itatusaidia kama itatusaidia jinsi 
hata was ichana wetu wanavyo  vaa pia ni kitu cha maana zaidi  maanake utasema kwamba 
umebakwa  lakini wewe pia umechangia vipi ubakaji wako , iwe ni kitu ambayo inaa ngaliwa zaidi 
sana.  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  Ambacho nasem a katika J umba hili ni rahisi mwanam ke anapopigwa kutoka nje kusema 
lakini wanaume wako kimya ndani ya nyumba, ni mikakati gani ambapo hizi sauti ambazo 
hazis ikiki nje ya nyumba mutazifikia ? Hilo ndi lo jambo  la maana kwa sababu kufikia saa h ii ile 
idadi  ya wanaume kwa wa nawake yaweza kuwa iko sawasawa  lakini kun a sauti za wanaume 
hazijatoka n je ya nyumba mukazisikia, lakini idadi  ya wanaume ambao wanapigwa makofi , 
wanacharazwa na mabibi imeku wa kubwa lakini anapotoka kule nje kuelezea wanaume wenzake 
hata h ajui ataanzia wapi ama itakuwa vipi . Ni lazima kuwekwe mikakati ya kuhakikisha zile 
sauti za wanaume  ambao wanacharazwa viboko na mabibi zao zinapatikana  na tunatia shime 
kwa sababu tumeangazia  sana upande wa kubakwa kwa mtoto wa kike , je mtoto wa kiume tu na 
mipango gani, a hsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Renson Thoya . Yes Hon Nyiro.  
 
 Hon. Nyiro: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kama mzazi na mwalimu n a kwa sababu 
hiyo hoja imetoka B amburi hoja za Bamburi huwa zimeenda shule siku zote , nataka kusimama 
kusema kwamba hii hoja imeenda shule imefanyiwa utafiti wa kustahili … 
  
(Applause ) 
 
 Nataka niongezee h ii hii hoja ambayo imeletwa na M heshimiwa Milka, katika wakati huo 
wa mtihani ikiendelea ; nafikiri kuanzia siku ya kwanza M heshimiw a Milka n aomba unipe 
masikio, kuan zia siku ya kwanza mtihani wa KCPE  ukianza tulianza na mtoto , ameza liwa K CSE 
ilipoanza siku ya kwanza kun a mtoto alizaliwa, wanaozaa ni  wanafunzi na ikiwa tunataka 
kuangalia jinsi tunaweza kuwaf uatilia watu ambao wamepita katika  dhulma ya jinsia naomba ile 
dhulma  nyengine ya ubakaji  tumeangazia sana lakini je hawa watoto hawa ambao wanazaa 
wakati wa mitihani ama wakati wa shuleni baada ya kuzaa je kuna njia yeyote ambayo  
wanaf uatiliwa ? Naongea  hili katika mantiki hii , mimi mwenyewe nilipokuwa  shuleni niliwahi 
kusomeshwa somo la baolojia na kemia na mwalimu wa ki ke alikuwa anaitwa Mlombo  
msichana wa K iduruma ambae alizaa akiwa darasa la saba na alipozaa babake kama kawaida 
mzazi wa ki ume mtoto inakuwa mzigo wa mama. M amake akamfanyiwa  counselling   
akamuhifadhi akamwambia huyu mtoto wako nipe mimi sasa ni wangu, mtoto akamnyonyesha 
kwa miezi sita kisha baadae  akamuachia mamake akamwambia rudi shuleni u kasome , na mtoto 
yule aliezaa darasa la saba ndio yule ambae alinifundisha mimi baoloj ia na kemia . Kwa sababu 
gani alif anyiwa counselling  na mamake na ile alikuwa amefanyiwa ni dhulma ? Lakini mbali ya 
kwamba alikuwa pengine amebakwa pengine alikuwa ametungwa mimba na mwalimu wake 
mbali ya kwamba alikuwa amefanyiwa dhulma pengine ile kesi  ingeendelea pengine mwalimu 
angefungwa lakini kufungwa kwa yule ali yefanya ile  dhulma  sio kwamba umemsaidia mtoto wa 
kike, je maisha yake baada ya kupitia  ile dhulma  inakuwa namna gan i na hapo ndio mahali 
ambapo wazazi wengi hawaf uatilii wanaf uatilia mtoto k ama amebakwa yule ambae amefanya ile 
kosa amefungwa halafu basi . Yule ms ichana ama yule mvulana anaachiliwa na maisha yake 
yanakuwa yameharibika bado ile dhulma  imemuathiri  hatarudi tena katika maisha yake  japo haki 
ilipatikana yule amefungwa . 
 Kwa hivyo m imi nataka tuangalie katika hali ya kwamba je baada ya kwamba 
tumemtetea haki yake amepata na yule aliemuathiri amefungwa na yeye je ataendelea kuwa 
mwanadamu kuafikia malengo yake ya kimaisha ? Hilo ni jambo ambalo twatwaka tuangalie 
katika kuongezea nguvu  hii hoja ili katika wale wanafunzi ambao...  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 (Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Mwamwiri . 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Mheshimiwa Spika naomba ku mpa...kumtaarifu 
mzungumzaji ya kwamba sisi ka ma Bunge la Kaunti tukiangalia K anuni za B unge hili nambari 
45, 44 ile sehemu ya pili na ya tatu b inapeana maelekezo  ya aina gani  ya hoja zinapaswa kuja 
katika B unge hili na kujadiliwa . Moja wapo ya sababu ambazo zinampa nguvu Mheshimiwa 
Spika kupinga hoja kuja hapa ni hoja  ambazo zinakeuka kanuni za Serik ali Kuu ama K atiba  ya 
Jamhuri  Kenya na ukiangalia katika  sheria  ya 2015 ,  the protec tion against domestic violence A ct 
number 2 of 2015  imezungumzi a maswala yote ya dhulma za kijinsia na majukumu ya kila 
mmoja katika utekelezaji wa maswala yale ambayo haya  yanayoendelea , kwamba polisi 
msimamiz i wa ushahidi yote yako katika sheria  ya 2015 . Kwetu sisi kuijadili hoja hii kwanza ni 
kinyume na sheria kisah ihi; isingepaswa kuingia katika B unge hili kwa sababu sheria tayari ipo 
na ilitiwa sa hihi tarehe 14/4/2015 na ikaanza kutenda kazi tarehe  4/6/2015 , kwa hivyo haya 
tunayoyapitisha sisi kwa mujibu wa Kanuni za Bunge  nambari 44 3b haistahili Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  Ahsante  kwa kunipa fursa ya kutaarifu.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Ho n. Mwamwiri . Yes Hon . Nyiro  you continue . 
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante kwa hiyo taarifa, ukweli wa mambo ni kwamba  Mheshimiwa 
aliyel eta hoja hii habuni sheria mpya … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Anaangazia mambo ambayo kisheria yangekuwa yanafanyika lakini hayafanyiki , hivyo 
ndivyo anavyofanya wala ha  duplicate anasema mambo haya kwa mujibu wa sheria yanafaa 
kuwa yanafanyika lakini haya mambo hayapatikani na yakipatikana ni kwa uchache ndio maana 
kuna maombi hapa ya kwamba dhulma ya kinjisia  iwekwe pale masaa 24, dawati  iko p ale twajua 
iko ukifika p ale saa  kumi hizi huduma hupati  na mimi mwenyewe nishaenda pale na mtoto 
ambaye alila witiwa na nikafika pale saa kumi  nikaambiwa njoo kesho mtoto amepasuliwa huko 
nyuma unaambiw a uje naye kesho na haufai kumu osha. Kwa hivyo tunsema haya mambo 
yamekuwa ni matukio ya kila siku hivyo basi  tunaomba hizi hu duma ziwekwe kila mahali…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Polisi gender desk  ziko, lakini saa nye ngine utaen da pale utapata afisa hayuko ina bidi 
ungoje  na ilhali tunasema huduma! J ukumu la Bunge hili ni kutunga sheria na  pia kufuat ilia je 
kama zile gender desk  ziko, je zinatenda kazi? Na kama hazitendi kazi tutapeanaje sauti katika 
hili…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Kwa hivyo Bunge hili limetoka sauti yake katika yale mambo yanafaa yafanyike na 
hayafanyiki t unasema haya mambo yafa nyike kwa sababu hu duma zi meongezeka  na ndio maana 
ninasema tuyafikirie kwa mapana mambo haya . 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Tufikirie pia wale wanafuatilia kwamba wanao athiriwa kwa haki kupata haki si ule 
aliyekuat hiri tu afungwe lakini je  baada kuwa amefungwa je wewe  mwenye  maisha yako 
yanaweza yakae ndelea? Kwa hivyo tuongeze tuwapatie counseling na tuonyesha kuwa 
tunaongea nao ili ma isha yao yaendelee kama kawaida , Mheshimiwa S pika naomb a kuunga 
mkono na kama kuna yey ote anayepinga tueleza vizuri kwa kufikia  sasa sijaona kuna umuhimu 
ama kuna la msin gi ya kw amba hoja hii haistahili kupita kupita Bunge hili.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Nyiro.Yes Hon . Mwaka?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari : Ahsante sana Bwana  Spika . Hoja hii nai unga mkono...  
(Applause ) 
 
 Mia fil mia ali yeleta hoja  hii ni mama na kwa kusema kweli ni jambo hili san a sana 
linagusa mama,  muathiriwa yeyote anatoka na miongoni mwa mama hata yule ni baba,  kijana , 
mtoto wote wam egusa mama . Mheshimiwa M wam wiri anapinga sa na sijui kwa nini anapinga 
amba o kwamba ye ye ni kijana  anategemea mama na hata pia kuna vijana pia hubakwa kama 
yeye hajafikiwa na mambo haya sisi yashatufikia kwa hio…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon . Mwam wiri?      
 Hon. Athman Mwam wiri: Mheshimiwa S pika nam uheshimu M heshimiwa ali eko ka tika 
sakafu na ninamuomba kwa heshima na taadhima  ambayo mimi nam uheshimu kwa hayo  ajenge 
hoja yake wala asisimame na  jina langu na kunikosoa . Mimi nimen ukuu v ipengele vya kisheria 
ambapo  kisheria kwa  mujibu wa Kanuni za Bunge  44 3b , hii hoja isingepaswa k uja katika Bunge 
hili kwa sababu aliyeleta hakufanya utafiti kabambe kwa sa babu tayari Seri kali Kuu ishapitisha 
sheria ndio yenye kila hatua inay ofuatwa kuchukuliwa jukumu ni utekelezaji . Sasa yeye 
alipitisha hapa Mheshimiwa Spika maswala mengine  ni ya  kutuonyesha sisi kutojifahamu kwetu  
nasikitika kutumia lugha hiyo  ama kuto jielewa  kwa sababu tunafanya vitu ambavyo ni 
duplication  hili suala liko mpaka naka la ilikua ni tar ehe 4/6/2015 na leo hii bado ya letwa. 
Mheshimiwa ajenge hoja yake pasi, naomba unilind e Mheshimiwa Spika…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon . Mwam wiri. Yes Hon . Milka?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : I am shocked that the honorable M ember who has just sat down is 
referring to some of us especially myself as people who are uninform ed yet many people have 
gone through my hands whom I have taught including the law that he is trying to pro duce in this 
House. I have taught many children who have gone to schools and have performed excellent and 
I do n ot need to be informed anymore…  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11 (Applause ) 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Milka we will give you the chance  to respond so let 
the Hon. Mwaka continue , then Hon. Mwaka when you are debating let  us debate on this M otion 
let us not debate on personality if  someone has said something he has sa id himself so let  it…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante sana kwa  kunijibia…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And he will have his own vote  if he thinks she is the only 
one not agreeing with this  Motion  so he will be the only one, so Hon. Mwaka please, yes Hon . 
Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Bwana S pika ni sawa kweli ulivyosema lakini nafikiri Mheshimiwa Milka  
alikua anapendelea sana itakuwa ni vyema Mheshimiwa Mwam wiri aweze kuondoa kwamba 
Nyumba hii kuna watu  ambao  hawa na u fahamu . Hapo ndio alikuwa amelenga na naf ikiri 
ataweza kuendelea tungeomba aweze ku ondoa maanake  ndio alikuwa  anajitetea kwamba yeye 
amekua  Mwalimu amefundisha watu  kwamba  yeye ana  habari kamili . Kwa hivyo mimi 
nakuomba hata kabla Mheshimiwa Mwaka kuendelea Mheshimi wa Mwam wiri aweze kuondoa 
kama hawezi kujieleza kikamilifu kwamba ni jinsi gani sisi hatuna ufahamu  ama tuko hapa 
kimakosa.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank y ou. Hon. Renson T hoya again you know  for Hon. 
Mwam wiri ha s his opinion it is his opinion , you hav e no right to tell him to go this way even 
your own son when he reaches 18 years he has his own freedom he can do w hatever he wants . 
You know this H ouse has procedures and there is Hansard capturing ;  in years to come maybe 50 
years to come people will kno w that Hon.  Mwam wiri was against this thing so there is Hansard 
here, there is ev erything capturing so let him speak whatever he wants to speak it is him. Are you 
on a point of orde r? Yes . 
 
 Hon. Thoya:  I think Hon . Mwam wiri has a right but he does not  not have a  right  to 
introduce or  to tell us we are not informed , that i s our area of concern ana haki kabisa ya 
kujielezea lakini hana haki ya kusema sisi hutuna ufahamu . Mimi nimechaguliwa na watu elfu 
tisa na wale watu wa Mikindani wanaelewa kuwa nina ufaha mu mpaka niko hapa leo naambiwa 
sijifahamu…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.Thoya ...again Hon.  Mwam wiri he did not even say  
that, he said even me I am infringing  on the procedures,  but let him speak what ever he wants to 
speak it is him wewe mwenyewe kama M heshimiwa Renson Thoya  si unajua uko na ufahamu , si 
unajua  what you are doing is right.  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  So we do not have to argue  with each other let him speak his mind whatever he wants to 
speak but tomorrow you will know whether he is in the  right or der or not. Yes Hon. Mwaka you 
can continue.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka  Bakari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika mimi naona hoja hii 
ukiangalia B unge hii yote ni kwamba wamekubaliana nayo kwa sababu  mtu mmoja ama pengine 
wawili wanaweza kupinga lakini nasema sisi tuna iunga mkono kwa sababu zake amba zo 
tumezizungumzia na kwa k usema ukweli kila kituo cha polisi tunaambiwa kuna ile dawati la 
kueleza matatizo  ya kudhulumiwa lakini nasema hata M heshimiwa Mwam wiri anaweza 
kukubalina na mimi  Likoni kwetu polis i hilo dawati  hakuna n i show  tu. Ukifika pale ime wekwa 
lakini haiwezi kusaidia wana nchi, kwa hivyo nasema nau nga mkono hoja hii na ninaomba B unge 
hili k uweza kuunga mkono hii hoja ya M heshimiwa Milka.  Ahsante Bwana Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Mwaka. Yes H on. Maimuna?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Maimuna  Salim : Ahsante sana Mstahiki S pika mimi nimesimama kuunga 
mkono h oja hii iliyoletwa na mwenzetu. Mheshimiwa S pika hili si jambo la watoto wa kike hili 
ni jambo la watoto hata wa kiume na hata watu wazima kwa sababu kuna wak ati bahati mbaya 
wezi wana weza kukuvamia na wakanajisi watoto wako hakuna hospitali nyingine yeyote 
ambayo inachukua hao waathiriwa isipokuwa ni M akadara . Ukienda saa nane za usiku utapata 
pale pamefungwa na kesho ukienda  utapata ya  kwamba daktari mhusika wa hapo hayuko , kwa 
hivyo wale ambao ni walala hoi kama sisi tunaona huduma haipatikaniwi ki  haraka halafu hilo  
dawati ambalo linatakiwa kuwa kwa kila st esheni  ya polisi mimi nina ushuh uda ya kwamba 
dawati laweza likawa lip o lakini wale wahusika hakuna .  
 Kwa hiyo sisi tusiangalie tu haya mambo mengine lakini tuangalie haki itemb ee kwa hiyo 
sisi tunajua ya kwamba ni majukumu yetu sisi kukumbusha na na kuangalia hizi shughuli  Serikali 
kuu walizo pitisha  zinafanyika na ikiwa hazifanyiki sisi kama K aunti tunafanya  majukumu gani?  
Pia sisi tunaweza kuchuku a majukumu ya kwamba tunaenda kwa polisi kama kina mama na 
vijana  wetu hawa ambao  tuko nao kama B unge tuangalie wanafanya kweli kwa sababu w ananchi  
wanaumia na sisi hapa kila jambo hapa tunalifanyia ya kwamba ni huk o mwana nchi ha mjui yule 
Mbunge anamjua MCA na sisi majukumu yetu ni kufuat ilizia majukumu haya muhimu amba yo 
yawez a kuwas aidia wale wananchi . Kwa hivyo mimi naiunga mkono na  nasema  mtu ikiwa 
hajanyolewa atanyolewa akishanyolewa ata ijua dharubu ya kile kite ndo kwa hiyo sisi tw aiunga 
mkono…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante . Naam  Hon. Fadhili, Naibu wa Spika ? 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa 
fursa hii. Mheshimiwa Spika kwa maneno aliyoyazungumza M heshimiwa aliyetoka yamenifay a 
hata mimi niamke niunge mkono … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Hoja hii kwa kuhofia huko kuja kunyolewa maana inadhihirisha  wazi  lau ningesimama 
na kupinga ungeona mfano hapa ndani ya Bunge hili ya mmoja kuanza kunyolewa.  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ku sema ukweli hoja  hii imekuja wakati mzuri na ali yeketia hoja 
hii tumesikia kuwa hoja za kutoka Bamburi huwa zimesomewa vizuri zimeenda shule na 
ninawakum busha kuwa kule kwangu Port Reitz  kuna hospitali ya wenda wazimu nafikiri pi a 
itakuwa ni vizuri W aheshi miwa pia tuweze kupitia  pia katika hos pitali kama ile tuweze 
kuangalia wale walioko kule pia maana wale ambao akili z ao si timamu watu huchukua fursa 
kama ile kwa sababu hawaj ielewi na wakaweza kuwafanyia mam bo mabaya , mambo machafu na 
wengine huweza kuath iriwa na magonjwa ya zinaa na akawachwa b ila ya huduma zozote .  
 Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika twaomba  ikiwa hoja hii itaweza kupita basi  hata sehemu 
kama zile hos pitali kama ile pia ziwe zitaangaziwa ; wauguzi wawe watawekwa katika hospitali 
zile kushughulikia mambo kama haya na twaelewa  sisi twapenda watu  wetu na twataka jamii iwe 
itakua ni jamii bora . Twaomba Mheshimiwa Spika pia tuweze kuel imisha watu wetu ili 
wasiweze kujiweka katika majanga haya , twaona kweli tumeelezwa hapa mitihani imeanza na  
mitihani ili poanza tumeona  kila siku ya kwanza watoto wanaweza kujifungua hatujui wanao 
watia mimba watoto wale ni kina nani . Mheshimiwa Spika ya weza kuwa ni wanaume wenye 
akili zao ama vilevile ni wale wanaume amb ao wanahitajik a kwenda hos pitali ya Port Ri etz ya 
wend a wazimu…  
 
(Applause ) 
 Mheshimiwa S pika katika hali kama hii am bayo ipo na katika hali ya kuweza kuwalinda 
watoto wetu na kizazi chetu kutokana na magonjwa ya zinaa na mimba ambazo hazina 
mipangilio . Tungeomba pia Seri kali yetu ya K aunti iweze kutoa fursa na kuenda chini  
mashinani ili kuepusha watu wetu waweze kuji toa katika janga hili ambalo limekumba nchi 
nzima ya Kenya  yetu. Tunaona kila uchao Mheshimiwa S pika hali in azidi kuharibika na nina 
imani lau hoja hii itapita na mambo haya yaweze kutekelez wa basi tutaweza kup unguza kwa 
asilimia kubwa sana visa kama hivi na vile  vile tuna imani lau  litokeapo la kutokea itakua si yale 
mambo tena ya kuambiwa nenda urudi tena siku ya pili kwa sababu kazi itakuwa inafanywa  
masaa 24  hakutakuwepo na wakati ambapo aliye dhulumika  ataweza kufika katika idara hizi na 
aweze kukosa huduma na tunaona tumeelezwa na waliotangulia kutuambia kuwa kuna masaa 
yake ya kuweza  kushughuliki a. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika mimi naomba W aheshimiwa 
wenzangu tushikane pamoja tuunge mko no ili t usiweze  kunyolewa vichwa vyetu. Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa S pika.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you H on. Fadhili.  Yes Hon.  Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba : Thank you Mr. Spe aker for giving me at least  a chance also to contribute 
to the M otion. Hon. Speaker I just want to  inform the House or to at least echo the sentiments 
made by colleague Hon. Mwam wiri. Hon. Speaker as it has been stated before that Standing 
Order s No. 44 (3) , we have protection laws against D omestic V iolence and I can just request 
Members as we  debate t his issue we should alw ays be sober if there is no one who is  (Inaudible ) 
to any other it is the Mombasa County residen ts according to him.  Hon. Speaker if you go 
through Act No.  3 of the same Act protection against domestic violence No.  3 A 1 to 8 it stat es 
the prayers that Hon. Speaker he is requesting. Hon. Speaker I do not think that where there is 
negligence we need to create  more l aws; like for Governor 's Sonko’s case we saw that Doctors 
are supposed to operate 24h ours, when Governor Sonko visited Pum wani Hospital he found that 
they were so me of the Doctors who were not on shift . 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  He never brought a Motion in the House or no M embers of the Assembly brought any 
Motion ; what they did, I know Coast General operates 24h ours and if the re is negligence we just 
need to adjust where there is necessity let us even fire but about the prayer I would request Hon. 
Milka that she should go through the Act and then you will see all those rules that have been 
stated here are well articulated in that protection agains t domestic violence Act. Another issue 
Hon. Speaker there is negligence ; it has been always my prayer  that we should at least get these  
Motions and order papers before time we could have done some research…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Samba on the same note you are saying under 
Standing Order 44 (3)b right, is that what you are saying?  
 
 Hon. Samba : Yes Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Do you know what is the meaning of contrary?  
 
 Hon. Samba : Yes I know . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : What is the meaning of contrary?  
 
 Hon. Samba : Going against . 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So is Hon. Milka going against that Act?  
 
 Hon. Samba : No, but we are debating that Act it exist…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No, but she is going against it?  
 
 Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker can we create an Act that is…  
 
(Background n oise)  
 
 Can you create an Act…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy, is a M otion an Act? Can you 
just express to us  Hon. Hatimy sin ce you are the s enior here.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Kidogo hapa watu hili jambo haimanishi kitu kikiweko 
kwenye  ya Act hamuwezi kuijadili hapa…  
 
(Applause)  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Nasema kuwa kitu ambacho kitakuwa against … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It is an o pposite, contrary is opposite .  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Kitu ambacho kitakuwa against our Constitution  ama Act 
haiwezi kutumika lakini ikiwa kwenye Act tena inatilia nguvu kile kitu chenye Act kifanyike…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker let us leave i t if the Speaker is of  the opinion that any 
proposed M otion is contrary to the Constitution of an Act of Parliament or of the County 
Assembly without expressingly proposing appropriate am endment to the Constitution Act. H e 
should…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Samba, Hon . Members we are not fighting here let us 
just understand ourselves . Maybe Hon. Samba might be right, maybe Hon. Milka may be right 
that is what we are debating now we are not fighting here. Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika hapa sisi hatu amend the Act . Hapa 
tunatilia nguvu…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yale maneno yaliyoko kwenye Act, wale watekelezaji waifanye ile kazi vile 
inavyotakikana. Kwa hivyo hatutaki ku amend Act  yeyote.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatr i): Yes are you on a P oint of order?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro : A point of information . 
 
 Hon. Samba : No, I do not want to be informed . 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But he is informing the House he is not informing you . 
 
 Hon. Nyiro : I am informing the Hou se. 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : He is not informing you . 
 
 Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker you need to protect me…  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16 (Background  noise)  
 
 I think you can hear ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Come on, Hon . Members please this is a House of 
procedu res stop behaving like you are in a market here, let the Hon . Member speak his mind , just 
know  that everyone has the right to speak his mind. Yes Hon. Nyiro . 
 
 Hon. Nyiro : Thank you Mr. Speaker. You are the one who should guide this House  from 
where Hon. S amba has made;  he says if the Hon. Speaker ..., so is Hon. Samba the Hon. Speaker 
or you are the Hon. Speaker because it has been brought to you and found that they is no fault in 
it and you are the Speaker so you have the mandate to come here because in yo ur own wisdo m 
you were satisfied that is ok.  So as he had said if the Hon. Speaker then he should  
Inaudible…..you are the Hon. Speaker here.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro. Yes Hon. Samba . 
 
 Hon. Samba : Yes Hon. Speaker we learn by day ; every day you learn even sometimes 
Hon. Speaker might sometime be outside the norm but at least we are learning. Hon. Speaker if 
you look at the prayer No.4 the Health Department to have trained nurses who can only carry 
forensic examination. Hon. Speaker if you go to Standing Order No.  44 3(f) it says , calls for 
commitment of public funds for whi ch no provision is made in the annual e stimates as adopted 
by the County Assembly . We never even passed this Hon. Speaker. Hon. Speaker I am not against 
this Act, I am not against this M otion…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. S amba again, you know this M otion came  a long 
time ago and we referred it to Budget , I think and Health as well both so that they look at it and 
they brought it back . The Committee brought it back and said it is ok.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Samba : So it authorize s… 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : That is what they say.  I remember very well I referred it to 
the Health Committee a nd even always when there is a M otion I remember even the Chief Whip 
can confirm f or we always refer them to the b udget if the money is being budgeted for that thing 
or whatever you are going to discuss here. So we always look at those measures Hon. Samba.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. Speaker  again I confirm there is a budget.  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17 (Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Samba . 
 
 Hon. Samba : I can see we will have to prove later on whether it is in the budget in 
writing though but Hon. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson . Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. Speaker when we passed the budget for 2018/2019 we 
directed the Department of Finance not to employ anybody but Health Department…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 …focused we need mid wife, we need everybody to come on board so that we do not 
have enough staff to help mwananchi so we granted permission to Health Department to employ 
more staff.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed. Yes Hon. Renson Thoya are 
you on a point of order ?  
 
 Hon. Thoya : Point of information . 
          
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Point of information . 
 
 Hon. Thoya : Mr. Speaker I think the reason as to why Hon. Samba is looking in on 
airtime is contrary to the Standing Orders ; when you are discussing (??) you have seen either (??) 
maybe the M otion that is here is not contrary to the Act that was passed by the House to National 
Assembly and into  (??) that he was supposed to give airtime (??) was to collapse at that end and 
we see the reasons why he still  (??), because when he is standing and addressing the wrong 
Standing Or der and you have seen that the M otion that is here today is contrary to the Act but 
enhancing the services at Makadara  (??) at the Police station you were to stop him at that point I 
do not see the reason as to why he is still been given airtime…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Renson Thoya. Yes Hon. Samba you may 
continue . 
 
 Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker I hate…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Samba o ne minute, Honourable M embers if Hon. 
Samba has his own opinion let him speak, let him finish whatever he wants to tell us...  
 
(Background n oise)  
 
 Yes. 
 
 Hon. Samba : They do not read Act ..., Hon. Speaker they do not read Acts and it is the 
first time some  of us are hearing about…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ogutu again we jus t said that let the Honourable 
Member...  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Ogutu : Mr. Speaker a point of information. As much as he is speaking his mind but 
rules and pr ocedures are to be followed. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
  
 Hon. Samba : Hon. Speaker when I am on the floor and so many dissenting questions are 
coming up, I sometimes seat down and give an Act for myself. Now men can now wake up, 
Honou rable members can now reason. Hon. Speaker when I stood, I stood with an Act I never 
brought an Act from Tudor it is an Act of the Parliament 2015 and that is the same same  Act that 
I quoted Hon. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Ho n. Samba this House is being guided by the Standing 
Orders so before you stand with an Act first give us the Standing Order which is 44, you said 44?  
 
 Hon. Samba : I stood on the same Act of which the same Standing Order I am not yet 
still convinced but if  I can see the mood of the House you will pass it is ok ay, the same way y ou 
have been passing their Acts a fter all, but I am on record to state very well  that I am not party to 
pass a M otion that will exist on rape , that is not me. What you need to do is we should strengthen 
our system ; every Committee should do site visit, they should go to Coast General Hospital,  and 
ascertain the shortcoming s, they should bring for us the report and then we will move from  that 
point. But bringing more M otions…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 I am not party to it Mr. Speaker , I oppose. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Fatma . 
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii. 
Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama kidete kwa kuweza kuung a mkono hoja iliyoletwa na 
Mheshimiwa Milka Moraa Ngare. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika nazungumza kwa uchungu na masikitiko na majonzi sio kwamba 
nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja tu kwa vile Mheshimiwa ni rafiki yangu , la! N aunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa kwa sababu  tunaobakwa ni sisi kina mama na watoto wetu na wabaji ni hawa hawa 
ndugu zetu…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Amur . 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker I want to inform the House wanaobakwa si wanawake 
peke yao hata wanaume wanabakwa so it should be very clear that  wanaobakwa ni watu wote si 
wanawake pek ee yao hata wanaume wanabakwa.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur. Yes Hon. Fatma?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana M heshimiwa Amur lakini wanaume mkibakwa 
huwa hamjitoke zi huwa m nanyamaza, sisi kina mama ndio tunaandamana tukibakwa. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru mwenzangu kwa kunirekebisha tunabakwa sote kumbe wanawake 
na wanaume…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Lakini Mheshimiwa Spika nazungumza kwa majonzi si jambo la kufurahia hi li ni jambo 
la kuhuzunisha maana yake watu wengine wakibakwa hawasemi hususan wanaume, 
wananyamaza na wabakaji hawajulikani kama ni wagonjwa ama ni wazima.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
iko hoja kabisa ama inafaa wanaume ... nazungumzia kuhusu wanaume wale wabakaji laki ni 
mimi najua ndugu zangu hapa hawabaki watu. Mheshimiwa Spika nazungumzia wale waba kaji, 
wabakaji wanatubaka sisi naomba unilinde naona Mwenyekiti wa Fedha ananichongonoa 
chongonoa Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Background c onsultation)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nau nga mkono hoja hii maana yake ni jambo ambalo ni la 
kuhuzunisha na vile vile Mwenyekiti  amesema ya kwamba f edha  ziko na vile vile wafadhili  
wako. Wafadhili  pia wako na dawati  zitakua nyingi katika kila hospitali kuanzia Level 4 mpaka 
Level 5 na itakua masaa 24. Mheshimiwa Spika nimesi mama kuunga tena nau nga mkono hoja hii 
na wanaopinga hoja hii nawasikitikia maana yake kabla hujanyolewa bila maji ujitayarishe na 
kama kidonda unacho na unaogopa kukisema kitanuka . 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20  Hakuna wodi ambayo mtoto ama mama hajabakwa laki ni mimi nashangaa wengine hapa 
wanapinga pinga ambapo ni jambo la kusikitisha na ni jambo la kuhuzunisha hii hoja mimi 
naomba ipite sasa hivi. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fatma Swaleh Mote. Yes Hon. Moses 
Aran . 
 
 Hon. Aran : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nasimama kuunga mkono hoja iliyoletwa 
na Mheshimiwa Milka…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Na kusema kweli Mheshimiwa Spika waheshimiwa wenzangu wamejadili hoja hii na 
kama kweli twafikiria tunataka mazuri hapa mjini Mombasa sion i haja mtu aweza simama aje 
apinge hoja kama hii…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Wajua saa zingine Mheshimiwa Spika waweza kuwa waongea ukaona watu wa nasikia 
raha wanapiga makofi, haya  makofi yanapigwa vizuri kumbe tu wataka umalize na uende ! 
Mheshimiwa utakuwa unashangaa huyu chizi freshi yuwasema hivi…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naona tusiendelee…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Aran I think there is a word you have used which is 
not parliamentary. I had something like chizi freshi , what is that ? 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Aran : Mheshimiwa Spika chizi freshi  ni sawa na kusema kuna Waheshimiwa 
hawajielewi … 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Lakini mimi naona kwa sababu W aheshimiwa ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  No, but Hon. Aran those are not parliamentary w ords chizi 
fresh  please those are not proper words please.  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21  Hon. Aran : Mheshimiwa Spika wa weza kuwa waongea upigiwe makofi ama unafikiria 
watu wanakushangilia kumbe hujielewi.   
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Tobias Samba . 
 
 Hon. Samba : Mr. Speaker  the House should know that there will be those opposing and 
there will be those proposing and if those one opposing are termed as chizi freshi  and if those 
proposing are as well chizi mafreshi zaidi … 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 And Hon. Speaker if you are continue to a llow this un parliamentary language…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Samba please.  I think now that it is too much you 
never even heard that word. So now what are you talking? You never heard it, I am the one who 
said that you were busy t here with your other stuff.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. Samba : Mr. Speaker I heard it . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So please Hon. Samba do not teach what to do, I know what 
I am doing and I have already told them so do not tell me that I continue giving them t ime to 
talk. I told him very clear ly and you heard that I told him that th ose are not parliamentary words; 
so do not tell me that I am giving them a leeway to say those words. Please Hon. Samba I am 
here to protect everyone I am not here against you or aga inst anyone, I am protecting everyone 
please Hon. Samba.  
 
 Hon. Aran : Hon. Speaker I withdraw the term I used , chizi freshi  and I replace it with 
wasiojielewa…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you may continue, I think that is part of the Kamus i, it 
is there in the Kamusi that word?  
 
 Hon. Aran : Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Swahili word ? 
 
 Hon. Aran : Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba tafadhali kwa heshima na  tupitishe 
hoja hii ili wananchi wetu wanaodhulumiwa wasaidike. Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon. Rosemary Mukavi . 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22  Hon. (Ms.) Mukavi : Thank you Mr. Speaker, readi ng the mood of this House this 
Motion has already passed…  
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker the Hon . Member who brought this Motion to this Hou se had experience in 
Coast General Hospital with Hon.  Milka and we went their taking a lady who was raped on that 
day and it took a long time for us to be seen . Mr. Speaker  I would u rge this Assembly to pass this 
Motion so that we can create tech nical gend er work groups for those  who are raped and done 
everything. With those few remarks Mr. Speaker I support and ask the Honourable Members to 
support that M otion.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes, Hon. Charles Kitula, you are ok?  
 
(Bac kground c onsultation)  
 
 Yes Hon. Charles Kitula are you givi ng anything from this M otion?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): I am neutral . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry, did you say you are neutral? Yes Hon. Fadhili . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker it is as if the Chief Whip hataki 
kujielewa na hataki kunyolewa … 
 
(Laughter)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Charles Kitula M embers want to hear something 
from you since you are the Chief Whip.. . 
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy . 
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika mimi 
mwanzo nachukua fursa hii kumpongeza Hon. Milka kwa kuleta hii hoja…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Bila kusumbua sana kuuliza maswali ya kutaka kujua kabla hajaleta h uu Mswada . Kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika bila kuchukua muda wa hii Nyumba nasimama hapa kumpongeza na 
kuunga mkono hii hoja. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Milka . 
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Ngare : Once again thank you so much Mr. Speaker for allowing  me this tim e 
again to respond…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You should be replying here to the M otion . Respond . 
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Yes, first I want to thank you for allowing this M otion to come to this 
House and also all the M embers who have either given positive or contrary sentiments , it is a 
way of life and it is the way of this Honourable House. But I just want to say something that this  
Motion is not against the Constitution, it is about the need to improve available services of 
victims that are  already suffering , we are not changing any Act of the Constitution. The victims 
have no voices we are their voices as Hon. M embers and if we do not speak up for them who 
will? When I talked about a 24/7 vigilance at the Coast General we are aware  and I have been in 
meetings even with Dr. Shikely and the CEC it closes on Friday ; Saturday and Sunday it is not 
there. What happens to the victims if they are raped or if they undergo a violence dur ing the 
weekend?  
 So Honourable M embers ask yourselves is that ser vice there on Saturday and Sunday? 
Then when it comes to court  cases like what Hon. Amur said  we only have one medical officer 
and this I am talking from a informati on point of vie. We  have only one medical officer who 
presents reports of rape cases at the  court and if you want more evidence I am making an 
appointment as a Women Caucus Chairlady we shall be visiting the Mombasa Headquarters for 
this to bring more information on the same, only one medical officer who is allowed to present 
the medical reports  at the court. So what if on this paper to those dissenting voices is something 
that has already gone through a lot of research and when I brought it here I had gone through 
various stages of research to be ab le to present it here. So this M otion, I hope H on. Mwam wiri is 
listening…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 This M otion actually seeks to enfor ce protection against violence a cts, they are the re but 
it looks lik e there  are challenges, they are not being implemented fully the way it is in the Act 
and we are the people, we are the voices of the victims who must protect and speak for them. I 
am therefore not creating any Act we are only asking for improvement on the available services 
which do not seem to be working very well…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 And with that I am very sure he and  the one who is neutral who happens to be our Chief 
Whip…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
24  Will have that M otion of looking at the victims or visualizing in his head and looking at 
the main people, the main victims who undergo a lot of suffering . This is  because somebody 
somewhere di d not do his or her work or because a certain service was missing  somewhere 
which of course the g overnment has put in place but it is not enough. So we need to enforce, we 
need to put more emphasis as Honourable Members of this House in order f or everybody  to get 
the much needed ser vices and with that Mr. Speaker.  I want to urge this  Honourable House to 
pass this M otion so that now we go to the next stage of asking for implementation and I assure 
you Mr. Speaker that once we pass this, personally I also hav e contacts who promised to assist us 
in putting this trained nurses and train them using their own funds I have donors who have 
promised and I am very sure that when this goes through and I do communicate back to them we 
are going to see a big change and d onors who are going to assist. Thank you.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka Moraa. Yes Hon. Bwire, did you 
want to say something?  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Raphael Bwire I thought…  
 
 Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker but I thought onc e the M otion is replied then the 
discussion is over…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But it is ok if you want…  
 
(Laughter)  
 
 Hon. Bwire : Otherwise I also happened to support the M otion.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  
 
(Applause and La ughter)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire for that Hon. M embers I now put the 
quest ion that this House adopts the M otion on Responsiveness on Gender based V iolence  by 
Hon. Milka M oraa in the same terms as moved.  
 
(Question put and a greed to ) 
 
 I think the ayees have it ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
November 14, 2018                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            92 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A c ertified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
25  Yes Clerk?  
BILLS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Feddis . 
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Mbura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba kutumia  
Standing Order 41 (c) . 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, yes Hon . Standing o rder 41 (c) about what?  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura : Niko na statement … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon. Feddis…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura : Pole Mheshimiwa sikuwa ndani nilikua nimetoka kidogo.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So we will d o it in the afternoon because there is a 
procedure here which we are following Hon. Feddis.  
  
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura : Sawa, ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . 
             
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : There is an Order P aper here and you hav e seen where there 
are message s. 
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mbura : I want to have a statement . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Statement is N o.7, so we have already passed Hon. Feddis. 
 Yes Clerk?  
  
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members this Assembly stands adjourned until Wednesday, 14th November , 2018 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at  10:46a.m.  
 