October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 16th October  2019  
The House met at 10:16 a .m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatr i) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Hon.  Membe rs you may b e seated.  Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
THE REPORT ON THE PUNGUZA MIZIGO  (CONSTITUTION OF KENY A AMENDMENT ) BILL, 2019  
 Yes Hon. Amriya Juma Boy  the Chairperson , Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs 
please lay down the Paper.  
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . With your permission I wish to lay down 
the Paper on  the Report on  the draft of Punguza Mizigo.  
(Paper Laid)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Yes Clerk next Order?  
MOTION  
 
ADOPTION OF THE REPORT O F THE DRAFT PUNGUZA MIZIGO  (CONSTITUTION OF KENY A 
AMENDMENT )  BILL, 2019  
 Yes Ho n. Amriya Juma Boy,  please move the Motion.  
 Hon. Amriya Juma : Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I wish to seek 
leave to move the Motion in the afternoon so that we can give time to the Hon. Members to go 
through the Report before adoption in the afternoon , with your permission. Thank you.  

October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 2  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amriya. Y es you may move the Motion in 
the afternoon. Clerks make sure the Motion is there  in the Order Paper in the afternoon.  
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Most obliged.  
 The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : Permission granted. Yes Clerk , next Order?  
ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON REFERR AL OF MOMBASA COUNTY INVESTMENT CORPORATION BILL, 
2019  
 Yes, Hon. Kizito Opeya?  
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Motion that this County  Assembly adopts the 
report on R eferral of the Mombasa County Investment  Corporation Bill, 2019 . I call upon Hon. 
Samba to second.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
 Hon. Samba:  Yes I second Hon. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Hon. Members  I now propo se a question that 
the Motion by Hon. Kizito Opeya on Adoption of the Report on R eferral Mombasa County 
Assembly Investment Corporation Bill, 2019  to be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the 
same terms as moved . 
(Question proposed)  
 Yes Hon. Kizito Op eya please eliminate the amendments.  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. As Members  we are all aware  we had debated this 
Bill and it was forwa rded to the Governor for his ass ent; a nd as I have looked at it he highlighted 
one or two areas that he felt were necessary to be amended so that it would not cause 
complications in the future and he highlighted the  Clauses . If you go through the Report you will 
see the C lauses that the Governor had highlighted and we sat as a Committee and we looked at 
the C lauses an d we also agreed with his findings that they could be complications in future. So 
we d id the amendments and this  is the R eport we have brought to the House so that Members can 
also see the necessary amendments that we did and agree with us so that we can f inish the 
process today and hopefully it  can be sent  to the Governor and he can a ssent to it this time. 
Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Kizito Opeya maybe you can highlight the 
amendments to the House, some of the amendments.  
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank  you. If you go to Committee observations and findings , some of the 
amendments were in Clause 6 ; as far as Members where the Governor proposed that we have 
five instead of six so in case there was a voting there w ould be a tie breaker . 
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 3  When we have six it is very difficult to have a tie breaker when they are votin g in six 
people  maybe three  are on this side and three on this side. So the Governor said it had either to  
change into odd number. Then there is also about the experience of the Managing Director  or the 
Chairperson and it was now clearly specified that he must hold a Bachelors Degree and has a 
knowledge and experience of not less than five years in the relevant field. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hamisi Mwidani, t he Majority Lea der? 
 The Majority Leader  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I rise also to support 
the amendment of the Report of the Referral of the Mombasa County Corporation Investment 
Bill, 2 019. Mr. Speaker as you are aware that we have already passed this Bill  but now this is the 
recommendation and amendment from H is Excellency the Governor  and I think Mr. Speaker on 
my side and in my views that what ever that has been amended here  fits with the law and within 
the Act of that Bill. So Mr. Speaker I rise to suppo rt it. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwidani, t he Majority Le ader. Yes Hon. 
Charles Kitula, t he Chief Whip?  
 
 The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika kusema 
kweli nikiangalia Clause ten  ya recommenda tion and observation , it indicates that the C lause 
10(3)(b)  of Bill be amended by deleting the word , “investment” and inserting the word “senior” 
to read,  “has had experience in senior management for a period of not less than seven years”  
Mheshimiwa Spika.  Hiyo ni dha hiri sha hiri kwamba Gavana aliona umuhimu zaidi  kuweza 
kuha kikisha kwamba atakayewe za kuzingatia maswala kama haya  ni mtu ambaye ana ujuzi  zaidi 
na kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba utekelezaji katika  Bill hii itakuwa ni kuhakikisha kwamba watu 
ambao w ako katika bod i hii ni watu wenye ufahamu zaidi na wenye uwezo zaidi ya kuweza 
kuleta waekezaji  na kuweza kuhakikisha kwamba Kaunti yetu inapata  waelekezaji ambao 
watakuwa na i mani na watakuwa hawasumbuliwi na kesi K ortini kila mara kwa mara 
Mheshimiwa Spi ka. Kwa hivyo kwa hayo machache ningependa k uunga  mkono ripoti , 
Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Charles Kitula . Yes, Hon. Nyiro?  
 
 Hon. Nyiro:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. N afikiri nasimama kuunga mkono 
mapendekezo ambayo  Gavana aliyaangalia kwa mara ya pili na ni kweli ukizingatia 
mapendekezo kama ile ya Clause  2(a), “A person to be qualified for appointment as a  
Chairperson or a Member appointed under section 1(d) the person shall possess the following ; 
a. holds a Bache lor’s D egree” , ambayo mbeleni mapendekezo yalikuwa ni kwamba awe na 
Degree ya Sheria  na mambo mengi ambayo sasa  kuwa Mwenyekiti ni mtu tu  ambaye ana 
ufahamu na ni msomi  si lazima awe na tarbani  nyingi kwa sababu katika lile B odi kutakuwa na 
wataalamu mbali  mbali ambao watakuwa wanapean a ushauri wao.  
 Kwa hivyo Mwenyekiti ni mtu af aa awe msomi kwa hivyo kuwa na Degree  ni usomi.  
Alafu yale mambo mengine ya  kitaaluma yatapeanwa na watu ambao wako pale kutekeleza 
majukumu  ya kitaaluma , hivyo basi  ni pendekezo ambal o Gavana aliona kwa kina na 
nayapongeza.  
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 4  Mswada huu pia ni mzuri kwa sababu kukiwa na kitengo maalum ambacho 
kinashughulikia tu uwe kezaji itakuwa haina haja kila W izara uone mara ime enda ng’ambo 
kutafuta uwekezaji.  Sasa itakuwa ni kitengo imara  ambac ho kinahusiana na uwezekezaji na 
itakuwa ni bora zaidi kwa sababu tunajua uwekezaji unasimamiwa from a central place . Kwa hio  
mimi nasimama kuun ga mkono mapendekezo pamoja na M swada kwa jumla , ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nyiro . Yes, Hon. Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank yo u very much Mr. Speaker for having  given me this chance also to 
air my views. First I congratulate this Bill w hich has come at the right time;  the amendment s are 
as good as making this Bill to be more independent; for exam ple when you go to C lause 11 it 
says that, Clause 11 of the B ill, “be amended by deleting the word County Public Service” to 
read “the Managing Director” . This on its own shows a commitment ; it means f or any 
misconducts to this Bill  then the County will ha ve somebody to be held responsible, w ho is 
accountable for that mess. S o I stand to support the amendment and the Bill , thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Nzai . Yes, Hon. Ali Sharrif? It’s okay Hon. 
Ali Sharrif if you are st ill going through the amendment it  is fine, we  will give you more time . 
Yes Hon. Samba just go through it Hon. Ali Sharrif then you give us your views on the 
amendments.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank Hon. Speaker. F irst of all let me congratulate the whole team for the 
first Bill we had in the second Assembly and also when we passed this Bill here for Governor 's 
assent  it came back  to us and me being one of the Committee M ember we had to go through it 
and we found out that the amendment w as very genuine. L ike for exa mple if you go to C lause 
10(3) (b) of the B ill be amended by deleting the word “investment” and inserting the word 
“senior” initially it was to read “ to have experience on investment matters ” so the Governor 
thought it wise maybe it would be very difficult to find someone who has a vast experience in 
investment issues rather than just putting it on a seniority matters now, that it should read now 
that, “I have  had experience in senior management for a period of not less not than seven years,”  
we know that mo st of the people have managerial skills so Hon. Speaker I thought it  is also good 
and I also stand to support it . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Samba . Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speak er. Mr. Speaker it is when am going through the Bill I  
have not exhau sted it, but as I go through it am gaining interest of supporting it.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi?  
 
 Hon. Chireri: Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuniona; nimechelewa lak ini 
sijachelewa kwa haya. Langu ni kuunga mkono R ipoti moja kwa moja yalioandikwa hapa 
Mheshimiwa Spika yaweze kutekelezwa mara moja , ahsante.  
 
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 5  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi ? Yes Hon. Evelyn 
Osongo?  
 
 Hon. Osongo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for the opportunity granted . I stand to support the 
Motion in that the a mendment that had been made in C lause eleven;  “The Managing D irector 
shall hold office for a period of three years on such terms and conditions of empl oyment as the 
Board may d etermine and be shall eligible for appointment for further  and final terms of three 
years ”.  I think the Governor has done a very good job in considering this  so that other Managers 
who want to be Managing D irector can also get the opportunity after three  years, so the person  
who will be appointed in this D epartment will also have t o work harder and maintain the j ob he 
has been given, so that the job his/her maybe renewed thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwaka Bakari?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante Mwenyekiti wajua ukisema Mwaka, bado tu mimi 
nitasimama tu Mwaka yataka useme Mwaka senior  ama Mulundonda . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiw a Mwenyekiti mimi naunga mkono Hoja hii ambayo imeletwa hapa leo shukran.  
 
           The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Ho n. Faith , sorry yes Hon. Feddis?  
 
           Hon. Mbura: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Pia mimi napenda kuunga mkono Bill hii kwa 
sababu ilikuja tukaipitisha mambo kidogo tu yarekebishwe na nampongeza Mheshimiwa Gavana 
kwa sababu aliweza kuchukua wakati na aka rekebisha kwa hivyo naunga mkono asilimia mia 
kwa mia. Ahsante sana.  
 
           The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Feddis. Yes Hon. Leila Mughazo?  
 
            Hon. Nyache: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Hata mimi pia naunga mkono H oja hii 
kwa saba bu itatuletea pia maendeleo katika jiji letu la Mombasa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
  
            The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Leila. Yes Hon. Shebe I can see you are 
going through, yes Hon. Shebe?  
 
           Hon. Shebe Athman:  Ahsante sana Mh eshimiwa Mwenyekiti ilikuwa bado naipigia 
mbizi hoja hii Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kwa hivyo nimeona in a nutshell  ni mswada mzuri 
ambao utaweza kusaidia upande wa kibiashara na kuwekeza katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa na 
vile vile mabadiliko yaliyoletwa hapa pi a nimeyaona Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ambayo 
yataweza pia kusaidia na kuwapatia watu nafasi ya kuangalia kuwa vipi tutaweza kuendesha ama 
jopo kazi hili ambalo litatarajiwa kuundwa katika hii Kamati  itaweza kusaidia hii investment 
corporation otherwise  naunga mkono mapendekezo haya ambayo ya meweza kuwekwa hapa 
katika huu M swada. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
           The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe. Yes Hon. Kizito Op eya you may 
reply to the Motion.  
 
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 6            Hon. Opeya: Thank you very muc h Mr. Speaker . First of all I want to thank the Members  
for their contribution to the Report;  as you ca n see the original Bill had 43 C lauses and the 
Governor o nly had issues with only three Clauses .  So it means that the Bill itself was good it  
was only one or two areas that needed to be fixed and hopefully that by the close of business in 
this session we would have finished and it could be taken to the Governor to assent it. Thank you 
very much.  
 
            The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Kizito Opeya.  Hon. Members I 
now put a question that the Motion by Hon. Kizito Opeya on , adoption of the report of referral 
Mombasa County Investment Corporation Bill, 2019  be adopted by this Hon ourable  House in the 
same terms as moved . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk next Order?  
 
ORDER OF COMMITTEE READ  
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
(The Mace was lowered)  
 
 (The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ) exited the Chair)  
 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
 
( The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
            The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members we are now in the Committee of the 
Whole House under Standing Order 131 on the re-committal of a Bill from His Excellency the 
Governor and Hon. Members we are going to touch only on the issues raised by the Co mmit tee 
from the Hon. Governor the C lauses which are supposed to be amended and I can see we have at 
least three C lauses . So without wasting much time the Clerk will read the amendment Clauses 
for the House to proceed. Yes Clerk?  
 
(Clause No. 6  (1) was rea d) 
 
            THAT, clause 6 (1) (d) of the Bill be amended by deleting the words ‘‘six’’ and inserting 
the word , ‘‘five’’ to read as follows;  Five professionals appointed by the Executive Committee 
Members in consultation with the Governor;  
 
THAT, C lause 6 (1) (e) be amended by deleting the words , "and S ecretary to the Board " to read 
(e) the Managing Director who shall be … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 7              The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  now I propose a question that 
Clause 6 (1) (d) as amende d to read , Five professionals appointed by the Executive Committee 
Members in consultation with the Governor . 
 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
 
            Yes Chairman a nything to…, any input to this C lause?  
 
            Hon. Opeya:  I agree with the am endment . 
 
            The Chairperson (Hon. Mwalimu) : Under what grounds are you agreeing with the 
amendment? This is the Committee of the Whole House you need to explain to the Hon. 
Members as to why you are agreeing . 
 
            Hon. Opeya:  I think an o dd number is going to be as far if there  is a tie breaker in the 
voting ; if you have six Members or if you have eight M embers it becomes difficult that  is why 
even the Governor in his wisdom maybe we should have a number like five or seven  or nine so it 
becomes easier. Thank you.  
 
            The Chairperson  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you . Yes I can see the House is satisfied , I 
now put a question that C lause 6 of the Bill, Clause 6 (1) (d) to read , Five professionals 
appointed by the Executive Committee Members  in consultation with the Governor . So I now put 
a question that C lause 6 (1) (d) be amended as moved . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
     
            Yes Clerk?  
 
(Clause 6 (1)(e) was read)  
 
           THAT, C lause 6 (1) (e) be  amended by deleting the words , "and S ecretary to the Board’’ 
to read (e) the Managing Director who shall be  an ex officio -Member.  
 
            The Board shall appoint the Managing Director.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose a question that clause 
6 (1) (e) b e amended as moved . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
 Yes Chairman? Hon. Opeya or any other Member?  
 
No input Hon. Members I now put a question that clause 6 (1) (e) be amended as moved . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 8 Yes Clerk?  
 
(Clause 6  was read ) 
 
That Clause 6 of  the Bill be amended by inserting a new sub C lause (f) to read , – (f) the 
County Attorney.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  I now propose a question that C lause 
6 be amended by inserting a new sub C lause (f) . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Yes M embers , any input as to why the C ounty Attorney is being added in this C lause? 
Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker I …  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Samba . 
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . Clause 6, I am of the opinion  that Attorney 
General should be added being that…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : County Attorney.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes Count y Attorney to be added in that Clause so that at least when it 
comes to matters to do with law he or she can advise an d so forth , atleast he might be there to 
advise Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Members . I now put a question that 
Clause 6 (f) be part of the B ill. 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Yes C lerk?  
 
(Clause 6 (2) amendment)  
 
That C lause 6 (2) (a) of the Bill be amended by deleting the words , "in economics, law, 
finance, accounting, logistics and procurement’’ to read - 
 
(2) A person to be qualified  for appointment as a Chairperson or a M ember appointed 
under sub  section (1) (d) the pers on, shall poses the following:  
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r  Page 9 (a) Holds a Bachelor’s degree.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Members  I now propose a question that C lause 
6 (2) (a) be amended as moved . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Any input Hon. M embers as to why we are having B achelor’s degree holder? Yes Hon. 
Tobias Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes also by deleting those in economics, law, finance and accounting Hon. 
Speaker I think it will be open to everyone now to apply for the position being that the 
requirements; the only requirement that wil l be required is just a degree holder. I think it is of  
great benefit of the people of Mombasa Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Tobias Samba. Hon. Members I 
can see we are in agreement . I now put a question that C lause 6 (2) (a ) be adopted as moved . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Yes C lerk?  
 
(Clause 6(2) (b) amendment ) 
 
That C lause 6 (2) (b) be amended by deleting the whole of it and substituting t herefore 
the following new sub C lause - 
 
(b) Has knowledge and experience of not le ss than five years in the relevant field.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I pr opose that C lause 6 (2) (b) to be 
adopted as moved . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Yes any input Hon. Members before we put a question?  
 
Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think this one , the original Bill had ten years’ 
which will have locked out a lot of young people. You know getting someone who has ten years’ 
experience; most of the youth s do not have ten year’s e xperience so by lowering it to five  years 
at least we are  giving it a chance wh ere maybe we can even have the M anaging  Director below 
the age of thirty. So it gives you chance to competing but ten years you would have locked out 
all the youths in this position , so I think I agree with the reason of the Governor to reduce it , 
maybe should even reduce it to three years. Thank you . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Mem bers I now put a question that C lause 6 
(2) (b) be adopted as moved , as amended . 
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r Page 10 (Question put and agreed to)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
(Clause 6(2)(c) amendm ent) 
 
That Clause 6 (2) (c) be amended by deleting the whole of it.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I now propose that C lause 6 (2) (c) 
be deleted . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Any input on as to why the C lause is being deleted?  
 
(Silence)  
 
Hon. Mem bers I can see  you are all accepting that Clause 6 (2) (c) be deleted. I now put a 
question that C lause 6 (2) (c) be deleted from the Bill . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
(Clause 10(3)(b) amendment)  
 
That Clause 10 (3) (b) of the Bill be amende d by deleting the word , "investment"  and 
inserting the words , "senior " to read  - have had experience in senior management for a period of 
not than less than seven years.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : I now propose that Clause 10 be approved as 
moved . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Any input Hon . Members as to why you are deleting investment and inserting senior?  
 
(Silence)  
 
I can see you are all in agreemen t so I now put a question that Clause 10(3) (b) as 
amended be part of the Bill . 
 
(Question p ut and agreed to)  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r Page 11 (Clause 11 amendment)  
 
That C lause 11 of the Bill be amended by deleting the words , "County Public Service 
Board " to read  - "The Managing D irector " shall hold office for a period of three years on such 
terms and conditions of employment as th e Board may determine and shall be eligible for 
reappointment for further and final term of three years.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon . Mwalimu) : I now propose that C lause 11 as amended be part of 
the Bill . 
 
(Question proposed)  
 
Any input Hon . Members?  
 
(Silence)  
 
I now put a question that C lause 11 as amended be part of the Bill . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Hon. Speaker. The M otion that this Whole House disso lves and 
go back to the plenary. Thank you.  I call upon the Majority L eader to se cond.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Chairman I arise to second.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members I put a  question that the House 
dissolves to mo ve back to the Assembly session.  
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
PLENARY RESUMED  
 
(The Mace was raised)  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Have yo ur seats. Yes the Hon. Chair for Trade 
and I nvestment you are supp osed to report back to this Honourable  Hous e as to what transpired 
in the Co mmittee of the W hole House.  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  I wish to report to the House that the Clauses ; 
that is Clause number 6, 10 and 11 were all unanimously amended as  per the recommendation of 
the C ommittee. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk. Hon. Members I put a q uestion that 
this House adopts the R eport as report ed by the Hon. Chair for Trade and Investment.  
October 1 6, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Edito r Page 12 (Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk.  
BILL 
MOMBASA COUNTY INVESTMENT CORPORATION BILL, 2019  
 
 Yes Hon. Chair move the M otion for the Bill to be read a third time, under S tanding 
order 132 , if you have your Standing order,132 just go by your Standing order and propose the 
Motion.  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I propose the Motion that the Mombasa County 
Investment co rporation Bill, 2019 be read a third time.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 
 Hon. Opeya:  My seconder will be Hon. Tobias Samba.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  I stand to second Hon. Spea ker. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk.  
 
THIRD READING  
(The Bill was read for the third time)  
 
 Yes Hon. Members the Bill has been read a third time, any amendments or simila r 
amen dments that were raised in the Whole House can be raised also in this Hon ourable  
Assembly in the third reading .  
 
(Silence)  
 
 If you have no input then we can proceed.  Hon. Members I now rise to put a question on 
adoption of the Bill as read, the Bill be approved as amended by this Hon ourable  House . 
 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 
 Yes Clerk.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members the House stands adjourn ed until today Wednesday 16th October,  2019 at 
2:30p .m. 
 
The House rose at 11:06 a.m. 