November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Wednesday , 15th Novem ber, 2023  
Third Assembly – Ninet y Third  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly met at  2:50p.m. at the County Assembly Buildings]  
[The Temporary  Speaker ( Honourable  Abdi rahman Abdulkadir ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Members, please 
take you r seats. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
UPGRADE PLANS FOR MITEDI ACCESS ROADS , MKOMANI ACCESS ROAD AND GUNG ’OMBE 
ACCESS ROAD  
 
There was a statement on upgrade plans for Mitedi Access roads, Mkomani Access road and 
Gung ’ombe access road. I cannot see Hon ourable  Hassan …he is not around but I ca n see the 
Vice Chair is about to walk in. Vice Chair just take your seat. Vice Chair Committee on 
Transport. You need time? ! Do you have a response? That is the only concern.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : As we wait for the Vice Chair 
may we move to the next statement we will get back to her in due c ourse . Yes Clerk. 
 
MEASURES TO MITIGATE AGAINST DISASTER DURING THE IMPENDING EL NINO  RAINS  
 
Statements  on measures to mitigate against disaster during the impending El Nino  rains 
which i s supposed to be responded by Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri.  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Athman Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I arise to 
provide a response to the statement issued by the esteem ed Honourable  Leila Nyache MCA 
Kipevu during the 65th Sitting held on Wednesday 4th October , 2023 regarding the measures to 
mitigate the potential disaster during the upcoming El Nino rains.  Honourable  Speaker , the 
County Assembly  initiated correspondence with the Chief Officer of Public S ervice 
Administration , seeking comp rehensive answers regarding  the concerns raised in the 
aforementioned statement.  In her response Mr. Speaker, the Chief Officer conveyed that the 
County government has already established the Cou nty Disaster Management Committee 
presided  over by His Excellency the Governor .  
November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 2 Furthermore , she highlighted the existence of a Sub-Committee on Disaster Preparedness , 
comprises  of County Executive Committee Members , with His Excellency the Deputy Governor 
serving as the Chairperson . The Sub -Committee has  actively convened multiple meetings to 
deliberate on key areas crucial for disaster preparedness and response. This Committee has also 
assigned specific responsibil ities to various departments for managing the potential impacts of 
the impending El -Nino rains . Mr. Speaker Sir , therefore the Department is ready for any action 
to be taken when a matter is reported on the same during this time of El-Nino . Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
The T emporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Well,  noted . Any concerns 
from any Member, I can see Honourable  Leila is not  around, in the  reactions to that?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
None. Yes Clerk?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Vice Chair T ransport are you ready to make the response? Please proceed ? 
 
UPGRADE PLANS FOR MITEDI ACCESS ROAD , MKOMANI ACCESS ROAD AND GUNG ’OMBE 
ACCESS ROAD  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I am responding  to the Statement;  the 
department  plans to maintain and improve access roads in Mwakirunge Ward as the rest of the 
words. Since the n umber  of kilometers  are more tha n 6km the County in -house grader will be 
used to grade the entire lengths and procure gravel for spot improvement. The amount of gravel 
required for the 6kms is 8,500 mm (11,050 tons). The in -house grader is currently under repair 
and will be dispatched to site once repaired . Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you. I want to believe 
that Statement was raised by Hon ourable  Mtoto, are you satisfied?  
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Honourable  Manuari , please remain  silent .  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri niliuliza  kuhusu hizo 
barabara  karibu miezi miwili iliopita lakini mimi mwenyewe nilifuatilia na Waziri na Waziri 
aliweza niambia nisubiri kidogo hii hali ya anga, mvua mvua ipungue halafu ndio atashughulikia 
kwa hiyo kwa ile statement iliotolewa na Naibu Mwenyekiti kidogo imenikanganya lakini vile 
vile nasema wacha tu n nisubiri. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Yes, Vice Chair ?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia Chief Officer  wa 
transport  hajandanganya . 
November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 3 Na kwa sababu yeye ndio ameandika  ripoti naku omba Mheshimiwa wa Mwakirunge uwe 
mtulivu na kwa hali ya hewa na anga vile unavyoona kuna mvua hili jambo litatimia kupitia 
Kamati. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Maybe I can ask the Clerk  to 
just read  for us that response  once again. Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk read the response from Chief Officer, Transport Eng. Albert Keno ] 
 
That Vide his  letter, Ref. CAM/CA/CO -CO-CORR/VOL.11/36 , upgrade Plans for Mitedi 
Access Roads 2km. Mkomani Access Roads 2km and Gung’ombe Access Road 2km . In 
Mwakirung e Ward Kisauni County . The department plans to maintain and improve access 
roads in Mwakirunge Ward as the rest of the words. Since the n umber of kilometers are 
more than 6km. The County in -house grader will be used to grade the entire lengths and 
procure gravel for spot improvement.  The amount of gravel required for the 6km is 
8,500m3 (11,050  tons) . The in - house grader is currently under and will be dispatched to 
site once repaid . 
 
Thank you . Maybe  you can also furnish  a copy of that to Hon ourable  Mwinyi Mtoto for 
follow up as well. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT S 
REGENERATION PLANS FOR PUBLIC ESTATE , WITH A FOCUS ON TUDOR  ESTATE  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir ): Statement on regeneration 
plans for public Estate, with a focus on T udor estate it was supposed to be issued by Hon. Samir 
Bhaloo. Anyone who is standing for him today? Yes , Minority Leader, make the statement on his 
behalf.  
 
The Leader of Minority (Hon. Matsaki ): Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker. Honourable  
Speaker, I stand pursuant to Standing order 41 (2) (c), to request for s tatement from the 
Chairperson, C ommittee on Lands, Urban Planning and Housing regarding the regenerations 
plans by the department on Lands , Urban Planning and Housing for public estate, with a focus on 
Tudor estate . Honourable  Speaker, m y primary concern, as the representative of the residents of 
Tudor is to  gain insights in to the progress and details of regenerations project, as it directly 
affects the lives of the residence in this estate.  Tudor Estate, in particular, has been identified for 
regeneration and I believe it is essential for the residents to be kept well -informed about this 
project. We seek transparency and open communication between the residents and the 
department of Lands, Urban Planning and Housing rega rding various aspects of the regeneration, 
including but not limited to ; 
 
1. Project Cost: We request detailed information about the estimated cost of regeneration 
project for Tudor estate and the allocation of funds for this purpose  
2. Contractor Information : Please share the Identity of the contractor or construction 
company responsible for executing the regeneration project in Tudor Estate  
November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 4 3. Allocation of New Housing Units:  It is of great interest to the residents to understand the 
criteria and procedures for t he allocating of new Housing units once the regeneration is 
complete  
4. Timeli ne and Progress Updates:  Residents are eager to know the project timeline and 
receive regular updates on the progress made in the regeneration of Tudor Estate  
5. Information sharing and community Engagement:  Express our concerns about the lack of 
forthcoming information  from the Department of Lands, U rban Planning and Housing as 
well as Community Engagement regarding the Tudor Estate regeneration project.  
 
Moving forward, we request th at residents to be kept informed of all development’s  
decisions, and key milestones related to the project and the plans to involve the community in 
decision making processes and gather their input. The residents of Tudor Estate are deeply 
invested in the outco me of this regeneration project  and I believe that their concerns and 
questions deserve attention and clarity from the relevant authorities. Open and transparent 
communication will help build trust and cooperation between the community and the 
departm ent. I, kindly request that the Committee on Lands, Urban Planning and Housing 
facilitate the provision of a detailed statement addressing the concerns outlined above.  Thank 
you, Honourable  Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon . Abd irahman Abd ulkadir ): Okay. This statement has 
been committed  to Committee on Lands which  I am  sure that you are a Member  Honourable  
Matsaki , the M inority Leader . Please take it upon yourself and your Committee Members to 
come up with a response on Wedn esday next week. Thank you.  
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF WAITING STAND OUTSIDE THE MATERNITY  WING OF COAST GENERAL 
HOSPITAL  
 
Yes, Honourable  Mwinyi Khamis Mtoto please make your statement.  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Honourable Speaker, I stand pursuant to 
Standing Order No.  41(2) (c)  to request for a statement from the Chairperson, Committee on 
Health Services on the establishment of waiting stand outside the maternity wing of Coast 
General Hospital.  Honourable Speaker, t he Coast General Hospital is a vital health care 
institution that plays a crucial role in ensuring the well -being of our citizens, particularly 
expectant mothers and their newborns. While the hospital provides commendable maternity 
services, there is a significant issue that requires immediate attention and resolution. The matter 
pertains to the absence of a designated waiting area for individuals who accompany expectant 
mothers to the hospital.  
Honourable Speaker, as it stand s, there is a noticeable lack of waiting stand or waiting 
area outside the maternity wing of the Coast General Hospital. This omission creates several 
problems and inconveniences for the relatives, friends and well -wishers who accompany 
expectant mothers during their hospital visits. These individuals often find themselves in a state 
of discomfort, standing for extended periods or loitering in unsuitable areas, which is not 
conducive to their well -being or the efficient operat ions of the hospital.  Honourabl e Speaker, i n 
light of the above, I seek to know from the Ch airperson Committee on Health Services as to 
when the Department of Health will establish a dedicated waiting stand or waiting area outside 
the maternity wing of Coast General Hospital.  Thank you.  
 
November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 5 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon . Abd irahman Abd ulkadir): Thank you Hon ourable  
Mwinyi Mtoto for raising  a very pertinent issue and I want to believe that the Committee on 
Health I am sure they are always prepared . I can spot the Chairman outside the Chambers;  
Chairman  just walk in please if you have a response . Any Member of the Committee ? Yes, 
Honourable  Hossana.  
 
Hon. Makanga: Thank you so much Mr. Speaker . On behalf of the Chair and the 
Committee we seek you r leave for two weeks to bring a response. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir) : Thank you Hon ourable  
Hossana , two weeks is a very long time, I mean it does  not sound reasonable and I could hear the 
Chairman there shouting for a week . So, I think by Wednesday will be fair enough good? ! Thank 
you. The issue of Coast General is very sensiti ve and we cannot delay it so next week on 
Wednesday we want to believe you  will furnish us with responses . Thank you. Yes Clerk.  
 
ENCROACHMENT AND DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC ROAD IN SHANZU  WARD BY A PRIVATE 
DEVELOPER  
 
     Any Member standing in for Hon ourable  Allen Katana ? Any Member instructed to do 
that? It is a statement on Encroachment and destruction of public road in Shanzu  Ward; anyone 
who has been given express or implied authority ? 
 
[Silence ] 
 
Yes? No? Since  no one is … Hon ourable  Ngugi , you want to make a statement ? 
 
Hon. Ngugi: Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker , pursuant to Standing Order 41(2)  (c), 
I request a statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Transport and Infrastructure as 
follows:  
Is the County government aware that a wall trench was dug on a public road in Pendua -Maweni 
area in Shanzu Ward by a private developer by the name Ayoub Mabrouk Ayoub some few 
months back destroying the cabro blocks and causing inconvenience to road users? If so, what 
measures will the County government take to res tore the road to normal  and hold the private 
developer to ac count in accordance to the law?  Thank you , Mr. Speaker.   
 
      The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir) : Thank you . For your 
response Vice Chair, are you aware of this matter you want to respond now?  
 
      Hon. Mwaka Bakari: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwa kweli sina jibu kwa sasa .  
 
      The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir) : Next week is okay with you?  
 
      Hon. Mwaka Bakari: Naomba muweze kunipatia nafasi ya wiki moja .  
 
      The Temporary Spe aker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir) : Next week Wednesday again , 
okay thank you. Yes , Honourable  Maimuna you have something to add I cannot hear you clearly.  
 
November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 6 Hon. Maimuna Salim: Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni concern ambayo imekuja s aa hii 
inatakikaniwa iende kwa  Kamati ya Uchukuzi  alafu waende nyanjani  ndio watupatie Ripoti  
kamili . 
  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir) : Yes? 
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim: Sawa k wa hiyo wiki moja ambayo Mheshimiwa Mwaka 
amesema haitowezekana kwa  sababu mp aka barua iende kule  kwa Katibu  wetu waandike ikitoka 
kule waende nyanjani  waki fika nyanjani  ndio wataleta Ripoti kamili .  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir) : So, you are asking for more 
time?  
 
Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Yeah,  I’m asking for more time.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir) : But the Vice Chair asked for 
one week, Vice Chair. 
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Maimu na kw a kuweza kuniel imisha nami  nakubaliana na yeye  kupatiwa wakati.  
 
The Temporary Spe aker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir ): Okay Hon ourable  Maimuna , 
you think two weeks is, okay?  
 
Hon. Maimuna : Yeah . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir ): Two weeks okay , in two 
weeks’ time . 
 
Hon. Ngugi:  Bwana  Spika kwa niaba ya wakaazi wa Shanzu ni kulingana n a barabara 
imebomolewa n a mvua , hii naona inakoroga watu ningeomba wanifanyie  haraka . 
  
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir ): Two weeks is n ot okay with 
you Hon ourable  Solomon Ngugi?  
 
Hon. Ngugi:  Mheshimiwa Spika ni sawa lakini  isiwe ni maneno ni pawe n a vitendo.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir ): Okay any other Member with 
a Statement? Yes , Honourable  Patrick Mbel le?  
 
MEASURES TO SETTLE PENDING BILLS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I stand for Hon ourable  Abdirahman MCA Mji 
Wa Kale  or also famously known as Makadara Ward and the Statement reads as follows:  It is a 
request Statement ; Measures to settle pending bills in the County.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir , pursuant to  Standing Order 42 section 2 su bsection C , I request a 
statement from the Chairperson of Committee on Finance , Budget and Appropriation as follows ;  
November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 7 The County government of Mombasa regarding the alarming accumulation of pending bills 
as highlighted  in the County government of Mombasa Annual report and Financial Statement for 
Financial year ended June 30th, 2023 . Specifically,  I seek clarification on the fo llowing matters 
Mr. Speaker ;  
 
1. The total amount of pending bills as of June  30th, 2023 which is reported to be 4.2 Billion  
shillings , including a background of the pending accounts payable balance, pending  staff 
payable balance and other pending payable balances as detailed in the said report  
  
2. Mr. Sp eaker Sir, I also wish to seek c larification on the age and nature of the bills 
particularly on those that have been outstanding for an extended period of time and the reasons 
for delay in settlement  
 
3. Mr. Speaker Sir, I also seek clarification on how much the County government has 
received  from  exchequer and a breakdown on how the funds were utilized to settle pending bills  
 
4. I also seek clarification on the immediate measures and strategies the County 
government of Mombasa intends  to take to clear the pending bills and ensure the suppliers,  
contractors,  institutions and s taff receive their dues in a timely manner  
 
5. Lastly , Mr. Speaker the Member seeks clarification on specific plans , policies and 
reforms aimed at preventing the recurrence of such a substantial accumulation of pending bills 
in the future and ensuring efficient financial management within County government . 
 
Signed by Hon ourable  Abdirahman Abdulkad ir, MCA Old Town.  Thank you , Mr. 
Speaker Sir . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd irahman Abd ulkadir ): Thank you for that 
Statement . I can see that … yes Hon ourable  Hosanna , you want to respond?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika na uniruhusu kwanza nimpongeze 
Mheshimiwa  Abdirahman kwa kuleta hoja hio ambayo ni swala tata ; swala ambalo limel eta 
majonzi mengi katika  Kaunti yetu ama Gatuzi letu la Mombasa . Mheshimiwa Spika samahani ; 
mimi ningeomba kabla upeane mwelekeo  kuhusiana na swala hilo ya kwamba …, Mhe shimiwa  
Spika iingie katika rekodi za Bunge hili  kwamba hili swala la pending bills  limekuwa sugu na 
limewatia umaskini wengi.  Mheshimiwa  Spika tunavyozungumza wako contractors na suppliers  
ambao walitoa huduma kwa Gatuzi hili tangu mwanzo wa ugatuzi mwaka wa 2013. Mhe shimiwa 
Spika wapo tunao  wajua ambao wametembea wakidai pesa zao  lakini unapa ta kwamba  
hawajalipwa na kuna wengine wamefanya kazi za majuzi wamelipwa. Kwa h ivyo Mheshimiwa 
Spika wakati Kamati inachukua j ukumu ya kuangazia maswala haya, tungeomba itiliwe maanani 
na Jumba hili ikiwezekana ijuzwe as a whole House  ili pale mashinani, tuwe na uwezo wa  
kuwaeleza wale ambao wamefanya biashara na serik ali hii na badala ya kutajirika  ikawatia 
katika ufukara wa milele. Kwa hivyo Mhe shimiwa Spika hilo jambo mimi pia naliunga mkono 
na labda unapopeana maa gizo ifanyiwe with the expedienc e, urgency an d the seriousness it 
deserves , so that we can salvage the lives of those artificial poor made by t he County 
government of Mombasa. A hsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
November 15, 2023                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY D EBATES                                         93 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Off icial Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be o btained from th e Hansard Editor   Page 8 The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you Hon ourable  
Hossana , any other reaction to that? Yes , Honourable  Morgan Matsaki?  
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki) : Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika . Pia mimi 
nasimama kwa sababu mimi ni Mwanachama wa Kamati ya Fedha  na pia nikis imama kama 
Kiongozi wa Wachache . Langu tu  ni kumshukuru pia Mhe shimi wa m wenza ; tungeomba pia 
afadhali utafiti u fanywe, akipeana kama wiki mbili itakuwa ni bora tunapo kaa pamoja na 
Mwenyekiti wa F edha  kwa sababu hii wiki tunamalizana na mambo ya Public Participation , 
labda wiki ijayo tunapoweza kukutana tuanze kulizungumzia hilo jambo na hio wiki ingine 
itakuwa ni vizuri sana tafadhali kuweza kuleta hilo jambo hapa kwa Bunge. A hsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkadir) : I think that  is a reasonable 
time given that the engagement of the Committee this coming week ; so, it is here by directed t he 
Committee be given two weeks  to come up with a detailed report on this matter . Any other 
statement Members? Hon ourable  Florence,  I can see you are wearing sunglasses , are you okay?  
  
Hon. Kachumbo:  Yes. 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Abdirahman Abdulkad ir): Okay . Ye s, Hon ourable  
Bomoa ? 
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Yes C lerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 21st November , 2023 at 
10:00 a.m. Inshallah . 
 
The House rose at 3:20 p.m. 
 
 
 