August 3 1, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        94 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtaine d from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedn esday, 31st August 2016  
The House met at 9.21am. 
(Hon. Temporary Speaker  (Mr. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker:  Kindly  Hon.  Members  may you have your seats .   
PAPER  
       Yes Hon.  Duncan Onyango .  
       Hon. Onyango : Thank very much Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker I stand to respond on the 
statement by Hon.  Enoc k Mwadziwe on the issue that was raised on 4th August, 2016 on the 
issue of unused tractor.  
       Mr. Speaker the Holland tractor was procured in 2015 for Kshs. 6.9 Million and has the 
following implements:  
(i) Tipping trailer 6 tone  
(ii) Ridger  
(iii) 3 disc plo ugh 
       Mr. Speaker Sir,  
       So far it has ploughed 110 acres before grounded using a casual operator. The process of 
recruitment of one operator has started and is before the County Public Service Board.  
       The funds for his remuneration have been set aside and it is expected that the process of 
recruitment will be finalized by end of September, 2016.  
       Mr. Speaker Sir, it is evident that the tractor is not in use due to lack of operator. Once 
the operator is recruited then the tractor will resume its operations immed iate.  
       Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
August 3 1, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        94 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtaine d from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 
        Hon. Temporary Speaker:  It is paper laying but we will find time for us to discuss after 
allocating the time but if the Member who has raised the issue if he will be satisfied with the 
respon se he will deny it and we will not allocate t ime for it to be discussed.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Yes Hon.  Ahmed Omar Ebrahim  (Meti) . 
       Hon. Ahmed Omar Ebrahim:  Thank you Mr. Speaker on behalf of my Finance 
Chairman Moham ed Hatimy I would like t o present this Notice of Motion concerning the 
subscription  of Mombasa County Assembly to Commonwealth Parliamentary Association .  
(Hon. Ahmed Omar  Ebrahim  read Notice of Motion ) 
SUBSCRIPTION  OF MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY TO COMMONWEALTH 
PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION  
       Hon.  Speaker, I beg to give Notice of the following Motion;  
       That, Aware that there exists a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) which 
is an Association of Parliaments of Comm onwealth countries worldwide;  
       Further, Aware that the CPA recruits new Assemblies which are competent to enact state, 
provincial or territorial legislations;  
       Noting, that the Association provides its Members opportunity to participate in a wide 
and expandi ng range of activities and programmes, and that Members are also entitled to 
exchange of knowledge and information on practices and procedures in other Parliaments and 
legislatures, as well as other benefits including sending delegates to annual conference s upon 
payment of the membership subscription;  
       This Assembly RESOLVES  to apply for membership in the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association as follows;  
THAT; - 
(a) The Membership be effectively immediately upon the approval of the application by the 
General  Assembly of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.  
August 3 1, 2016                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        94 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtaine d from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 
 (b) This Hon.  Assembly agrees to abide by the provisions of the Constitution of the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association;  
(c) The required membership fee be paid to the Commonwealth Parliament ary Association;  
(d) This resolution be communicated to the Secretariat of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association, immediately following its passage.  
       Hon. Temporary Speaker:  Yes thank you Hon.  Ahmed Omar Ebrahim (Meti) , it will be 
better for this House and this House will like also to know actual amount that is going to be 
paid to the Commonwealth Par liamentary Association for the Members to debate when we 
allocate time for this Motion . 
       So the next House Business Committee or my office will allocate time for this Motion.  
ADJOURNMENT  
       Hon.  Members there being no other business the House stands adjourned until today in 
the afternoon.  
The House rose at  9:31am. 