October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
          COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 16th October , 2019  
The House met at 2:41 p.m. 
 
(The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
MOMBASA COUNTY BUDGET REVIEW AND OUTLOOK PAPER , 2019  
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani , Leader of Majority party please lay down the Paper.  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. Let me take this 
opportunity to lay P aper on  Mombasa County Budget Review and Outlook Paper, 2019.  
 
(Paper  laid)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Leader of Majority 
party . Yes, C lerk next order.  
 
REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE FY ENDED JUNE 30th, 2019  
 
 Yes, Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker again, let me take this 
opportunity to lay Paper on Reports and Financial Statement for the FY ended June 30th 2019, 
thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Paper laid)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Kh atri): Thank you  again Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani. Hon. 
Members the Reports and Financial Statement for the FY ended June 30th, 2019, having bee n 
laid stands committed to the C ommittee on Public Investme nt and Accounts C ommittee . Yes, 
Clerk next order?  

October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 (Silence) 
 
 Hon. Members the Mombasa County Budget Review and Outlook Paper, 2019 having 
been laid stands committed to the C ommittee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation . Yes, C lerk 
next order?  
 
STATEMENT S 
 
 Yes Hon.  Ali Shomari? Hon. Members the S tatement fro m Hon. Ali Shomari seems he  is 
absent, so we will take the matter back to the House Business Committee . Yes, C lerk next order?  
 
STATEMENT  
 
 Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh, Chairperson Committe e on Health, please give the 
Statement.  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Hon. Members agai n Hon. Kibwana Swaleh seems to be absent, so the matter will go 
back to the House Business Committee . Yes, C lerk next order?  
 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF REPORT OF THE DRAFT PUNGUZA MZIGO (CONSTITUTION OF KENY A AMENDMENTS ) 
BILL, 2019  
 
(Consultations ) 
 
 Yes, Hon. Am riya Juma Boy , Chairperson Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs, 
please move the M otion . 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I beg to move the M otion . 
  
THAT,  this House adopts the Committee on Justice and Legal A ffairs R eport on the Draft 
Punguza  Mzigo (Constitution of Kenya Amen dments) Bill, 2019 laid on the T able this 
Morning Mr. Speaker.  
 
 Mr. Speaker I ask Hon. Mwaka to second.  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Zahoro : I second Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members.  Hon. Members I now pr opose a 
question that the Motion by Hon. Amriya Boy Juma on , adoption of Committee on Justice and 
Legal Affairs report on the Draft Punguza Mizigo (Constitution of Kenya Amendments) Bill 
2019, be considered by this Honourable  House in the same term s as mov ed. 
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3  Yes, the Chairperson Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs Hon. Amriya Juma please 
make your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you so much Mr. Speake r. It is with great pleasure that I 
table this report of the Draf t Punguza Mzigo 2019, that is referred as Punguza Mzigo Bill. Mr. 
Speaker the Punguza Mzigo Bill was forwarded to the County Assembly from the IEBC on the 
18th and through your indulgence you were able to commit it to the Just ice and Legal Affairs 
Committe e to scrutinise the content on whether it fits the Constitutional or the l egal parameters, 
on the proposed amendments of the C onstitution .  
 Mr. Speaker on that note the C ommittee organised ascrutiny exercise from 20th 
September, at the Jambo R esort to loo k to the draft Bill and the Committee had the following 
observati ons and findings that one; the C ommittee resolved that the Bil l goes for Public 
Participation which it went for pursuant to A rticle 196 (2) (c). So the B ill went for Public 
Participation whic h was in line with the invitation of the memorandum s from the 9th October , 
2019 to 14th October Mr. Speaker and that exercise lasted at 4:30 p.m on the 14th, that has been 
the brief introduction Hon. Speaker . 
 On to the m eat of the R eport, on  observation an d findings as a C ommittee, that Bill as a 
Committee we ha d issues particularly with C lause s 3 and  4 which had intended to amend A rticle 
73 of the Constitution on leadership and integrity. Mr. Speaker as all Members are aware that the 
draft be proposes that  any person who had been adversely mentioned in any public inq uiries or in 
any audit report bans him or her from seeking or holding an y public office or state office. The 
Committee Mr. Speaker finds this C lause to be against the principal of fair hearing a nd natural  
justice that is enshrined in the B ill of Rights , that is Article 50 of the C onstitution of Kenya and 
also undermines the principal of the whole human rights (??), that is the whole unders tanding of 
the Human rights, it i s a whole understanding o f the proposal of the Human right Mr. Speaker 
and that proposal according to the C ommittee, is an unconstitution al and it  is a movement that  is 
backwa rd.  
 Mr. Speaker also I would lik e to inform the House that the C ommittee Members also had 
an is sue with Clause 4 of the draft B ill, which deals with the prosecution of corruption and theft 
of publi c resource cases. It  is in this B ill that the drafter of the B ill intended that, those who have 
been adversely mentioned should step aside and  abstain  from opting into any political or any 
appointive positions and so in our scrutiny as a C ommittee that  this is against A rticle 50 2(1) that 
talks about one is presumed innocent until prove d guilty . 
 Mr. Speaker, also the C ommittee had a problem with that C lause and als o the proposal 
that these cases should be handled within thirty  days after one has been adversely mention ed. 
Mr. Speaker the House is aware that ou r Judiciary is a bit incapacitated  in regards to the 
infrastructure so this is a long shot and it  is very unr ealistic.  
 Forward Mr. Spea ker we had also a problem with C lause 2.3 which was about the 
amendment of the Article 93 of the C onstitution  which proposes to make the S enators the upper 
House with virtu al power. Mr. Speaker making a S enate it  is in the view of the Committee that of 
making S enate an upper House will water down the function of the National Assembly, so there 
will be no point of having  the National Assembly if the buck then stops with the Senate. S o that 
will be amounting to  abuse of powers because as the proposal of the B ill had suggested that each 
County to produce two people in form of a man and a woman to be at the Natio nal Assembly and 
one M ember from each County t o be the S enate. So giving the S enate a virtual  power Mr. 
Speaker will undermi ne; so what  is the purpose of two people coming fr om the National 
Assembly anyway.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  So it is the opinion of the Committee that the C lause was a bit far -fetched Mr. Speaker 
and also the Clause that had really hit the C ommittee was on the gender clause which  had the 
removal of nomination of women and marginalised groups . That is another setback, because the 
history of affirmative action Mr. Speaker  was to cure the inequalities and the inequities that were 
faced by women and marginalised group s in our Country.  So we are saying as a co untry if we are 
moving forward  we are moving  together Mr. Speaker, so that C lause we had issues with it and 
also moving forward on Clause 2.4 on amendment of A rticle 142 of the Constitution  touches on 
the fundamental of why this Bi ll had to come through all 47 Counties  because this amendment 
has to go through a referendum which limits th e Presidency to one term of seven years. Mr. 
Speaker we thought that this w ill result to one elected as a President  they will feel that it  is their 
time to eat because they do  not have anything to lose at the end of the day, so given seven terms I 
get what I earn you know it  is man’s society since the social contact ... the theory Mr. Speaker 
Hon. Members will agree with the Committee  that before we en tered into social contract theory, 
it was told that this earth is a man eat man, so we thought that giving the President just one term 
will feel that one term  i will have to finish with the seven term period and has nothing to lose and 
it would be like it is our time to eat  given that this country is a Presidential system.  
 Mr. Speake r I want also to highlight the C ommittee also had issues ... maybe q uickly 
when am highlighting on A rticle 157, that it  is almost the same as A rticle 50 that one is innocent 
until prove n guilty , so that is also in line with A rticle 50 and we had spoken about it earlier and 
also Article 77 is almost the same as 93 so I had spoken about it, that the two -third gender rules 
removing nomination of MCAs is a backward  movement and it  is against the two -third gender 
rule because we are looking in a Kenya that we have a fifty -fifty or a seventy -thirty where 
women are more than men because when we are looking at our last (??) of statistic, we are 
seeing that women are more than men so we are looking at a country that will have fifty -fifty 
gender equity Mr . Speaker or even more or even having 75 to 25.  
 So on A rticle 1 of the (??) the Committee also had issue with A rticle 179 which scraps 
off the position of Deputy Governor, and proposes th at the Deputy Governor should be removed 
and it  is in our opinion that this is a very important position because the Deputy Governor since 
the Governor is a political figure, the Deputy Governor deals with administrative issues that are 
in lin e with th e Cabinet and all that. S o when you remove this post as Deputy Governor such that 
when the Governor is engaged in political issues the office will be too vacant Mr. Speaker and 
the C abinet w ill no t run very we ll.  
 So finally Mr. Speaker the B ill also had prop osed to amend A rticle 31 that creates the 
office of the auditor general, D epartments and administrative structures which function needs to 
be enshrined with the highest level. Mr. Speaker so they were proposing that there would be 
forensic Department of th e Auditor G eneral unit, that would f asttruck the corruption cases, we 
had no issue with it but we are saying that this office is already in place, so it does  not need a B ill 
to create this office. So under our conclusion I will take through the Hou se that from above 
finding s the C ommittee on Justice and Legal A ffairs is dissuaded  by the draft Punguza Bill 
because there are some of the issues that we had not mentioned here, because the Committee 
discussed at length but this is just a brief and highlight Mr. Speaker , of those core Clauses that 
we had rea ched  a consensus  that  they had no value to warrant that this Bill should be passed  so 
that this Punguza Mzigo , 2019 is geared towards enriching the current Constitution, since it  is 
violating the multiple of good g overn ance and natural justice. It does not promote inclusivity and 
equity as we have demonstrated th ey want to scrap off the Women R epresentative  positions , the 
nomination positions so it does not promote inclusivity and equity and it does not adhere  to good 
governance  so that is pursuant to Article 257 of the C onstitution.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  So in that light Mr. Speaker, the C ommittee disapproves the draft Punguza Mzigo Bill , 
2019, and s o our final recommendation is that this County Assembly rejects the Draft Punguza  
Mzigo following the findings of this C ommittee. Mr. Speaker on that note I beg to rest my 
report , thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amriya Juma Boy . Yes, Members the floor  
is open for the debate of the M otion . Yes, Hon. Fa dhili the Deputy Speaker?  
  
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Bwana  Spika 
kando na kuwa Bill hii imeletwa na kuchambuliwa na Kamati husika Mheshimiwa Spika kuna 
mambo ambayo  ningependa kuyaeleza mbele ya N yumba hii ambayo nitase ma ni mazuri katika 
Bill hino ya lakini sisemi kuwa naunga mkono. Katika kitengo ama Article 79 (a)  Mheshimiwa 
Spika ya Bill ya Aukot, alikuwa ameangazia kuhusu maswala ya ufisadi ya kuwa yeyote yule 
atakayepatikana na ufisadi atakuwa ni mwenye kufungwa ki fungo cha maisha Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni jambo zuri ambalo lingeweza kusaidia nchi yetu kiupande wa 
maendeleo na vile vile Article  133 ilikuwa imeondosha nguvu za Raisi kumsaidia ama kutetea 
yeyote yule ambaye atapatikana na maswala ya u fisadi alafu Raisi awe atakuwa na nguvu za 
kuweza kumsaidia. Kwa vitengo hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa naona Kamati  haikuelezea 
lakini ni vitengo ambavyo katika Bill ile ilikuwa ni vizuri ijapokuwa mimi pia nimesimama 
kuipinga Bill hii ya Ekuru Aukot kwa  sababu Article  83 ya Aukot hiyo marekebisho  ya Aukot 
ilikuwa inaelezea kuwa mwananchi yeyote anayefika miaka 18 anapochukua kitambulisho ni 
kuwa atakuwa na uwezo wa kupiga kura pahali popote na kwa hili kuwa yeyote yule ambaye ana 
kitambulisho iwe ichukul iwe ni kuwa akichukua kitambulisho ni kuwa ashajiandikisha pia kama 
mpiga kura. Mhes himiwa S pika hii ingehujumu kura za nchi yetu kwa sababu kungekuwa na 
sitonfahamu nyingi na kungekuwa na kura ambazo hazieleweki na vile vile wale wanati au watu 
wa maeneo yale wangekuwa wanakosa kupata uwakilishi kwa sababu yeyote yule ambaye ana  
kitambulisho aweza simama mahali popote wakati wowote . Mheshimiwa Spika ingeleta shida 
nyingi katika kura zetu za hapa nchini kwetu na vile vile nafikiri imeangaziwa na nazidi tu 
kugotea ni kuwa Article 142 vile vile kama Mwenyekiti wa Kamati alivyozungumza ya kumpa 
Raisi mamlaka kwanzo ya  kusimama muhuma  mmoja w a miaka saba hii ingeleta ama 
ingetengeza Maraisi ambao wangekuwa ma dictator  na vile vile ingekuwa ni kama njia ya 
kuteng eza ama kuzidisha ukabila ndani ya nchi yetu. Maana ikiwa mimi nitakaa na najua 
ninakaa kwa miaka saba Mheshimiwa Spika nitatafuta yule wangu wa karibu ama nitatafuta yule 
mkabila wangu wa  karibu ni weze kumtengeza ninapoondoka mimi naye miaka mingine saba aje 
achukue Mheshimiwa Spika.  Vile vile Mheshimiwa Spika ingezidi kudidimisha watu w engine 
kuja kupata mamlaka haya .  
Mheshimiwa Spika kwa hayo ambayo nimeangazia mimi nimesimama kuipinga na 
naomba wenzangu wa B unge letu la Mombasa tuweze kuipinga kutokana  na haya niliyosema na 
yale mengine ambayo Mwenyekiti ameyazungumzia. Kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Spika ndani ya 
Katiba yetu inaonyesha jinsi gani ambavyo tunataka kuwe na uwakilishi wa kina mama, 
uwakilishi wa vijana, uwakilishi wa kina baba na uwakilishi wa wa lemavu , lakini katika Katiba 
hii ama katika Bill hii ya Ekuru Aukot Mheshimiwa Spika Punguza mzigo imehujumu haki za 
hawa ndugu zetu wengi na nikimalizia ni kuwa Bill hii naomba isione mwangaza katika Bunge 
letu la Mombasa, ahsante.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6 The Speaker ( Hon. Khatr i):  Thank you Hon. Fadhili Makarani.  Yes Hon. Milka Moraa 
Ngare?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance to give my contribution 
on the Bill that is on the floor and I want to state that I am standing to oppose the Punguza Mzigo 
Bill. 
 
(Applause)  
 
And I am doing that vehemently!  I will just quote or touch on the three Clauses that 
Ekuru Aukot purports to amend; one is the deletion of Article 90 of the Constitution which 
clearly state, A rticle 90 of our C onstitution as the Chair of Just ice and L egal affairs has rightly 
put it is the nomination of party list. This proposal for 90 to be deleted  is to abolish proportional 
representation through nomination of representati ves to P arliament and the County Assemblies 
by use of party list which has been provided by the Constitution; the 2010 Constitution, notably 
Bill propo ses to amend Article 97 of the C onstitution to reduce  the number of nominees to the 
National Assembly from 12 to six and the same time he gives the S enate the veto power so 
whatever that will be passed in the National Assembly where we shall have six  nominees; female 
nominees might not see the li ght of day when it gets to the S enate.  
Another Article that is a claw back to gains made by women o n the same is in the Article 
98; th at Article 98 of the C onstitution is amended to abolish nominations of representatives of 
women, youth and pe rsons with disabilities to the S enate. Again this proposal is aimed at 
reducing , according to him reducing the w age b ill. As stated though well int ended the 
amendment does not factor in the C onstitutional imperative in Article 81 (b) of the C onstitution 
which provides th at more than two thirds of the M embers of the elected public bodies shall be of 
the same gender. This amendment therefore is a claw back to the gains  made by the women in 
the 2010 C onstitution and being a woman and one who was nominated into this House I oppose 
it.  
Article 100 of the C onstitution also proposes that A rticle 100 of the C onstitution be 
amended by ex cluding women and marg inalised C ommittees as categories  of persons in respect 
of whom P arliament is obligated to enact legislation to promo te their representation in the 
Parliament. The rationale for this amendment is perhaps the fact that the representation of 
women is guarant eed by the proposed amendment to Article 97 of the Constitution , therefore this 
amendment therefore again is a claw back to the gains made by women and marginalized 
communities in the 2010 Constitution.  
Having said that I also want to touch on Articl e 79 (a), he proposes that the C onstitution 
is amended by inserting the following new Article immediately after Article 97, 79 ... sorry! That 
Article 79(a) (1) a corruption or theft of public resources case shall be tried within 30 days of 
arraignme nt before a court of competent jurisdiction and appeal be concluded within 21 days. A 
person convicted and found guilty of corruption or theft of public resources of money shall serve 
a life sentence.  
Notwithstanding t he provision of Article 133 no P residential pardo n or amnesty shall be 
applicable for those found guilty of corruption or theft of public resources , this is a populist 
approach seemingly aimed at addressing corruption and theft of public resources by introducing 
strict timelines to the hearing and determ ination of corruption cases and enhance punishment 
upon conviction.   
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 The practability of this amendment is questionable in view of the complex nature of such 
cases whereas it is desirable to have such matters concluded expeditiously ; the rights of an 
accus ed person under Article 50 , as read with Article 25 of the C onstitution must be protected at 
all times. I therefore vehemently find this B ill one that is not lined well with the rights of the 
citizens of Kenya and I repeat again I am opposed to it and I ve hemently oppose it and I urge my 
colleagues that we should not pass such a populist Bill in this House. Thank you very much.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka Moraa. Y es Hon. Shebe Athuman?  
 
Hon. Shebe Athuman : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenye kiti kunipatia nafasi hii 
kuweza kuchan gia Mswada huu wa Punguza M zigo. Kwanza kabisa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
mimi ni mmoja a mbaye nitaweza kutofautiana na W aheshimiwa wenza katika Bunge hili 
nikisema kuwa naiu nga mkono ama naunga mkono huu Mswada wa Punguza  Mzigo na niko na 
sababu zangu za kimsingi na niko chini ya himaya yako uweze kunilinda na alama viamrishi vile 
vile na alama vielimishi.  Kwanza kabisa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sisi ni wawakilishi wa 
wananchi wetu kule mashinani  na nitaangazia swala hili ama Mswada huu kwa muktadha mpana 
kama utaniruhusu. Ahsante, Punguza M zigo tuangalie maana yake katika muktadha na taswira 
ya uong ozi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Leo W akenya tunalia kuwa maisha yameku wa magumu 
vipato vimekuwa shida h akuna kipato kinachoongezeka Mhe shimiwa mwenyekiti lakini maisha 
yanazidi kuwa magumu. Ukiangalia katika Serik ali yetu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti s erikali 
imekuwa kubwa wawakilishi wamekuwa wengi lakini ukiangalia katika maswala ya mwananchi 
kipato chake kinakuwa kidogo ; nazungumzia kuhusu ma swala ya representation  ya viongozi. 
Kenya ni takriban idadi ya wananchi milioni 45 labda hesabu ya census  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti ikitoka lakini angalia Mheshimiwa tafadhali nasikia chocho nimeomba niweze 
kulindwa. Rusha rusha ya maneno tafadhali niko katik a ulingo…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The S peaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Order! Hon. Members Order let the Hon. Member give his 
views! You will have your chance. Order!  
 
Hon. Athuman Shebe : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri ): Yes you may continue Hon. Shebe?  
 
Hon. Athuman Shebe:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Mheshim iwa wananchi 
wanalia kuwa Kenya ni idadi ya milioni 45 takriban lakini ukiangalia uwakilishi umekuwa 
mkubwa sasa huu mzigo ambao tunasema upunguzwe ni kuangalia zile nafasi ambazo ziko 
nying i katika serikali ambazo zinashikana au duplication  nataka tuhakikishe Mheshimiwa  
Mwenyekiti ikiwa hoja hii ama M swada huu utapatiwa uhai katika B unge la Mombasa maswala 
kama hayo yataangaziwa.  Swala la Seneti ukiangalia mimi ninamshukuru Mh eshimiwa mwenza  
wa Kamati ya she ria ambaye ameweza kuchachawiza na kuangalia vipengee amba vyo ameona 
havifai katika huu M swada , lakini je shilingi Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ina  pande mbili;  sikuona 
upande mmoja wa shilingi hapa ! Kwa hivyo mimi ninasema kuwa katika swala la u gatuzi 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekit i tuko na Seneti na ukiangalia M swada huu kwa muktadha wa upana 
umesema hii Seneti iweze kupatiwa mamlaka.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8 Leo tunal ia tukiangalia maswala ya rasilmali katika G atuzi zinakuwa chache 
Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti; c hangamoto zinaku wa mia leo maendeleo mashinani ya nakuwa shida 
kwa sababu pesa ni haba. Kwa hivyo ikiwa katika s erikali ambayo ni wakilishi wa S eneti ndio 
ngao ya ugatuzi  wanavyosema m imi ninaona kuwa Seneti katika M swada huu wa Ekuru Aukot 
imeweza kuzingatiwa kwa muktadha huo.  Tukiangalia wawak ilishi ni wengi tusemeni ukweli, 
tunasema kuwa hawa wawakilishi ma  nominated  sijui nini, hawa wote ni  kuangalia wanakula 
mshahara wa serikali; naam  ni mshahara unatumika hapa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na mimi 
nasema kama Mheshimiwa ambaye nimec haguliwa , two third gender rule  Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti…  
 
(Interruption)  
(Technical hitch)  
 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti . Ukiangalia Article  142 ya Katiba inasema R aisi 
apatiwe awamu moja ya miaka saba ; kwa nini katika hekma ya Ekuru Aukot amea mua miaka 
saba? Ewe Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti utaku baliana na mimi aidha kiroho ama kifalsafa 
Mheshimwa miaka sa ba ya Uraisi tutafanya hiki K iti kisiwe kimithili ya kupiganiwa kama mpira 
wa kona. Leo kila baada ya uchaguzi  kuna kuwa na vita kwa sababu U raisi umekuwa wa 
kushindaniwa sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, l akini ikiwa tutaunga mkono hoja hii tuseme 
miaka saba wallahi  hiki K iti kin azunguka na kitakuwa hakina ba shasha vile kama ilivyokuwa 
sasa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa mimi nimeiangazia hoja hii kwa shi lingi upande wa pili 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Nikiangalia swala lengine la uongozi … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Milka, are you on a point of order?  
 
Hon. Ngare : Point of information!  
 
Hon. Athuman Shebe:  Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti nimesem a elimisho, elim isho litabakia 
kwako Mheshimiwa.  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes what is your point of order?  
 
Hon. Ngare : Point of information i  said. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Point of information . 
 
Hon. Ngare : Yes, I have over heard my colleague said that and I put it in quote that , ma-
nominated wanakula mshahara wa bure  I want to inform him that we are in this House legally 
elected by our parties and Article 177 allows us that right to be in this House and we are here 
because we represe nt special groups and we are doing that rightful.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9 We are here to champion for the special groups that we represent. So we are not earning 
salaries for nothing. In fact some of us are taking our roles more seriously than those who 
were…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank yo u Hon. Milka. Hon. Shebe please.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon. Athuman Shebe:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti labda kwa kutu…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : If that is what you have said just…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Athum an Shebe:  Sikudhamiria kutumia lugha ambayo imeweza kumuudhi 
Mheshimiwa mwenza Kwa hivyo nasema samahani Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Lakini.. . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, you may continue.  
 
Hon. Athuman Shebe:  Ahsante! A hsante lakini Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti na mimi  pia 
nitarudisha mpira huu kwa W aheshimiwa wenza ; malengo ya Ekuru Aukot Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti yamekuwa mazuri  katika maslahi ya wananchi na W akenya kwa jumla. Kwa hivyo 
ningependa tukiangalia mada hii tusiangalie kwa mitazamo mingi, t uiangalie na turuhusu hekma 
iweze kutuongoza katik a mpango mzima wa kujadili huu M swada.  
Leo sisi  tunalia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti G atuzi zinapata changamoto nyingi ukiangalia 
MCA ambaye ndiye mwananchi; ndiye mwakilishi ambaye yuko chini mashinani M heshimiwa 
na ana majukumu makubwa. Leo sisi Ma MCA, mambo mengi ni sisi; matanga, harusi, 
maendeleo, vifo Mhes himiwa Mwenyekiti sitaki kuyata ja ni kidogo tu kati ya maelfu ya matatizo 
ya MCA mashinani. Lakini ukiangalia Mswada huu Mheshimiwa u memuwezesha h uyu 
mwakilishi wa W odi akatengewa mgao ambao sisi tunalia nao tuweze kufikiriwa M heshimiwa 
na mimi nina imani malengo yake yamekuwa mazuri B wana Aukot.  Leo ikiwa MCA 
watawezeshwa wale waliochaguliwa na wale walioteuliwa waangalie kwa saa hii kwa muktadha 
wa saa hii yale mabadiliko wangekuwa mashinani Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti yangekuwa 
makubwa.  
Mimi nasema Mheshimiwa Aukot nikimalizia ni mwanaadamu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
ana upungufu wake; n awao mba Waheshimiwa wenza huu Mswada muu angalie kimapungufu ya 
kibinaad amu aliyekamilika peke yake ni Mungu . Kwa hivyo ikiwa kuna hoja mimi ninawasihi 
tuweze kuunga mkono hoja hii ya Bwana Ekuru Aukot halafu tutaikalia chini tuangalie wapi 
pamekoseka tukaweza kubadilisha. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Shebe . Yes Hon. Athuman Mwamwiri?  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10  Hon. Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza 
nikupe kongole kwa juhudi zako za  kuliendesha Bunge hili katika mazingira ya kimapenduzi…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Ya kwamba kila Mwaki lishi Wo di katika Bunge hili ana uhuru wa kuchangia maoni na 
kuchangia au kuunga yale aliyonayo kongole kwa hilo na Mwenyezi Mungu akuzidishie hekima 
na busara Mheshimiwa Spika…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza naanza walakini wa ripoti wa Kamati ya m asuala ya sh eria. 
Mheshimiwa Spika M swada huu wa Bwana Aukot ametumia kipengele cha 257 popular 
initiative  ya kwamba maoni ya wananch i ndio yalipewa kipao mbele na K amati yetu kutoa 
matangazo kuanzia tarehe 9 hadi 14 kusema hawajapata hata memorandum  moja ni hujuma, 
kuitisha memorandum  kwa wananchi wachochole, wananchi wa chini sio mwafaka katika suala 
nyeti kama hili . Ingewalazimu Kamati husika kushuka mashinani kusikiliza moja kwa moja 
maoni ya wananchi na si kuitisha memorandums  kana kwamba tunataka ku vet mtu anatafuta 
kazi ndio tuseme watu walete kama wana dukuduku kwa sababu itakuwa kwa usiri wao ama 
kama mashahidi umefichika . Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni suala bayana, suala nyeti ambalo 
mashinani lingesikizwa zaidi w ananchi ama W aheshimiwa leo wangechangi a kwa mapendekezo 
ya kule wanakotoka.  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nitachangia kwa mapendekezo ya W odi 
ninayo toka wananchi; wangu wa Likoni Wo di wam enituma ya kwamba niunge mkono H oja hii 
ya Kupunguza Mizigo…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mheshimiwa Spika wamekubali na kunituma niunge kwanza na suala zima la hatamu 
moja ya Rais, suala la hatamu ya miaka saba hili liko bayana kwa yoyote mwenye mapenzi na 
huba na taifa lake ndani ya miaka saba atajukumika kutekeleza mema ili aache historia, tofauti 
Mheshimiwa Spika na hatamu mbili za uongozi kila inapofika uchaguzi wa hatamu ya pili 
tumeshuhudia ghasia, vita na vifo kwa sababu ya kung’ang’ania na kubakia katika mamlaka 
ambapo kwamba ingekuwa ni hatamu moja sote tushakubaliana hata mu moja ya M arais wote wa 
Mwaka 2012 wamewajibika kut ekeleza mema kushinda kwa hatamu ya pili wakiwemo  katika 
uongozi.  
Mheshimiwa Spika suala lengine ambalo nitachangia ni suala la wa tu kutajwa katika 
masuala ya uki ukaji wa haki na ufisadi ; Bwana Aukot amesema mtu akitajwa akae nje ya ofisi 
kupeana uhuru na  nafasi ya upekuzi. Pili kesi iendeshwe ndani ya siku 30 ili asidhulumike ndani 
ya siku 30 kama yuko safi kama pamba ataendelea na majukumu yake na kama amepatikana na 
hatia Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti amepewa siku 15 za kukata rufaa  kabla kufungwa kifungo cha 
maisha ambayo hii itajenga tamaduni katika taifa letu  kwetu sisi na vizazi vijavyo ya kwamba ni 
jukumu la kuwa wazalendo na kutumikia taifa hili kwa mahaba, mapenzi na uadilifu kuchelea 
masuala kama haya kutuungama.   
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti suala la uakilishi  ni kweli ni m zigo na hii iko bayana kwa 
wasomi wa uchumi watakubaliana ya kwamba wahitaji ama consumers  wakiwa wengi kushinda 
suppliers  hiyo inakuwa ni crisis . 
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11 Na ndio inafikia mahali serikali zinashindwa kujitegemea mpaka ziombe msaada kwa 
sababu wahitaj i ni wengi na ni kweli ni wengi ikiwemo suala zima ambalo serikali  Bunge kuu  
wameshindwa kulitekeleza Article 100 ambapo ukiniruhusu nisome Mheshimiwa Spika , ibara ya 
100 ya Katiba ya Jamhuri ya Kenya,   
 
Parliament shall enact legislation to promote the representation in Parliament of - 
(a) Women;  
(b) Persons with disabilities;  
(c) Youth;  
(d) Ethnic and other minorities; and ,  
(e) Marginalized communities.  
 
 Kulipaswa kuwe na kanuni na sio suala la kuteuliwa almaarufu nomination . Bunge la 
kitaifa limeshindwa kutekeleza hili si tu ibara ya 91 kadhalika vyama vya kisiasa vimepew a 
nguvu na mamlaka katika kusi mamia uchaguzi wao na wagombezi wako wahakikishe wameli…  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Vyama Mheshimiwa Spika vya kisiasa vimepewa jukumu katika Katiba hii katika ibara 
ya 91 ya kwamba katik a kuendesha uchaguzi au kuwakilisha wagombezi wa vyama katika 
uchaguzi mkuu wahakikishe ya kwamba wamelinda na wamezingatia uakilishaji ikiwemo kujali 
sehemu ya 91 (1) (e) respect the right of all persons to participate in the political process, 
including minorities and marginalized groups  ambazo liko bayana Mheshimiwa Spika kama 
vyama vingekuwa na nia njema katika suala hili pia wao katika kulinda ishu nzima ya two third 
gender rule ingekuwa wamelizingatia hilo.  
Kadhalika Bunge la kitaifa wangekuwa waungwa na na wastaarabu wangekuwa 
wameshapitisha sheria ya gender  parity  ambao m zigo huu wa nominated  usingekuwepo kwa 
sababu ungekuwa na mfumo mahsusi na wa  kufahamika ambapo watu wanachaguliwa kisahihi 
kuwakilisha watu pasipo na jinsia moja kuzidi jinsia nyengi ne Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika suala lengine ambalo Punguza Mzigo limezingatia kuleta rasil mali mashinani ya kwamba 
Kaunti ziongezewe mgao wa kutosha na hali kadhal ika sehemu ama kata ndogo ama Wo di 
wakilishi ziwe kama (??) development  ambapo mgao u le ambao sasa hivi unasimamiliwa na  
CDF uwe moja kwa moja katika Wo di kwa sababu eneo Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika ni kubwa na 
unapokosana na Mbunge wako uende akakuhujumu akakunyima maendeleo kama vile 
tunavyoshuhudia baadhi ya Gatuzi  walio na utata na M agavana  wao pia katika Wo di zao 
maendeleo hayafiki lakini mgao huu ukiwekwa moja kwa moja katika kata ni fursa mwafaka 
kwa Mheshimiwa na watu wake wachache katik a hali ya kukabaliana na kupangi liana na 
kuhakikisha wanatengeneza maendeleo yao na kupeleka uchumi mb ele. 
Kwa hviyo Mheshimiwa Spika na rai tu Bunge hili tuweni wa ungwana , wastaarabu kwa 
fikra za kimapi nduzi na si ushabiki wa watu binafsi ama ushabiki wa kivyama kupinga suala hili 
bali tuliunge mkono kwa sababu yapo umuhimu ambayo yanajenga taifa letu na kuacha historia 
na muelekeo mwema. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Athman Mwamwiri. Yes Hon. Ibrahim 
Oyugi?  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12 Hon. Omondi:  Yes this is okay for me. Y es Mr. Speaker Sir,  I want to organize myself 
emotional ly and psycholo gically so that I can be able to give my points clearly.  Mr. Speaker Sir 
first and foremost as Ekuru Aukot comes with this particular Bill, first of all I want to inform 
Ekuru Aukot that this Bill first it lacks public participation and this Bill is done i n hurry, this Bill 
lacks consultation Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Athman?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I need to be protected . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon. Ibrahim?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Naomba kumtaarif u na kutaarifu Jumba hili ya kwamba 
Mswada huu umekuja chini ya kipengele cha 257 ambacho sahihi za  Wakenya milioni mia moja 
waliweka sahihi zao na kuweza kumpa ruhusa Bwana Dkt. Ekuru Aukot kuendesha zoezi hili . 
Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa kusema ya kwamba halin a public participation  ni kupotosha Jumba hili 
na kupeana  taarifa ambayo sio sahihi.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Ibrahim Oyugi?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir I do  not want to dwell so much on side shows today but I 
want just to inform  the Member who was on the floor when somebody sits down and pick names 
of 100 people, a million people, 1000 people ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
And put signature there that one does not justify public participation…  
 
(Applause)  
 
And as am saying as an elected Member of Airport Ward Mr. Speaker Sir none of (??) 
not even me…  
 
(Applause)  
 
None of any co nstituents of my W ard was consulted on this particular Bill and that is 
why I stand firm by saying it lacks public participation.  Mr. Speaker Sir it was also done in hurry  
and again Mr. Speaker Sir it is more of political is like somebody wants to sneak himself into a 
political arena without following the right channel. Mr. Speaker Sir if you need to be a politician 
in this country you need to go along way and there are so many things you need to go through for 
you to be known politically but you do  not use th ese short cuts and side shows that is what I can 
confirm. So Mr. Ekuru Aukot should have waited and take n his time before he came up with this 
Bill because he has made a lot of blunders and almost every article the he proposed in this 
particular Bill he has made a mistake .   
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13 Mr. Speaker Sir , and that  is why am saying he was doing it in a hurry or he would have 
taken his time before he comes up with it Mr. Speaker Sir.  Number One Mr. Speaker Sir Ekuru 
Aukot in his Bill is talking about the amendment of Article 142 of the Constitution which talks 
about the terms of the presidency in this country and he purports to tell us that a president should 
go for one term which is sev en years .  
Mr. Speaker Sir first of all I want to thwart that and thwarting that with points ; number 
one in the Kenya we have today our country is not well developed, it is not well informed on the 
growth of political environment, we are still below where one person will be given the mandate 
of the country for seven years and remember in this country corruption is eating up almost 
everybody in this particular country and if one person is going to be entrusted for seven good 
years to lead this particular cou ntry I am telling you we are going to have a big problem in this 
Country therefore that one automatically tells me that am not going to accept this Bill.  
Number two Mr. Speaker Article 157 if it is amended let me be clear on this it’s 
destroy ing or its aga inst the rule of natural justice that is  why one should remain innocent until 
he is proven guilty and today if we hurry without taking enough time, without following the 
channels that are supposed to be followed as state d in this C onstitution we are going to make 
many and very big mistakes because an innocent person will find himself in a corner where he is 
not supposed to be there and that  is why I am opposing this particular Bill.  
Mr. Speaker Sir Article 179 which provides for the Deputy Governor in the C ounty let 
me be clear on this if to day with amending this particular A rticle 179 and say that we should not 
have the position of the Deputy Govern or in the office of the County g overnment we will have 
made a very gr ave mistake  that is  why because it is und er anybody even a fool I will tell you that 
in this world that we l ive there must be somebody who can support you , even I as an MCA and 
elected Member of Airport Ward I have my wife who supports me Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
(Applause)  
 
I cannot do it alone…  
 
(Appl ause)  
 
And therefore this particular A rticle purport to tell us that the G overnor should run the 
County alo ne without a helper, without a Deputy Governor, the G overnor may fall sick , what 
becomes of that…  
 
(Applause)  
 
The G overnor may die Mr. Speaker Sir , God forbid what becomes to the County Mr. 
Speaker Sir…  
 
(Applause)  
 
Those are things eve n a fool will tell you and that i s why am telling you that this man did 
not consult well , he need to go back again and consult well on this Bill…  
 
(Applause)  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14 Mr. Speake r Sir am almost finishing and I want to say this as I summarize that A rticle 73 
which is talking about leadership and integrity A rticle 73 which gives a person mandate if he has 
done a mistake to be well investigated until proven guilty but this man is tel ling once this person 
has been suspected then he should be barred from holding a public office forever. Mr. Speaker 
Sir that is too much for that person…  
 
(Applause)  
 
And therefore I summarized by saying that I and these Hon. Memb ers both elected and 
nomin ated M embers of this House are flying the hopes of the peo ple who elected us back at our 
Wards Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
(Applause)  
 
And we must say the truth, we must stand firm and speak the truth to our people, we 
cannot allow such a very hopeful Bill to come i n our House and pass it and therefore if I say no, 
no, no to this particular Bill of Punguza Mzigo and so on. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause)  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Ibrahim. Yes Hon. Mwaka Mwalundonda?  
 
Hon. Mwaka Bakari: Ahsant e Mwenyekiti . Mimi nasimama hapa kuipinga na kuipinga 
Punguza Mzi go na naipinga kwa sababu zangu; k wa sababu ya kwanza mimi naona huyu Dkt. 
Ekuru Aukot angekuwa labda ni Mary Okoth asingepinga kina mama kwa sababu mimi naona 
hapa kitengo ambacho kimenisima misha mi mi hapa zaidi ni kupunguza huu m zigo; naona m zigo 
wenyewe umelemea kina mama kwa kit engo cha kuondosha kitengo cha Women R epresentative  
ama uakilishaji wa kina mama kwa hivyo ndiposa nasimama hapa kulikemea na kusema kwamba 
hii Bill yake ninaipinga . 
Jengine pia vile vile ni kusema kwamba kitengo cha  Uteuzi  au uakilishaji wa vyama 
ambao ni nominated MCAs  mimi nataka kusema nominated  MCAs ni wanadamu ama wengi wao 
vile wanasema kupinga kwa sababu wengi wao nafasi hizi nafikiri huwa zinakuja kwa kina 
mama sisi tumepatiwa nafasi hizi ili ku empower  kina mama ambao kwamba wengineo 
hawajawahi kusimama . Mimi hapa nilipo nasimama kujivunia kwamba nimelelewa ndani ya 
siasa ambayo siasa hii nimefundishwa na mama ambaye ni Mbumge wangu Mheshimiwa Mishi 
Mboko am enifundisha siasa hii leo hii niko hapa ambao kwamba leo ni elected  wa Timbwani 
Wodi kwa hiyo mimi nasema ninaipinga, na ninaipinga Punguza Mzigo na mizigo iende uko 
ilikotoka. Ahsanteni.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fatuma Mote?  
 
Hon. Fatuma Swale h: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi pia nimesimama leo 
kupinga Hoja ilioletwa na Ekuru Aukot Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi leo hapa pia nataka kufungua 
jamvi falsafa ya Fatuma Kushe , kila siku tunasikia falsafa ya Mukono na leo kuna falsafa ya 
Fatuma Kushe.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15 Mheshimiwa Spika huyu Bwana Ek uru Aukot ni katika wale ambao Diploma  zao ama 
kama ni shahada  zao ni feki zile zilionekana na Matiangi kwa sababu kama angekuwa amesoma 
yeye kwanza anasema kwamba nominated Members  waweze kupunguzwa. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kusema Rais wetu Bwana Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta alikuwa nominated  
na yuaiongoza nchi yetu na Bwana mwengine kama sijakosea ni super  Seneta Sakaja . Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika hii ni hu juma hususan kwa sisi kina mama,  ikifika wakati wa siasa au wakati 
wa kupiga kura ama wakati wa kufanya uchaguzi kina mama ndio huwa wanaumia sana manake 
wanaume huwa wanatumia mabavu na njia zengine ambazo hazieleweki ndio pale Katiba 
ikatuamuru ikatutetea ikasema kwamba lazima kuwe na nominated Members  na nominated  huwa 
wengi ni kina mama Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Kwa hivyo ikiwa Bwana Ekuru Oukot ataka kupunguza mzigo akampunguze mkewe 
nyumbani Mheshimiwa Spika lakini sisi tuko na In shaa Allah  Mwenyezi  Mungu atatujaalia sisi 
tutakuwa elected  na wengine watakuwa nominated . Mimi kama Kushe In shaa Allah  najua 
Mwenyezi  Mungu akinijaalia kwa rehema zake, kwa nguvu zake, kama Rais alikuwa nominated 
na akawa elected mimi pia InshaAllah nitakuwako elected  kwa hivyo mzigo B wana Ekuru Oukot 
akapunguze nyumbani kwake. Ahsante sana Mheshim iwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Prischilla Mumba.  
 
 Hon. Mumba: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. N imesimama hapa kwanza kushukuru 
wenzangu waliokuwa mbele yangu na wakapinga vikali hoja hii na mimi ninazidi kuongeza sauti 
yangu k upinga vikali hoja hii iliyoletwa katika Jumba letu tukufu hili. Kwanza kabisa nikinukuu 
kama vile wenzangu wanavyo nukuu, itakuwaje kuwa ukiwa umeshtakiwa ama umeshukiwa una  
kesi dhidi ya jambo lolote alafu uwe utakuwa umezuiwa usisimame kwa vile umewahi kuwa na 
kesi na tunavyoelewa hata Kenya yetu hii  unaweza kuwa katika kesi, unaweza kuwa katika 
mashtaka na peng ine lile kosa hukulifanya lakini kwa sababu ya il e sheria ishakuwa imewekwa 
pale inakuwa unajulikana kuwa wewe ni muhalifu na pengine haukuwa muh alifu, ikuharibie uso 
wako wa mbeleni katika siasa na usiweze kusimama na pe ngine haukuwa na uhalifu wowote. 
 Kwa hivyo ninaona hapo tayari kuna hujuma ya kwanza ambayo tunaiona. Kwa upande 
mwengine kadiri wenzangu wanavyo ipinga na kusema kuwa tunaona amek iuka hujuma za kina 
mama, w alemavu na  vijana . Ni kweli tunaju a sisi Ke nya yetu waliokaa na kupitisha K atiba 
mwaka wa elfu mbili na kumi waliangalia wakaona kuna  tatizo katika nchi yetu ya kuwa hakuna 
uwakil ishaji bora wa walemavu katika M abunge yetu, hakun a uwak ilishaji bora wa vijana katika 
Mabunge yetu , hakuna uwakili shaji bora wa kina mama katika M abunge yetu ndio maana 
ikapitishwa kuwa ni lazima tuwapatie nafasi ili theluthi moj a kwa tatu iingie upande wowote. 
Ikiwa leo Jumba hili tungelikuwa kina mama ni wengi basi uteuzi u le ungekuwa umeenda kwa 
wanaume, h ivyo basi  uteuzi kivyovyote hauendi kwa kina mama peke  yake tunataka hata 
ikijaaliwa uteuzi pia uende kwa wanaume .  
 Kwa hivyo ile ni kitu iko kwa pande zote mbili tusiilenge tu kwa upande  wa kina mam a 
peke yake, tunaju a itasaidia pande zote mbili na  haitasaidia pande mo ja, kwa hivyo ikiwa 
ataweza kuiu a hii nomination  ni kusema kijaaliwa kina mama wakichaguliwa hapa wengi alafu  
wanaume hapa hawata teuliwa? Kwa hivyo ni lazima tuangalie  kwa upeo wa mbal i. Pili tunaju a 
walemavu katika Kenya yetu tuna idadi kubwa sana na tunaju a tumekuwa na baadhi katika sisi 
hapa Kaunti ya Mombasa ya walemavu ambao wamejitolea kusimama , nafikiri hata tulikuwa na 
mmoja Likoni ambaye alipita nasikia lakini aliwahi kusimama akijaribu kupigania kiti lakini ile 
nafasi hakupata . 
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  Lakini leo hii ana  mwakilishi wake hapa ndani ya hili Jumba na tunashukuru kw a sababu 
ya K atiba iliyopi tishwa kwa sababu kama si hiyo K atiba leo hii huyu mlemavu angekuwa 
hayuko hapa ndani na hangekuwa na nafasi ye yote ya kuwa mmoja wetu baina yetu hapa ndani 
na si  kuwa  hatukuwa na matatizo kama haya.  Bunge kuu sasa hivi nafikiri munajua ; kuna 
Mswada wa kina mama mpaka wa leo wameshindwa kuupitisha kwa sababu hawataki kutimiz a 
Katiba vile inavyotaka, kwa  nini? K una uwoga wa  kuwa kila saa kunapotajwa katika mambo ya 
urekebishaji anayetajwa huwa mwanamke, kwani hawa wengine huwa hawako? Kwa nini tuwe 
tunaonewa tu upande mmoja kuona kina mama peke yake ndio punguza mzigo na hali mama 
huyu ndio amezaa huyo mw anamume, mama huyu ndio amezaa huyu kijana na mama huyu huyu 
ndio alie zaa huyo Raisi wa Kenya, mama huyu huyu ndio ali yezaa hata Spika  tulie nae hapa leo 
na mama huyu huyu ndie aliekuzaa wewe Ekuru Oukot…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Leo umekuw a watulenga ukitulenga. K wa hivyo mimi nasimama Mheshimiwa Spika 
nikipinga vikali hoja hii na nikitoka hata nikishamaliza kuibwaga leo nitamtafuta huyu Ekuru 
Oukot ni mwambie asijaribu tena Kenya hi i kutuletea kitu cha kuhujumu u ongozi wa kina mama, 
kwa sab abu tunaona anaenda kinyu me na K atiba  iliyopitishwa na watu wa Kenya kwa sababu 
hiyo ni K atiba ilipitishwa si mimi peke yangu, ilipitishwa na yeye sasa anajaribu kufanya panya 
route  lakini hatafanya panya route  na Kaunti ya Mombasa na Waheshimiwa wenzangu ambao 
muko hapa ambao ham ujaang alia hichi kipengele kwa undani  ningewaomba muang alie hichi 
kipengee kwa undani mukisome vizuri ambao munaona ati mwaunga mkono ; hapa kuna nini cha 
kuunga mkono isipokuwa madhambi matupu yaliyoko hapa ! Fungua macho ya ndani ya kiini 
cha ndani uangali e, kama una  usomi wa hali ya j uu utaona haya makosa tunayo ya zungumza. 
 Mheshimiwa Spika nak ushukuru sana kwa kukubali huu M swada utembee ndani ya 
Nyumba ndio sisi tuweze kutoa hisia z etu, tusije kuambiwa tuliuogopa;  hapa hakuna cha 
kupitishwa hapa, sisi t waubwaga asubuhi sasa hivi, hata tulikuwa twaona twachelewa. K wa 
hivyo hapa ni tumalize haya maneno tufunge jamvi tukaangalie mambo mengine ya maana, 
maana haya hata si oni umuhimu wake wa kutukalisha . Mheshimiwa Spika tunataka sasa hivi 
tuubwage kama si sa sa ni sasa hivi, weka hilo jawabu mimi mara moja mimi ni toe sauti yangu. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mumba Prischila.  Yes Hon. Samba.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Sp eaker. T he debate is charged!  Hon. Speaker i stan d to 
support the recommendation of the C ommittee that which am also a Member and that is what 
most of the Members do not understand here, we are discussing a bout the recommendation of the 
Committee and that is why am standing to support. Hon. Speaker, most  of the issues that have 
been raised in the proposed Bill here, some of them make sense and some of the m will be a little 
bit tricky, I  will support the recommendation on a sober note and i w ill no t take much of the 
time. Hon. Speaker if you look at the re commendation by the Ekuru Oukot , that Article 90 to be 
deleted completely, if you look at Section 12 o f this Bill, Article 98 of the C onstitution is 
amended to abolish nomination of women , youth s and person s with disability. Hon. Speaker 
again i f you look  at his recommendation I have got my own document here, the title of the Bill is 
Punguza mzigo and most of Hon. Members here  will agree with me that the only disease that is 
eating Kenya is corruption ! 
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  All these  other shenanigans  are just side shows , not until the day there is a person who 
will declare that any corruption charges will lead to death penalties that is the day I  will see that 
whoever will come with that Bill will be serious by bringing changes in our country but for now 
Hon. Speaker this docu ment lacks goodwill of most of the Kenyans. Hon. Speaker I thought that 
Dr. Ekuru Oukot just took advantage, he just found  a new way that there is a loop hole 
somewhere and he wanted to capitalize on it and I would also wish to remind Members here, 
there ar e most of the Bills  that will come here , amendment s that will come and we should be 
very careful when we  are trying to defend this Bill. W e might not need this one but tomorrow we 
will have a similar  copy and Hansard has captured us , I being a Member of the said Committee I 
stand with the C ommitt ee resolution and I reject the Punguza Mzigo Bill. Thank you H on. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Samba. Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed 
Hatimy.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na mi mi kunipatia nafasi kuweza 
kutoa sauti yangu juu ya hii Bill iliyoko mbele yetu . Mheshimiwa Spika  nikianzia mwanzo 
kusema kuwa sijui Bill hii imefika vi pi ndani ya hii Nyumba bila kufuata sheria!  Mheshimiwa 
Spika nikikupeleka kwenye Kanuni za Bunge  nambari  142 iko wazi ya kusema kuwa yeyote yule 
atakaeleta Bill ndani ya hii Nyumba mwanzo ni lazima awe ataweka deposit  ya zile gharama za 
kupitisha ile Bill. Naona hii imekuja kama photocopy , kupigwa photocopy  na sisi kuweka ndani 
ya hii Nyumba  Mheshimiwa Spika na pia ukienda kwenye Kanuni za Bunge nambari  146, 
gharama za kupigisha chapa  pia utakuta pia ni vile vile ni juu ya mambo ya kuisimamia hii Bill 
lakini isionekane kuwa sisi tunaipinga ati kwa sababu ya kupinga . Mheshimiwa Spika nitakuwa 
mchache wa maneno ambapo nataka kutoa tu vifungu viwili , vitatu ambacho kifungu cha 
kwanza alisema anataka kurekebisha   Article  73 na kurekebisha  Article 73 atakuwa ameenda 
kinyume cha Article 27 ya Katiba  ambayo ni quality  na freedom from discrimination . Ameenda 
kinyume ch a Article 47 ambayo inazungumza juu ya fair administration  na pia ameenda 
kinyume na Article  50 ambayo ni fair hearing Mheshimiwa Spika. S ina haja ya kuelezea kwa 
urefu kwani wenzangu washaweza kuzungumza mambo haya.  
 Mheshimiwa Spika ukiangalia section  3 na section  4 yake ambayo ametaka ku rekebisha  
Article 79 kama tunavyo jua muda wa mahakama u mewekwa ni wakati wa  kusikiza kesi ya Raisi , 
wakati wa Raisi  peke e yake imewekwa kusikiza . Lakini hapo hapo ukiangalia kuna sheria na 
kuna uamuzi  ambao ulitoka ya ku wa mtu anaweza kupatiwa muda zaidi wa  kusikizwa kesi ile na 
kuwa sasa hapa itakuwa kuwaambia M ajaji ndani ya siku 30  ni kama kusema kuwa kumuachilia 
huyu mtu huyu aliyefanya uwizi wa pesa au al ioweza kuchuku a pesa za wananchi kuwa huru 
kwa sababu Mheshimiw a Spika kesi ni ushahidi  na huwezi kusema ndani ya siku  30 ati mtu 
atakuwa ameshtakiwa na kesi itakuwa imesikizwa na imemalizika . Na pia Mheshimiwa Spika 
itakuwa imeingilia Majaji haki zao na M ahakama haki  zao za kusema kuwa kwa sababu J aji  
baada  ya kuwa  ashasikiza anakaa anaangalia ule ukweli wa ile ke si alafu yeye ndio anakuja 
kutoa uamuzi w a ile kesi . Kwa hio  Mheshimiwa Spika  itakuwa imeingili a mambo ya M ajaji na 
mahakama.  
 Tukiangalia section  31 ya hii Bill anazungumzia juu  ya kutumiwa ripoti ya Audit or 
General  ambapo ushahidi  kuwa mtu ametajwa kwenye Auditor General  atakuwa ni kuchukuliwa 
hatua moja kwa moja ; itakuwa ni makosa kutokamana na vifungu nimeweza kuvitaja mbele 47 
na 50 . 
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama hapa kuipinga hii Bill na ku omba hii Bill 
haikuleta manufaa ye yote kwenye Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa, hatuangalii Kau nti nyingine 
zimefanya nini lakini twaangalia K aunti ya Mombasa na sisi hatuna manufaa yoyote ndani ya hii 
Bill. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika napinga hii Bill na naomba Wahe shimiwa wenzangu 
wapinge hii Bill ili maisha yapate kuendelea.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mohamed Hatimy. Y es Hon. Mwaka 
Zahoro.  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Zahoro:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this chance.  I stan d to 
support the report of the  Committee  which reject the draft of the Punguza M zigo Bill ; being the 
Member of that C ommittee I recommend the whole team did a wonderful job on coming up with 
the resolution and their recommendation of this report. Mr. Speaker Sir I want to say that this  
Bill is a private Bill so Dr. Ekuro Oukot could have sponsored the Counties in conducting first, 
the public participation and second for the Bill to be here in the House. O ne Member was saying 
that the C ommittee published about collecting memorandum, I  would like to say that is the cost 
that the County incurred which we had not planned for, that means it  is a negative on our side 
considering the fact that the Member of the Bill did not give support for his Bill to be in the 
County to be debated.  
 
(Interru ption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Athumani.  
 
 Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
Mwanachama anae mkusudia ni mimi ; si kusema  kwamba K amati iliweka matangazo kwenye 
gazeti kwa sababu haikufa nya hivyo na kama walifany a ato e ushahidi ya kwamba aliweka 
matangazo kwa gazeti kwa gha rama wanayoisema wao wameitumia;  haikuwa kwa gazeti kwa 
hivyo wasisingizie gharama ambazo haziko Mheshimiwa Spika, ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes?  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Zahoro:  Hon.  Speaker I was not requesting or i wanted the Member to 
clarify; this Bill is a private Bill,  Mr. Okuru Oukot should have sponsored the County to perform 
all the necessary work that should have been done…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, the gains that the C onstitution of Kenya has made since 2010 up to now, 
those are thin gs which should be maintained, the l aw is supposed to be progressive and not 
retrogressive …  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Issues of about what the gender has gained so far ; the issue of two third rule Mr. Speaker, 
the issue about affirmative action, those are things as a country we should maintain.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19  A law is supposed to be progressive and not taking us back Mr. Speaker so with that 
thing of Mr. Ekuru Oukot saying the gender rule should be left aside i do  not know the issue of 
fifty fifty, that as a Member of the C ommittee and as a woman am rejecting the Bill.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  
 
 Hon. Mwaka Zahoro:  Mr. Speaker S ir on another issue,  you find that the sustainable 
development l aw also recog nizes the gender equity and equa lity that is role number 5, if g lobal 
wise people recognize gender issues and gender equity why can’t we as a country go back try to 
feed things which have given us gain ? With issue of affirmative action you find that variou s 
gains and achievements have been made, with this Mr. Speaker as a country we cannot afford to 
lose them. Mr. Speaker women are not mizigo which should be punguz wad; with that we are 
saying that affirmative takes action and it is supposed to take time for  women and men to be at 
per, with that  we reject the Punguza M zigo Bill . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Yes Hon. Nzai.  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker to have given me this chance also to have air my 
views. First and  forem ost I stand to oppose this Bill;  in fact Mr. Speaker i want to give a 
question, this tendency of people who stand  for P residential ... hund reds of l aws coming up with 
the amendments should be stopped, we shall never be used to be stamp ed or rather pet  balls to 
pass M otions for people to excel on top. Mr. Speaker Sir, this Bill lacks merit ; how can the 
County operate without the Deputy Governor? How can  a whole President operate for seven  
years, have you ever heard in the whole world? Mr. Ekuru Oukot sh ould be made asleep by 
coming up with this Bill which did not consult others, I remember him to have lost in the last 
general election and i think he was doing the same so that to make clauses whi ch can make him 
to be the next P resident in the next electio n, with these few remarks Hon. Speaker, I stand to 
oppose this Bill.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Yes Hon. Leila.  
 
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi pia kunipa  nafasi hii ya kuweza 
kuchangia. Mimi pia nimesimama kupinga M swada huu u liokuja na Ekuru Oukot; m imi pia 
napinga na mimi nataka  kusema sababu zangu za kupinga. N apinga kupitia kipengele hichi cha 
kina mama cha 93 pamoja na 142; vipengele hivyo viwili Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama pia 
mimi kupinga vikali sana. Mimi hapa nilipo kw anza ni Mbunge mteule, najivunia…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Ath mani.  
 
 Hon. Ath mani Mwamwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika, 
Mheshimiwa ambaye am ekuwa katika jukwaa la maongezi  anapotosha Bunge hil i kwa kunukuu 
kipengele 93 cha K atiba ambach o ukiniruhusu nikisome kinasema ; There is establish ed a 
Parliament of Kenya which shall consist of National Assembly and Senate na yeye anasema 
inazungumzia Kipengele cha kina mama ama atusome e Katiba yake.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20  Hon. Nyache:  Samahani Mheshimiwa Spika nimepitiliwa lakini ni Kipengele cha 177, 
ndio ilikua namaanisha hiki.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes continue.  
 Hon. Nyache:  Naam , nimesimama kujivunia kama Mbunge Mteule wa Kaunti ya 
Mombasa na sio kwamba ati nim euza sura ama nimecheka nimeto a meno ndio nikapata huu 
Ubunge Uteule. Niliwajibika vilivyo katika chama cha ODM ndio maana najivunia kuwa 
Mbunge Mteule. Nataka kumwambia Dkt. Ekuru Aukot, yeye ni nani ambaye anaweza kuingilia 
kina mama kiasi hicho? ! Na kina mama wenyewe wakati wa  kura ndio wana  wahitaji, wakati wa 
kuwatumikia ndani ya N yumba ndio wanao  wahitaji, yeye mwenyewe ana mama ndani ya 
nyumba anambebesha mzigo…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, are you on a point of information?  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Spe aker. I just want the Hon. Member who is on the floor to 
read Article 177 that she has just referred to it does not speak on what she is addressing the 
House…  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : She was referring to Article 100 of the Constitution , I 
think…  
(Interruption)  
 Hon. Bwire:  No, she mentioned Article 175, kindly read out.  
 Hon. Nyache:  Bwana  Spika naomba unilinde.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you can continue Hon. Leyla . 
 Hon. Nyache:  Maana yake hawa vijana nikisimama tu, wakimuona mama tu amesimama 
basi…  
(Applause)  
 Wanaanza kuniandama!  Hon. Mwamwiri na Hon. Bwire mumezidi…  
(Applause and l aughter)  
 Munanihujumu nikiwa Bungeni, niko na haki zangu pia mimi…  
(Interruption)  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, continue Hon. Leyla . 
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. M imi naomba tu unilinde na mimi nataka 
niwa ambie…  
(Interruption)  
 ,The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Renson are you on a point of information?  
 Hon. Thoya:  I wanted to inform the Speaker who is on air that we do not have youths 
here but Hon. Members. Thank you.  
(Applause)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Hon. Leyla you may continue.  
 Hon. Nyache:  Ni W aheshimiwa vijana lakini kwangu naona kama ni  vijana tu, lakini 
kwa hapa ni W aheshimiwa, hata kama mutanitatiza tuende na lo hivyo hivyo. Kwa hivyo 
Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kumwambia Dkt. Ekuru Aukot awachane na kina mama, kina mama 
ndio jamii, kina mama ndio kila kitu katika dunia. Kwa hivyo mimi nataka nimwambie hata yeye 
mwenyewe amezidi kumbebesha bibi yake mzigo ndani ya nyumba, kila siku anambeba na yeye 
apunguze mzigo huko ndani ya nyumba, ajipunguze mwenyewe.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Leyla. Yes Hon. Lucy Chizi?  
 Hon. Chi reri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuniona . Naona mimi nitakunja hil i 
jamvi. Mheshimiwa Spika ningependa kumpongeza na kumshukuru Mheshimiwa Amriya 
ambaye ni Mwenyekiti, Kamati ya Mahakama na Maswala ya Kisheria. Mheshimiwa Spika 
Mwenyekiti amefanya kazi nzuri sana, niko hapa nikiungana na Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya 
Mahakama na Maswala ya Kisheria nikipinga Msw ada ulioletwa mbele yetu vikali sana. 
 Mheshimiwa Spika yaliyozungumz wa ni mengi na ni mazuri ninayaunga mkono; k itu 
ambacho ningependa salamu zimfikie Dkt. Ekuru Aukot naona kama anatafuta kazi hajaipata, 
bado yuko na U raisi hataupata kama mambo ni haya ya kudanganya mwananchi. Amechukua 
Katiba yetu ameivuruga vuruga akidhani ya kuwa kuna wengine ambao watakua hawana  adabu 
kama yeye wamuunge mkono. Kaunti ya  Mombasa tumesema Mheshimiwa Spika hatuko kwa 
hio mada yake amba yo yuko nayo; n inaipinga Hoja hii na aju e kazi bado yuko nayo asijaribu 
kuvuruga wananchi, wananchi wanataka kusaidiwa Mheshimiwa Spika yeye anawaondo a 
vibarua. Watu wanasimama wakitafuta kazi leo hii  anawaondo a wananchi kwenye nyadhifa 
nyengine ambazo wat u huwa wanazipigania Mheshimiwa Spika na kupata uongozi leo hii 
anaziondoa, kina mama waende wapi? Huyu sijui ni nani aliyemzaa ! Maana yake yaonyesha pia 
haku zaliwa na mama Dkt. Ekuru Aukot; k una mtu aliyemza a na anamjua yeye na Mungu wake, 
waachane na kin a mama. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Member. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22  Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker first I wish to declare my interest ; I 
am a Member of Committee of Justice and Legal Affairs but indee d I disagree with the Report 
on so many grounds but due to time I would just be as brief as possible.  
(Interruption)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama chini ya kifungu cha Kanuni 
za Bunge nambari  177 (4). Mheshimiwa Spika Mwanachama  aliyesimama sasa hivi hapa ame 
declare interest  kuwa yeye ni Mwanachama wa Kamati ya  Justice .  Justice  Mheshimiwa Spika 
imeweza kukaa na ilipokuwa inazungumzia hii Ripoti hakusimama na kusema kuwa yeye 
anaipinga hii Ri poti, k wa hivyo sidhani kama ni sawa kukubali maneno ya ke anayoyazungumza 
kuwa amejito a yeye mwenyewe . Mheshimiwa Spika, tukiangalia  Kanuni za Bunge nambari  177 
(4) inasema ... 
(Silence)  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, you can continue Hon. Hatimy . 
 Hon. M ohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa tulipokuwa tumekaa, na kama unavyojua 
gharama imeingilia hii  Kaunti  watu kwenda kukaa na kufanya mikutano ni kuwa Sub-Section 4  
inasema, 'Where a vote on a question is not unanimous, the names of the Members voting for and 
against  the question and those abstaining from voting, respectively, shall be recorded in the 
minutes. Mheshimiwa Spika kumbukumbu ziko, hakuna mahali mtu aliyesema kuwa yeye 
amepinga hii Ripoti ambayo imeletwa hapa leo Mheshimiwa Spika.  Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
Spika naomba Bunge hili chini ya U wenyekiti wako ni sheria ifanye kazi yake Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy. Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker I only fear God and I want to be so specific. Mr. Speaker 
during the train ing when we were going through the Bill I disagreed with Members on various 
occasions. I had my own grounds as to why I support  the Bill, the majority of the m embership of 
our Committee had their own grounds as to why they rejected the Bill and if the Hans ard is to be 
brought here, I am on record for having supported this Bill. So if the Clerk did not take it into 
consideration of writing my opinion as  a person who accepted the Bill  then it is the Clerk it is not 
my mistake. Mr. Speaker but as far as I am c oncerned and I am on record Mr. Speaker I 
supported the Bill and that is why I am supporting it today.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, you can continue but as far as I can see the minutes 
whereby they have been signed by the Chairperson, if I can read the  minutes ; 'Adoption of the 
Report on the Draft of Punguza Mizigo Constitution of Kenya Bill, 2019  the Chairperson tabled 
the aforementioned report on the Draft Punguza Mizigo Constitution of Kenya Amendment Bill, 
2019 after discussion Member unanimously re solve to adopt the Report in its entirely entity and ; 
2. To table the Report in the County Assembly for consideration.  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23  But Hon. Member , you can continue and give your views.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you. Just like I said Mr. Speaker I will not take much of yo ur time. 
There are so many factors that we were to consider as a House if at all we were in agreement to 
pass this Bill. Mr. Speaker just to mention the removal of the nominations ; the tax payer is 
overburden ed and it also has to be considered that we are i n bad timings of the economy. The 
taxpayer is overburden ed to pay the salaries to the leaders both elected and nominated and I think 
in the wi sdom of the author of this Bill  is that we scrap those nominations and use those monies 
that were being channeled to salaries and some other issues to development which according to 
me and the people I represent it makes a lot of sense.   
 Mr. Speaker there is an issue to do with matters of corruption;  when we impose a tough 
sanction it does not mean that you welcome p eople or you are co ndemning  people to be jailed. 
The tough sanctions Mr. Speaker are meant to sc are people from doing that vice; s o when we 
talk of life imprisonment we simply mean that people will be scared to i nvolve themselves in 
corruption a nd that is why through his own wisdom Dr. Aukot suggested that we implement the 
life imprisonment to those people who are adversely mentioned in matters to do with corruption 
and that is why I support it. Mr. Speaker the issue that is eating the econom y of this Count ry is 
corruption; p eople are looting left, right and center, day and night, a nd the monies that are being 
looted are meant for development. So you can imagine Hon. Speaker the taxpayer is being 
overburdened, the taxpayer money is not being well utilized. S o personally because I am not 
corrupt, I would recommend that this life imprisonment is the best solution to this Country. 
 Mr. Speaker again there is an issue to do with time limit on hearing on cases to do with 
corruption. Mr. Speake r I think it is good that this c ountry comes up with a timeline especially 
on cases that touches on corruption. So many people have been forced to step aside pending 
hearings and I will not mention because I am not allowed but Mr. Speaker till today even so me 
have been taken b ack to the g overnment without hearing of their cases. The case is still in the 
court, they were suspended, some were even the Cabinet Ministers Mr. Speaker but still th ey are 
now serving in the same g overnment. So having a timeline of hearing on these corr uption cases 
Mr. Speaker it is a plus and I think will bring some positive results out of it.  
 Finally Mr. Speaker the Kenya Constitution , 2010  we hap pened to borrow from different 
countries especially the US and if you look much into these States or c ountries the formation of 
the Senate was to upgrade Senate to be the Upper House and in his own wisdom Dr. Ekuru 
Aukot suggested that the Senate be an Upper House just like in those areas that we borrowed our 
Constitution ,2010. With those few remarks Mr. Spea ker I beg to support the Bill 's 
recommendation. Thank you.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire. Yes Hon. Amriya?  
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I ndeed this Bill has elicited a 
lot of (??) but I would limit my responses Mr.  Speaker to just two. Mr. Speaker at this juncture 
the Draft Punguza Mizigo  is not a Bill, it is not a Bill yet until and unless it has been passed by 
24 Counties which is hal f of the Counties in Kenya and g azetted and has gone to Parliament and 
that is wh en it will become a Bill.  So the issue that it is a private Member Bill does not arise. At 
this point we are discussing a Motion to adopt a Report by the Committee, s o it is important we  
make that clarification first Mr. Speaker.   
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
24  Secondly, also I want to  respond to the Hon. Member who is in my Committee that 
indeed if I remember  during  the proceedings of the Committee he had raised issues regarding 
some of the Clauses. But what he omitted to do if at all he had intention to have a minority report 
or a m inority opinion then he should have aske d the Committee to set aside a majority r eport and 
a minority report b ecause this is a democratic County and that is the price of democracy th at we 
are free to have divergence  on opinion and only those with m ajority op inion take the day and 
those with m inority opinion have their say Mr. Speaker. So what he ought to h ave done is to 
have recorded a m inority op inion and henceforth to have a m inority Report.   
 Lastly Mr. Speaker, I also want to respond on th e issue of publi c participation;  It is 
indeed that the position of the Committee that the public participation that we conducted as a 
Committee was adequate. Mr. Speaker Hon. Members have raised Article 196 about the right of 
public participation ; also we have Article 10,  so many Articles on the public participation and I 
know it is in the heart of every Member and even you Mr. Speaker that the public is  always 
involved in matters of g overnance and that is  exactly what the Committee did. W e put u p a 
request for Memorandum for seven  days and the Memorandum did not come and so if Members 
had an issue with that they can look at the judicial interpretation of Article  196 from the previous 
precedence s of the High Court Mr. Speaker whereby they mentioned that public participation  
needs not to be adequate, it just needs to be sufficient that is the ground we as a Committee feel 
that public participation was sufficient.  
 Because in light of the time I urge the Hon. Members who had stood up to both reject and 
support that in those w ho are supporting the Draft Bill  to say nay and those who rejecting the 
Draft Bill , when the question is put Hon. Members you are supposed to have responded to if you 
are in support of the recommendation of the Committee, because these are just recommendat ion 
of the Committee on the adoption of the Punguza Mizigo Bill . Thank you very much.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank yo u very much Hon. Amriya Juma Boy . Hon. 
Members I now put the question that the Motion by Hon. Amriya Juma Boy on , adoption of 
Committe e on Justice and Legal Affairs Report to reject the Draft Punguza Mizigo Constitution 
of Kenya Amendment Bill, 2019  be adopted by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms as 
moved . 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause and l aughter)  
 Yes Clerk , next Order?  
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
ADJOURNMENT OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Leader of Majority Party please move the Motion.  
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let us move a 
Procedural Motion that ;  
October 16, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            94 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
25 Pursuant to Standing No.25(3) of the County Assembly, this Houses RESOLVE S to 
adjourn today Wednesday, 16th October , 2019 for a short recess and resume its si ttings 
on Tuesday, 29th October 2019 . 
And I would like Hon. Amriya to second the Motion.  
 Hon. Amriya Juma : I second the Motion Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa. Hon. Members I now 
propose a question that the Motion by H on. Hamisi Musa Mwidani on the Adjournment of the 
County Assembly for the short recess  be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms 
as moved . 
(Question proposed)  
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 The Leader o f Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think we are still 
within the law because this is part of the laws which we  have passed for the whole year ; so Mr. 
Speaker I have moved this Motion because it is the time this House to go on a recess of ten days 
so that Members can visit their Wards in a very good time  because I know we have been very 
busy in this House, so that is the time when Members can meet their elector ate there in a very 
good time . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa. Yes Clerk next Order?  
ADJOURNMENT  
 Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 29th October , 2019 at 10 :00 
a.m.  
The H ouse rose at 4:31p.m. 
                   
 
 
 
  