November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 15th November,  2018  
The House met at 2:57p.m. 
   
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Hon.  Members  you may be seated, yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT   
RESPONSE BY CHAIRPERS ON OF IMPLEMENTATION  COMMITTEE HON. KALUME TO STATEMENT  
ON THE IMPLEMENTATIO N OF MOTIONS PASSED IN THE  HOUSE SINCE INCEPTION  OF THE SECOND 
ASSEMBLY  
 
 Yes Hon.  Salim Kalume, Chairperson of Committee on I mplementation please give 
the statement.  
 
 Hon.  Kalume: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.   I am  standing in regards to a statement 
requested by Hon.  Moham ed H atimy on the implementation of M otions passed in the House 
since inception of the second  Assembly on Thursday October 4th 2018 during t he 79th Sitting. 
The C ommittee has received a communication from the executive requesting to be given 
further 14 days to collect and compile the report Mr. Speaker Sir; I therefore kindly request 
for 14 more days to bring the response, thank you . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Salim Kalume, I think we have been extending 
this thing every now and then so we are going to give you the last 14 days now, yes Hon.  
Bwire.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire: Mr. Speaker thank you but my opinion is that let  us give this C ommittee 
two years so that they can come and report back, they have been postponing three weeks , two 
weeks, it's almost now three months let's give them the whole year they report back next year 
when we resume.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . yes Hon.  Amur.  
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker let us call a spade a spade, the Committee  did 
summon the County S ecretary on behalf of the executive Member  who is answerable . 

November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  He has pleaded with us for 14 days so that he can also follow it up wit h the 
department s conce rned so we are trusting on the County S ecretary now not the other 
Members , we shoul d grant them the 14 days,  thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Amur . Yes Hon.  Samba.  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  I just wan ted to share the same w ith the House, thank you Mr. S peaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So we should give them 14 days?  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Yes I happen  to be also a Member  of the said C ommittee . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy ? 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika nafikiri mimi ndie m husika wa 
hii. H ili swala nililoleta nafikiri K amati haijafahamu ni kitu gani ambacho nimeweza 
kukiuliza  kwa sababu  imechuku a miezi miwili tayari hili swala kujibiwa . Hatukatai tunaona 
kuna barua ya kutoka kwa  Katibu  Francis Thoya lakini hii tracker  tuliouliza sifahamu kwa  
nini imefikia hapa kwa sababu kuna kitu tumeuliza ambayo twataka quarterly reports .  
Quarterly reports  yataja ile Miswada na Bills na kila kitu itaeleza sisi tumepitisha nini na 
wamefanya nin i lakini Bill tracker  na Motion tracker  ni kutuletea tu kutu ambia kuwa 
wamefanya hivi na hivi hii tayari ime tekelezwa  hii bado lakini naona hadithi holela holela 
kila siku 14, siku 21! Nafikiri kama M heshimiwa kutoka Junda alivyosema twaweza 
kuwapatia hata  kama ni mwaka pia watuletee kwa sababu hata hatufahamu sisi mpaka sasa 
kuna nini.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Ogutu.  
 
 Hon.  Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika, quarterly reports  zatakikana kwanza 
zipatikane kwa kila K amati ambapo itakuwa katik a Kamati ya Utekelezaji ita kuwa ina  rudia 
majukumu ya Kamati  zengine. T unaomba kwa mba kuna Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  
ambae anashu ghulika na  biashara ya serikali achuku e hili jukumu  atusaidie kusukuma 
maneno . Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Renson Thoya.  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru sana lakini wakati kinanyolewa hu wa ni 
kichwa cha mwenzako lakini nashukuru kwamba hata hao ambao wana chekelea M heshimiwa 
Kalume siku zao zinahesabiwa . Tumejaribu na tukisema tupewe siku 14 tunaju a kile 
ambacho tunaleta kitaku wa cha kufurahisha katika hili J umba, s io rahisi kama munavyojua 
wale Mawaziri wetu na Chief O fficers  ni kama ambae tunataka kuwaingiza katika system  
lakini wengi wao mara nyingi sio rahisi wao ku shirikiana  lakini tumejarib u lakini hata jana 
tulikuwa na Mheshimiwa nikamu ambia hii sio mambo ya mab arua tena ni wewe mwenyewe 
ukamu ambie ikiwa haitawezekana itabidi yeye mwenyew e aje hata kama hapa kama ni 
kuvunja zile sheria . Lakini ninachoomba hizo siku 14 tutajaribu kuwajibika vil ivyo lakini 
hata hiv yo isiwe ni kwa Kalume tu tutataka ripoti kama ni ya Kamati ya Leba , tutataka ya  
Kamati ya Fedha , Maridhiano  tutataka ya kila mtu lakini isije ikawa ni ngumu mwengine 
kuzitoa, a hsante.  
  
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Renson  Thoya.  Hon.  Salim Kalume I 
think if you have time you sho uld go to the vote book of the C lerks and get to know what  
Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy has asked for because if I can rec all he even asked for the M otion s; 
how many M otions we have passed in this  House , so get all the things which he was asking 
for his prayers and then make sure within the 14 days and combine them together with the 
ones for the C ounty Secretary so you can bring all of them in 14 days.  
 
 Hon.  Kalume:  Mheshi miwa Spika kulingana na maombi Mhes himiwa Moha med 
Hatimy alioweka ni kwamba sana alikuwa anataka kujua ni mambo gani yame tekelezwa 
Miswada na  Bills gani zime tekelezwa  na nafikiri tuko na copy  pia ya u le  Mswada,  ile taarifa  
aliyoleta wakati ule , pia twa weza kuinukuu , tunaweza kwenda kuinuku u vizuri na mimi na 
Kamati  yangu tulivyoelewa ni kwamba yeye anataka kujua ni kitu gani kime tekelezwa  na 
kitu gani hakija tekelezwa  na sisi tumefanya juhudi ku bwa tumeenda mara kwa mara kwa 
Mheshimiwa CS na tumekutana nae na leo nafikiri ameleta barua, stak abadhi zote ameleta 
hapo...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Kalume sijui kama umenipata , Katibu wa Kaunti   
atahusika vipi kujua vipi mambo yamepitishwa kwa Bunge  yetu, hizi vitu inapatikana hapa  
hapa ndani ya Bunge , kwa hio  Hon.  Hatimy am euliza anataka kujua ni Miswada  ngapi 
zimeletwa hizo vitu zinapatikana hapa  hapa hazitaki uende kwa CS, Hon.  Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon.  Athman Mwamwiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Sp ika, mimi natangaza msimamo 
ni Naibu Mwenyekiti wa K amati iliyopewa jukumu hili na jukumu tu lilopewa na 
Mheshimiwa M wenyekiti . Haikuwa tu ni hoja gani ama ni M iswada mingapi ambayo 
tumepitisha kama Bunge  bali M heshimiwa ali yeuliza alitaka kujua imefikia hatua gani katika 
utekelezaji ama status of implementation . Kwa hivyo katika utekelezaji sio j ukumu letu kama 
Bunge  kutekeleza bali ni jukumu la idara  husika hivyo basi  sio swala ambalo liko kwa idara 
moja ziko nyingi ndio maana tumechelewa na tunaomba m uda zaidi tuweze kuzinukuu zote 
na kuziweka pamoja ili tukija kupeana iwe ni ripoti inayoridhish a ya utekelezaji kamili, kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa S pika tunakuomba hizo siku.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Moham ed Hatimy it is not true that  you have asked 
how many M otions have passed you just wa nted to know the status of the M otion s if they 
have been imp lemented or not . 
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Hapa ni ku wa pengine sasa tunaona h aya marupurupu ya  
hizi Kamati  nyingine tutazikata tugawanye;   hapa kitu ra hisi kama vile ulivyosema atu ambie 
Miswada mi ngapi hii meza  ya Karani , Karani  ameandika barua kwa kitengo  kuonyesha kuwa 
kumepitishwa Miswada  na wao wamepeleka kwa Kitengo  hawakupeleka kwa kitengo,  u le 
ushahidi wa  barua za Katibu u tatuon yesha wame tekeleza wamechukua hi zi Miswada  
zimeandikwa kule ama hazikuandikwa tuleteeni kwenye orodha  ile mul ioleta kuwa nyin yi 
tayari mumezitoa, k isha yale mambo mengine tutayafuatilia mbele. Mheshimiwa S pika 
nakubaliana na maneno yako kuwa yeye ajibu vile wewe umem uelekeza . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Samba.  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Yes Hon.  Speaker I think the one that we are proposing ; the full report 
is much better than just tracking M otions . 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  And if the Hon.  Member  who request ed for the number of maybe the M otion s that we 
have passed the library is just here and we also have Hansard and then the C lerks are also 
here if at all  he is genuine about knowing the number but what we are propagating for we 
need to bring exactly through the executive full report of our role s. If you can look at o ur 
roles we are supposed to be Implementation C ommit tee we want to confirm how any M otions 
we have passed have been implemented so far so I would request him to exercise a little 
patience 14 days is not long it is just some eight days and then we shall be here with full 
report, thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Samba . Yes Hon.  Bwire.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  Mr. Speaker I think it's not in order for a Member  to direct a fellow 
Member  to the library for him to get the information he has asked before the plenary, jus t like 
we have been asking the C hairperson Infrastructure an d transport  we know the bulbs tha t 
have been distributed in our W ards and we have been asking the r eport to be tabled here so 
Mr. S peaker I think this House won't be having any work , the Members  will be having no 
work to do here if at all when you ask for information to be brought before the plenary you 
are directed to go to the other institutions to seek f or the information for yourself. I think Mr. 
Speaker we are heading to a very wrong direction if at all the Members  will be directing 
Members  to be g etting information on their own; all we need is the Chairperson and his 
Committee to table the report that the Member  has asked for and the C ommittee also ought to 
tell us what have they been doing for the last 14 days they had asked for  because after three 
weeks they came here and asked for 14 days, it has elapsed again they are asking for another 
14 days, I think we are not serious and we need to be serious.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Bwire.  Hon.  Salim Kalume I think it is 
very clear now Memb er Hon.  Moha med Hatimy wants to know up  to today which is the 94th 
sitting how many M otions  have been passed and what are the status of the M otions ; how 
many of them have been implemented and how many have not been implemented. So you 
have 14 days you can go and get the information whether it  is from the CS or from the C lerk 
or from the library or from wherever you will get the information and so you have 14 days 
which again you will bring the status and how many M otions have been pas sed by this House 
and h ow many M otions have been rejected . I am sure there are M otions which have been 
rejected , so you just tell us how many M otions have been rejected and how many have been 
passed , how many have been implemented and all that general informat ion please. T hank y ou 
Hon.  Salim , yes C lerk. 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON INFRA STRUCTURE , ROADS AND PUBLIC WOR KS ON 
INSTALLATION OF DIGI TAL MASTS  
 
 Yes Hon.  Prischillah Mumba at least you have come today because the whole week 
you have not been seen in this House, s o it’s good you have come today to reply the 
statement am sure you were around the whole week, were you around Hon.  Prischillah  
Mumba?  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri umeniita kujibu swali hili lakini 
kutokuwa kwe nye N yumba ama kuwa kwenye Nyumba nafikiri tulikuwa na wewe juzi hapa 
tulipokuwa na wageni na uliniona ... 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : That was on Monday but on Tuesday we had a session i 
didn't see you , yesterday we had a session I didn't see you.  
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Nilikuwa mgonjw a Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Oh pole ndio hiyo nakujulia basi . 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Hata nafikiri waniona hapa nimeshika dawa yangu napuliza 
kwa sababu ya hii hata leo ilikuwa nisingeweza  kuja . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Pole lakini si mko na naibu Mwenyekiti , yuko wapi 
naibu  wako? She is not around ? 
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba: Naibu  wangu kwanza ndio mgonjwa zaidi hata nafikiri 
amelazwa amenitumia ujumbe mfupi  asubuhi kuwa malaria imemzidia . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay thank you Hon.  Prischillah so please you give the 
statement.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.)  Mumba:  Nafikiri nilienda  kwa W aziri nikazungumza na W aziri kuhusu 
mambo ya hizi digital ma st na akan iambia hii ilikuwa ni mpangilio wa shirika la  World Bank 
ambayo ndio walikuwa waki weka hizi na k ulingana na vile watu wametaka kuwa ziongezwe 
akasema atajadiliana tena na shirika hilo  ili waweze kuongeza mipangilio  yao lakini sio 
mpangilio w ake ilikuwa ni wa shirika la World B ank ndio ilifanya hiyo mipangili o kwa hivyo 
atatuongezea kwa ajili ataenda kuomba mazungumzo zaidi ndio aombe kama tutaweza 
kupewa hizo masts . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So Clerk who asked this question , the statement . 
 
(Consultations ) 
 
 Hon.  Kitula? You heard what the Hon.  Prischillah Mumba  said, she is the Chairperson 
of Comm ittee on T ransport and infrastructure saying.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Are you satisfied with the statement?  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 Sorry?  
 
(Chief Whip remained silent)  
 
 You did  not hear what she was saying?  
 
(Chief Whip remained silent)  
 
 Hon.  Kitula are you serious? Hon.  Kitula, the Hon.  Member  was replying to your 
statement . 
 
(Silence ) 
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  So we can, yes Hon.  Amur ? 
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker, with all due respect when this question 
was brought up about the lighting depart ment we thought each and every W ard will  be given 
a share of what he deserves but according to this report there is no fairness in this report ; 
some areas have been given more , some are give n low and that is the fact Mr. S peaker , of 
Members  thought . This will cause problems here because it canno t be that each W ard 
deserves to get same number as other W ards are getting and that is not a rule Mr. S peaker we 
want it to be clearly defined whether we are getting 50 each W ard is 50 but a matter of others 
getting 10 , others getting 200 there is no fairn ess in this report.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Prischillah Mumba.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kujulisha Nyumba nafikiri  nimejibu 
kwanza namba nane, sijafikia kwa hii ripoti, sasa naona mtu anarukia pahali ambapo sijafikia 
kujibu  pahali nilipotakikana kuleta hii ripoti.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, I think Hon.  Kitula was satisfied with the 
statement number 8 , so Clerk please let  us move on.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON HEA LTH  HON. KIBWANA SWALEH  
 
 Yes Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh, he is not around? Yes Hon.  Milka Mor aa. 
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Committee on H ealth 
and message from Chairman is that we will give a statement on the same next week on 
Thursday if that can be gr anted.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Okay It  is fine , so next week Thursday.  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Ngare : Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Milka. Yes Clerk.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON INF RASTRUCTURE , ROADS AND 
PUBLIC WO RKS HON. (MRS.) MUMBA  ON THE FLOODS IN THE  COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon.  Prischilla  Mumba again please give u s the statement response.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika tena na majibu ya hii taarifa bado 
sijayapokea, kwa hivyo siwezi kujibu mpaka niipate , nafikir i ningepewa tena kama wiki 
moja.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Clerk when did we give out this, can you just check in 
the vote book and what was it about; the floods? The floods in the C ounty. So Hon.  
Prischillah  we are giving you another week, so next Thur sday please if you can bring the 
response. Yes Hon.  Amur.  
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Hon.  Murfad Amur:  We have been given a report and we are being told to wait for 
this report I don’t know which number it is because whenever I look at the agenda for today 
there is nowhere talking  about this report.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It is number 12 Honourable.  
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur:  This is writin g problem that was in  a specific W ard Mr. 
Speaker;  we will be referring to that issue, this is a report of the 30 W ards that you wanted to 
be given ...an equal sharing of materials yet this report is not giving equal share . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Amur let u s wait for that to come because I 
remember  on the same note, am the one who gave those instructions so that the Whole House 
know each War d, about each W ard. Yes Hon.  Samba.  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Let me just remind the Honourable  who was on the floor, this report 
had been already discussed and it was already responded to, I can recall it is upon your 
request that you made so that Members  can go thro ugh to confirm that whether the said  
items have been dispatched to the various W ards and that is  why he is not seeing anywhere.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I have not, I don’t know when did you discuss that 
because it is my first time am seeing this repo rt. 
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Yes we discussed this.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It was not this report. It was not a complete report Hon.  
Samba I don’t think we have discussed this.  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Yes we had discussed this, you are the one who requested Mumba to 
give every Member  a copy so that to confirm.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Where is the report? Iko wapi hiyo ripoti ? 
 
 Hon.  Samba:  She had responded to it.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Samba, this report has not been in this House 
before, I’ve not seen it before not unless may be my Deputy S peaker has seen it, it  is my first 
time am seeing this one that is showing every W ard. Hon.  Prischillah she is there herself let 
her say by herself, did you bring this report before Hon.  Prischillah or is it the first t ime 
coming in this House?  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Mheshimiwa Spika with due respect in this House I think the re 
is always a misunderstanding;  I think there was a discussion abou t the street lighting of every 
Ward and how it was the work was being done, and th en you ordered me I get a report that 
will show each Member  to know the date which every Member  was being visited  and…. in 
each W ard so th is is how the report shows and it will be when I will be responding to the 
statement  number 12 and that  is why it is not yet.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So yes it has not yet been tabled in this House so why is 
Hon.  Samba saying it was here before?  
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : No he was replying to what Mhes himiwa Amur was saying 
that…  
 
(Inter ruption ) 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Hon.  Samba is telling this House that Members  have 
discussed about  this report and it is not true.  Members  have not discussed about this report, 
you are the one tabling the report in statement number 12, you have not even tabled the report 
so how is tha t Members  have discussed. Yes Hon.  Thoya.  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Bwana Spika  kidogo nimekuwa na imani kubwa na Mheshimiwa 
Samb a lakini leo naona ananivua nguo  na anah itajika labda aambie Jumba hili;  inaweza kuwa 
ni ukweli lakini watu huota, watu huota kwamba tuko k atika mkao wa Bunge na kama ni 
ndoto atuambie lakini mimi nafikir i tulisema tunataka tujue kila W odi, mimi nataka kujua 
kule kwangu ku meletwa nini, na haijawahi kuja.  
 Lakini kidogo kuna matatizo ya kukorogeka na ni  lazima achukue hiyo kama mtu 
binafsi kwa sababu haiwezi kuwa Jumba hili lote kila mtu anajua, watu walioka a hapa  ndani 
kila mmoja anajua hii ka ratasi haija zungumzwa lakini yeye anajaribu kusuku ma, 
inawezakuwa ni ndoto na tumu ambie kwamba ilikuwa ni ndoto leo tuko hai hapa, tuko hapa 
live na huu ni ukweli na mimi nina imani sana na huyu Bwana Samba lakini leo amenivua 
nguo.. . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Thoya kaa kidogo, Hon.  Thoya tafadhali. Naam 
Karani . 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON INF RASTRUCTURE , ROAD S AND 
PUBLIC WORKS ON  DRAINAGE IN MAGONGO  
  
 Yes Hon.  Prischillah  Mumba.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika tena, hapa niko katika majibu ya 
njia za maji taka z a Magongo ambayo niliwahi kuleta majibu yake hapa na Mheshimiwa 
Faith akawa bado ana  maswali ya kuwa ni mpaka a patiwe majibu zaidi na ukatoa uamuzi 
kuwa tuweze kuwa na site visit  na tukaenda kwa site visit  na tukakuta hiyo shida vi le ilivyo . 
Lakini kama nilivyokuw a nimeleta yale majibu ya wakati uliopita  ni kuwa ni  kweli kuna 
tatizo la hi yo njia ya maji taka , hiyo  njia ya maji taka  pale ambapo alieleza lakini ni kwa 
sababu wale vijana walikuwa wakifanya ile kazi kama tulivyoambiwa walikataa kufanya hiyo 
kazi kwa sababu wanasema malipo yao yamechelewa na wao hawawezi kujilimbukizia 
kufanya ile kazi na huku hawapati malipo na kwa hivyo tukasema wacha tungojee tuone 
wakiwa wamelipwa ndio tuone kama ile kazi itazidi kuendelea. Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Prischillah  Mumba, yes Clerk.  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY  CHAIRPERSON OF COMMI TTEE OF INFRASTRUCTU RE, ROADS AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON. (MRS.) MUMBA ON  LIGHTING IN PORT REI TZ WARD  
 
 Again Hon.  Prischillah Mumba.  
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika tena, nimeomba masikio yako 
sasa kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Fadhil i alitaka kujua kuhusu mambo ya Wodi ya Port Reitz na 
mambo ya mataa  ya barabarani na wakati ulitoa u amuzi ya kuwa niweze kuileta ripoti ya kila 
Wodi ambayo kazi imefanyika kwa ule mda ambao tulikuwako tunaelezwa . Wakati nilikuwa 
nilileta ripoti ya majib u ya kwanza ya majibu ya  kuwa kila W odi ilikuwa ikipewa taa 20 
nafikiri kuna  wakati nilisoma ripoti nyengine na ik awa sasa nilete ripoti ya kila wodi ili 
ionyeshe kama W odi yako ilifanyika kazi gani na bado inaendelea kwa  sababu nikijibu swali 
hili la P ort Reitz, nimelichanganya pamoja na W odi nyengine zote ndio  nikaona nilete hii 
ripoti ya kila mtu aweze kuwa na ripoti yake na asome na  kuelewa kuwa kila siku hiyo 
ambayo itakuwa imenukuliwa kwa ripoti ndio kazi imefanyika kwako na nikazidi kuambiwa 
na wiza ra kuwa wana mipangilio kabambe wakati huu muhula wa masherehe  ili waweze 
kuzidi kuendelea kufanya kazi kwa sababu ya kutaka haya mataa kuwaka . Kwa hivyo nafikiri 
kila mtu ana ripoti hiyo ambayo imeeleza zile kaz i vile zilifanyika katika kila Wodi;  ikiwa 
kuna swala zaidi ya hivyo pengine baada ya mtu atakapo soma ripoti hii kwa wakati wa wiki 
ijayo tunaweza kumjibu zaidi yale atakayokuwa anataka tumjibu. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Prischillah  Mumba.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Hon.  Amur . 
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker in this report there is 
additional Ward that has been inserted; I don’t know which W ard this  is, Old town Ward, 
where is it coming from? We don’t have old town W ard Mr. Speaker we have Mji wa kale 
Makadara so this is a new W ard that has been crea ted for the purpose of maybe making the 
report. My W ard is not there Mr. Speaker in this report I therefore ask to  be given also a 
report for my W ard... 
 
(Consultations ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Amur. 
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur:  So this report does not include me as a Member  of Mji wa  Kale 
Makadara W ard, this is a new W ard that has been created and I don’t know how is 
representing it here Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon.  Prischilla h, I think this report has been 
done by the World Bank, it is not even th e County report the way am looking at it. I think this 
is a World Bank report, it has not been done by the County.  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba : Hii imefanywa na Kaunti  maanake wizara ndio ime leta hii 
ripoti, walikuwa wanataka kuonyesha kila Wodi  vile walikuwa wakitemb ea kwa hivyo 
nikijibu swala la M heshimiwa mwenzangu ninge muwia radhi lakini kama ninavyo jua 
peng ine ni typing error  lakini ile W odi yake ilikuwa inaitwa Old Town, ikarudi kugeuzwa  
sasa pengine walisahau wakarudi wakaweka jina lile la kitambo ambapo hili jina jipya ndio 
liko sasa linalotumika . Kwa hivyo ninaomba radhi kwa sababu ya hiyo typing error  itaenda 
kugeuzwa lakini hapo  hapo ndio kwake.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you , yes Hon.  Amur.  
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 10  Hon.  Murfad Amur:  I was born in this town of Mombasa, what I know there was 
Makadara  ward, Kizingo ward and Mji wa Kale Ward. There has never since I was born in 
this town a W ard that i s known by the name of Old town  so Mr. Speaker it is either they 
agree that they  messed or they have created a Ward that is not existing. T wo Mr. Speaker if I 
accept that apology again this report contains no equality ; some W ards have been given more 
than what to expect , some have been denied, there is no  fairness in this report . Mr. Speaker, 
the disbursement of the material s has not been done fairly, unle ss we are given equal  shares, 
this report I reject it.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon.  Bwire.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  Mr. S peaker the report is wr itten in English and I think the argument of 
the Hon.  Member  it was Mji wa K ale and Old town is just an English word, fr om the Mji wa 
Kale to O ld town, I think it is the same. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri.  
 
 Hon.  Athman Mwam wiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa 
kupitia makablasha haya ya utenda kazi wa idara ya uchukuzi ninaona kidogo kuna utepetevu 
lakini ni swala ambalo linaeleweka na tunaweza tukaafikiana kwamba raslimali haiwezi 
kufanyika sawa kwa wakati mm oja. Hata kwa mujibu wa K atiba kipengele cha 202 kuna 
mgao wanasema , equita ble sharing of national revenue , alafu 204 wanasema , equalization , 
kuna ile ya  kwamba ni laz ima kila sehemu ipate alafu kuna ile ya kuongezea kulingan a na 
haja na matatizo ya mahali . Mfano Mheshimiwa Spika, W odi ya Mheshimiwa Bwire ya 
Junda ukubwa wake na changamoto inazopitia kuhusu maswala ya mataa  ni tofauti na W odi 
ya Mheshimiwa Amur ya Mji wa K ale. Pengine katika mgao wa kwanza walipata sawa taa 
mbili mbili alafu Mheshimiwa Bwir e akaongezewa tatu kwa sababu ya kwamba kwake kuna 
giza z aidi kuliko kwa Mheshimiwa Amur;  ni mfano wa ugawi wa raslimali unavyo kwend a.  
 Kwa hivyo kupitia kwa idara M wenyekiti wa Kamati hii tunamuomba na Kamati yake 
na wizara husika wawajibike ya kwamba m gao huu tuliopata hata kama hauko sawa sawa  na 
watu wote lakini bado ni mgao mdogo kulingana na shida ambazo tunapitia mashinani. 
Mheshimiwa Spika sehemu zetu zina giza na sasa hivi tumekuwa na changamoto ya 
kukabiliana na hali nzima ya usalama kwa sababu ya njia zinazopitiwa ; ikifika saa kumi na 
mbili vijana wameingia shughuli kwa sababu hakuna mataa. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
Mwenyekiti kwa heshima na taadhima tunakuomba, tunajua kwamba kuna upungufu wa 
wafanyi  kazi katika idara yako, pengine hilo tunaweza lia ngazia lakini kwa kuwa haijasemwa 
kama ni sababu  katika ripoti yako, sisi kama W aheshimiwa ama binafsi kama sehemu yangu 
tunaomba muwa jibike zaidi na mtuwashie mataa. S hukran Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker S ir my concern is the legal 
procedure ; the rules and the laws of this House , in as much as this report we  have alrea dy 
started discussing about it I would request you to give a direction whether we are supposed to 
discuss this report  before it is officially tabled. N umber 2 , I thought according to the 
statement we are supposed to be reacting on a problem on Port  Reitz Ward  if am not wrong  a 
statement  on lighting problem s in Port  Reitz W ard by Hon.  Prischillah  Mumba.  
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 11  But now Mr. Speaker Sir, we are discussing a report which involve s all the Wards in 
the C ounty and the report which has not been officially tabled Mr.  Speaker Sir. K indly give 
your direction, thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Ibrahim were you here when I gave the direction to 
Hon.  Prischillah Mumba? Y ou were not here am sure that day.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : I was here Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I never gave t he direction about only one W ard of Port  
Reitz, I re member  if I can recall very w ell all the Members  were complaining about their 
Wards, so the issue is not only P ort Reitz, it is about all the W ards and I can recall very well 
Hon.  Prischilla I even asked you that I re member  there was some money which had been 
allocated for this work , each W ard and we asked you to go and look for finance if that money 
was used, if those bulbs were procured and you never even brought back  the report about 
those bulbs. Al l you are tell ing us is that you went to the M inister, you are not even supposed 
to go to the Minister, you should call the Minister here, call the Minister here with your 
Committee.  I can re member  last week I saw the other M inister for sports he was summoned 
here with  his Chief O fficer and they came here so there  is nothing special about  that M inister 
of yours, you can call him here and Members  I want to know about their affairs here so you 
can call him here and ask him so that you can invite the other Members  even so that everyone 
will know what's  happening.  You do not to have every time  stress yourself going t here you 
are sick because of these  small small reports ; you are not the one running that Ministry you 
are the Chairperson of the Committee, s o please Hon.  Prischilla if you think Members  are not 
satisfied summon that Minister here y ou have those powers, the Members  have that power 
you summon that Minister here ask him all relevant questions you want to ask him and get 
the answer from him , simple. We do not have to drag this iss ue now is almost over one 
month, s o Members  you will go t hrough that report and if you find that you need to know 
more about it you will ask the Chairperson, Hon.  Prischillah then we can move forward with 
that. Yes Hon.  Ibrahim . 
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Ok Mr. Speaker Sir, thank you for that clarification it is okay I thi nk 
what you have just said is what should happen we need to have the CEC here well equipped 
with everything and we are also going to  prepare ourselves. But before we discuss that report 
I think the report was supposed to have been tabled officially but it  was not tabled Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But it is tabled no w, you have the report with you, s o 
what do you mean officially like Hon.  Ibrahim I am not getting you…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir…  
 
(Inte rruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :You are holding the report with you and you are saying it 
is not been tabled officially…  
 
(Interruption)  
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 12  Hon.  Omondi : Mr. Speaker the procedure of tabling a report has it followed its due 
course? I thought that the Member  was supposed to bring it and table it officially before we 
start discussing on it.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Aran . 
 
 Hon.  Aran : Hon.  Speaker thank you. I think  the Hon.  Member , Chair of Education is 
just concerned he wants to know the pro cedure because soon we are expecting he will be 
laying the report on the progress  we are making on bursaries so…  
 
(Applause and Laughter)  
 
 So kindly bear with him Mr. Speaker because we are expecting the energy he is 
putting…  
 
(Consultation)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you continue Hon.  Aran we are listening to you.  
 
 Hon.  Aran : I was just saying Hon.  Speaker as Hon.  Members  of this House we 
expect him to lay the report on the progress he is making on the status of bursaries. So he is 
just concerned h e wants to know the procedures so when he comes next week he would not 
have any problem. So kindly bear with him.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you , but Hon.  Ibrahim this is a response for the 
statement it is not a report. Yes Hon.  Feddis . 
 
 Hon.  (Ms. ) Mbura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi kwanza nampongeza 
Mwenyekiti  wa Kamati ya Uchukuzi  kwa kazi yake na juhudi zake anazozifanya katika 
Bunge hili. Ombi langu ni kwamba sote ni ndugu na kuna kwengine Mheshimiwa Spika kuna 
mataa  na kuna kwengine ha kuna kabisa, jibu unalo Mheshimiwa tafadhali. Sasa ombi langu 
ni kwamba wakati taa zinapopeanwa lazima u angalie kule ambako hakuna mataa waongeze 
na kule kama uko nazo tafadhali mwenzako akipata sisi ni ndugu sioni ni kwa nini tuvutane, 
kwa hivyo ombi lang u, naomba unikinge Bwana Spika tafadhali…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Amur . 
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker  (Off microphone)  my colleague is claiming about 
the road of Mwakirunge because I have a road here, she should remain witho ut a road 
because what she is trying to tell us here if we are going to be given equal share of our issues 
she should bear with us about the road of Mwakirunge not to be constructed because if I have 
a road she does not need to have a road , that is what sh e is trying to implement. We are 
talking about equality on issues pertaining to lights in Mombasa County, if we are dividi ng 
50/50 then it is 50/50 each W ard that is the share ratio . Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Hon.  Feddis I do not k now if you Hon.  
Members  do not understand what is the issue the Members  have ; it is not about the 
Chairperson for Transport  so stop stand ing here and try t o defend her . 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 13  You are defending her from what? There is not hing you are defending her from, 
people ar e complaining it is not even her business she is not the one ev en working in that 
office there s o you do not have to stand up here and try to defend the Chairperson , it is upon 
her to go and ask what is the status there and bring the report here and we are  not putting 
pressure on her.  So you do not have to be every time you are defending her, what are you 
defending her for? She is the one who is supposed to bring the report to us and if she cannot 
bring the report she should just resign and the other Membe rs who can do that work. Yes if 
she thinks she is not fit for that job she should just resign and they are other Members  they 
want to be the Chairperson for that Committee. Yes Hon.  Mwam wiri I thought you wanted to 
say something?  
 
 Hon.  Athman Mwam wiri: Nilitaka tu kumfahamisha Mheshimiwa kuhusu usawa wa 
masuala ya ugavi akipata nafasi apitie Katiba ya Jamhuri ya Kenya kipengele cha 202 na 204 
Mheshimiwa Amur ili apate ufahamu zaidi kuhusiana na ugavi wa raslimali.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Feddis I  think you are about to finish you were 
saying something , yes continue.  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.)  Mbura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo ombi langu ni 
kwamba wakati mgao unapofanywa basi tuweze kuzingatia zile sehemu ambazo bado 
hazijaguswa kabisa. Kwa hivyo w aheshimiwa tunapopata mwenzako amepewa kiwango 
ambacho ni cha juu kukushinda wewe tafadhali maana yake sisi ni wamoja. Ahsanteni sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Ibrahim . 
  
 Hon.  Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker once again. I have a concern Mr. Spe aker Sir, 
as much as we are really discussing about the distribution of this material there is also a very 
big concern about the manpower involved. I was trying to explain that apart from the 
distribution of the material as Members  are complaining there is  also a very big concern as 
far as manpower is concerned…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But Hon.  Ibrahim I do not know which language do you 
want us to use here in this House?  I just said the report is there and Members  should go and 
look at  the report and then we can come back and bring those issues ; so now again you are 
standing to br ing the issue about this report, d o I give you time? And I have made the ruling 
already and now again you are  talking about the same report…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Mr. Speaker Sir, maybe this one will not be captured that is why I am 
very much concerned about it and it is very important maybe it may not be captured…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No, if you start like that the other Members  may even 
want to contribute about this, s o go and look at it then we are giving you time next week you 
can come and bring the report please, thank you. Yes Hon.  Bwire?  
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 14  Hon.  Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I am standing on a point of order 
on Standing Order No.41 2(c) it says and I read:  
 
(c) A Member  may request for a statement from the Committee Chairperson relating 
to matters under the mandate of the Committee and the Speaker may either appoint a 
day for the statement or direct that the stat ement be issued on the same day.  
 
 I pray that Mr. Speaker…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes you can proceed.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire : Thank you. Mr. Speaker we are winding this year now and very soon we 
will be going for a long recess and we have be en raising issues concerning the things that 
affect common mwanan chi mostly but…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Bwire you referred to 41 2(c)?  
 
 Hon.  Bwire : Yes Sir . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Before reading 41 2(c) did  you read 41 1?  
 
 Hon.  Bwire : Mr. Speaker my much interest is on 41 2(c) that is why I never 
concentrated on other…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No, you are much interested about the statement hour?  
 
 Hon.  Bwire : Yes Sir . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So did you read 41 1? But it is okay you may continue I 
am just telling you that next time you read 41 Sub -section 1 you will see there is a time  limit I 
think not later than 3: 00p.m. Yes Hon.  Bwire you can continue.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire : Thank you. Mr . Speaker my concern or the statement that I have is over 
the status of the bursaries from the Department of Education…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mr. Speaker this is not personal though the other day the Chairman took it personal 
and he was almost to resign and hand i t over to me. Mr. Speaker the issue of bursaries is of 
much wait and we are winding up this year and we have not been given the directives from 
the Department of Education. I therefore seek to know the plans that the Department of 
Education has for our peo ple concerning the bursary. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 15  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Amur.  
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker I also have a burning issue, I wish to raise a 
statement as we know all of us you have given one chance of contract employment to  each 
Member  but Mr. Speaker it is becoming unsuitable in our areas. We understand they are 
some people who have been recruited under the Fire Department and are being trained Mr. 
Speaker. We would want to be given more information in regards to this Mr. S peaker because 
they are people being trained right now yet we were told only one vacancy for each Hon.  
Member  and those people who were sent were taken to Environment Department, Cleansing 
and whatsoever but what happened to this recruitment of Fire Depart ment we would want to 
be given a report on that the concerned Committee should at least give us a report Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes Hon.  Mwamwiri . 
 
 Hon.  Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika pia 
mimi nasimama chi ni ya kanuni za Bunge hili nambari 41 2(c) kuomba ruhusa yako kuuliza 
swali Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, statement?  
 
 Hon.  Athman Mwam wiri: Yes. 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Yes you can continue.  
 
 Hon.  Athman Mwam wiri: Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika. Mheshimiw a Spika ibara ya 
183 sehemu ya tatu  ya Katiba ya Jamhuri ya Kenya inaelezea majukumu ya Waziri wa 
masuala ya Fedha  na mipango katika serikali g atuzi. Kadhalika Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti 
kwenye ibara 187 sehemu ya 3(a) ya kanuni za Bunge hili inatuelezea vizuri majukumu ya 
Kamati ya masuala ya Fedha, bajeti na m ipangilio. Naomba kujua kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti ya 
Fedha, Bajeti na Mipangilio watupatie ripoti ya awamu mbili ama robo mbili za mwisho za 
matumizi ya serikali g atuzi ya Mombasa. Kadh alika katika ripoti yao watueleze maombi ya 
Idara husika kiwango walicho omba na kiwango walichoafikiwa ama walichopewa. Tatu 
Mheshimiwa Spika watupatie sababu kwa nini hawakuweza kupatiwa kiwango 
walichokiomba kwa muda muafaka na ni kwa jinsi gani wataweza  kufikia malengo yao 
waliyoyaweka kwenye bajeti na mipangilio ya mwaka huu katika awamu mbili ama robo 
mbili za mwaka huu 2018/2019 Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti. Ahsante . 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwam wiri. I think the Chairman of 
Finance Commi ttee Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy is not around. So Hon.  Fadhili you are the Vice 
Chairman? Or it is Hon.  Mwidani? Anyway Hon.  Fadhili you are a Member  of that 
Committee so you have heard what Hon.  Mwam wiri said so you will just refer to your 
Committee and you can tell us when you can bring back the report.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I can 
see the urgency of the statement as it has been brought last but the Committee concerned has 
been asked to respond as the first issue from the raised statements that were raised before. 
Mr. Speaker I , as the Member  of the Finance Committee and I am also concerned from what 
the Hon.  Member  has raised.  
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 16  It is our mandate as the Finance Committee to investigate  on the disbursements from 
the n ational g overnment to the County but as far as the statement is concerned I am asking 
this Honourable  House to give us some time . Atleast a week’s time putting into consideration 
that in the next three  weeks to come we might be going to our long recess an d the iss ue that 
has been raised is an  issue that concerns each and every Member  and every citizen in this 
County . So Mr. Speaker so I am asking for a week’s time I will consult my Chair and the 
other Committee Members  so that we bring back the report.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. So we are giving you one week Hon.  Fadhili. 
Hon.  Bwire has asked somet hing about the issue of bursary  so Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi I think 
you know the procedures to follow you will have even to go again through the Finance a nd 
see if there is money which has been allocated and it has been used maybe you never know , 
maybe people have been given bursary already and you are just here in the House talking 
about it and maybe people have been given the cheques.   
 So just find out and  then by next week make sure you bring the answer and again 
there is Hon.  Amur which you have asked about employment and training of the people of 
the Fire . So Hon.  Prischilla please … 
 
(Consultation)  
 
 …ooh it is Labour? No, but I think he was asking speci fic, was it in Labour or 
Transport d epartment?  
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker I said the Committee concerned, I asked the 
Committee concerned maybe they are two  Committees there, they  are intermarrying because 
the d epartment falls under Transport but als o the Labour Committee can also take it up .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So you are concerned about the recruitment?  
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur : Yes Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : And you are sure there are people who have been 
recruited?  
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur : (Off microphone).  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So I think that is the d epartment of Labour which is 
under our brother Hon.  Renson Thoya. So Hon.  Renson Thoya please look into that matter 
and then tell us by next week if they were people, you know th e most important thing is the 
procedure, was the procedure followed? So you will just tell us by next week please. Yes 
Hon.  Thoya . 
 
 Hon.  Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker we are going to bring it, kindly just allow us 
two weeks because that is the norm , two  weeks we are going to bring that information but…  
             
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Fadhili?  
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 17  The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Mwalimu ): Mr. Speaker as far as the statement  from 
Hon.  Amur the two weeks’ time that the Honourable  is asking for maybe they will have been 
posted and when he gives back the report they might also have been deployed to their 
departments in several locations . So with due respect Mr. Speaker t reat this as an urgent issue 
and let the Hon.  Member  even if it is to summon the people concern ed soonest possible so 
that they give us the report.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank You. Yes Hon.  Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Najua Mheshimiwa Spika hili ni J umba la waheshimiwa na 
waheshimiwa nawashukuru wengi ni wajanja na  ninawavulia kofia kwa hiyo hata kama huyo 
tutakaomuita na awe hivyo na mimi namfahamu kwamba y ule namuita kwa saa hii yuko 
katika kongamano kule Washington D.C  sasa wewe an galia ule ujanja waheshimiwa wako  
nao yama anisha ni  kumuita  akiwa Washington D.C. Mimi nimeomba tu wiki mbili kwa 
sababu ninajua kwamba ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur : Point of information .  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes.  
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur:  If someone travels they do not travel with the office  this is a 
fact, the office is st ill there, and if you travel Mr. Speaker do you t ravel with your office with 
you?  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : No.  
 
 Hon.  Murfad Amur:  It is not a handbag.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Renson Thoya please try within a week, I am sure 
you can get some small inform ation the rest you can give us by next week but atleast tell us.  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Whatever I want to tell you out of the request for information  I do not 
want to bring shoddy ..., hizi vitu ambazo zinazungumziwa ni  tetesi amba zo hata mimi lazima 
nizijue nazisikia hapa na pale lakini tunataka tukishika tusishike maji , tushike kitu ambacho 
hata mimi nita kuja mwambia huu uajiri unafany wa kiubaguzi ninajua kuna  mambo mengi 
lakini naomba munip e ule wakati kwa sabab u nataka niite mt u am baye nikimshika tutakuwa 
tunapata ile habari mahususi . Hata mimi nina watu wangu ambao nataka waajiriwe 
ningepata nafasi kama ile lakini nikikwambia baada ya wiki moja nitaleta alafu nije hapa ni  
kama ile ya Mheshimiwa Kalume  hamridhiki  hapa… 
 
(Laught er) 
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 18  Mimi nakuambia nipatieni wiki mbili wale watu nitawashika na nitawakamua vilivyo 
na nyinyi mnataka watu wenu  waajiriwe sawasawa , Mheshimiwa A mur mimi najua sana 
tafadhali nipe wiki mbili.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank y ou Hon.  Renson , yes Hon.  Ibrahim seems li ke 
today you have energy.  
  
 Hon.  Omondi:  Mr. Speaker Sir, what the Hon.  Member  for Port Reitz Ward has said 
is very important because today the Chairman is telling us t hat he wants to bring for us a  real 
thing by the time we go for  it that real thing will be gone and as we are speaki ng today the 
real thing is still  there . Mr. Speaker Sir so we do not want to wait when we will be told if you 
would have come at this particular time you would have got it for now it is already turned  it 
cannot be overturned and therefore with due respect the Chairman should go to the office  and 
find out what is happe ning because even me I saw it with my two eyes it is happening . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon.  Samba?  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Thank you Mr. Sp eaker . The statement requested by Hon.  Amur on the 
hiring of staff is of great magnitude and I would urge the Hon.  Member  in charge to act fast 
because I represent the people of Tudor and it happens that the department of Inspectorate is 
located within my Ward and I have never been given an opportunity even t o offer one person 
employment and people are being hired day and night...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Members  take note you know this House there is 
Hansard capturing Hon.  Members , there are procedures to  hire people it  is not like  you have 
been given a chance.  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  It is just an example.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : So please when you are talking Members  remember  
what you are saying because things are being captured here please  I think you  understand 
Hon.  Samba what I am saying .  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Yes I withdraw my statement but I only need  the equal distribution 
whenever there are job opportunities atleast we should have prior information even if it is 
about fair competition it should be done and people should be  hired as per the merits.  Thank 
you Hon.  Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank y ou Hon.  Samba.  Hon.  Aran ? 
 
 Hon.  Aran: Mheshi miwa Spika haitakuwa sawa kama Mheshimiwa Ibrahim , 
Mwenyekiti wa elimu atasimama  kama na ujasiri aongee kuhusu Mwenyekiti wa Leba 
mwenye amei tisha wiki mbili pekee wakati sisi tumengojea mwaka mzima hatujapokea 
bursary ... 
  
(Applause ) 
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 19  Mheshimiwa Spika imebaki wiki mbili tufanye birthday  mambo ya bursary  
hatujapata , kwa hivyo hiyo nguvu anaweka kwa Mheshimiwa m wenzake aweke hadi tupate 
bursary ... 
  
(Applause ) 
 
  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Bwire . 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 Hon.  Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Are you Hon.  Bwire?  
 
(The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri)  left the Chair) 
(The Deputy Speaker ( Hon.  Mwalimu ) in the C hair) 
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think we need to have some classes to be 
taken throu gh the procedures of this House ; Mr. Speaker as far as I am concerned is that 
whenever a Member  makes a prayer it is upon the Chair to make a decision .  
There was a prayer for two weeks and the re was a prayer from the Chair for two weeks  and 
there  was a prayer by that time the Deputy Speaker, who is now the Speaker of one week so 
kindly  and I have heard the Chair has already ruled one week . So let us go by that and end 
that debate , I am also a Member  of that  Committee ; Chair, let us bring  the statement  in one 
week failure to that we come again and seek for more time but the Speaker has already made 
a ruling on that.  Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Thank you Hon.  Bwire , Hon.  Thoya , Hon.  
Bomoa  get back to your seats . Chairman Committee of L abour we are giving  you one week  
to respond  on the said issue of Hon.  Murfad Amur , if there are any pending issues when you 
are responding you will  address the House  then yes Hon.  Ibrahi m respond on the bursary 
issue . 
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Once again Mr. Speaker Sir but before you give  direction on this issue 
first of all I would like the Hon.  Member  to be very clear and tell us which Ward he is 
representing because he has talked ab out that , that is number one…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Number two a wrong does not make a wrong or a wrong does not make a right or two 
wrongs do not make a right Mr. Speaker therefore if the Hon.  Member  purports that I did not 
have a right t o question the Labour Chairman…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Ibrahim respond on the bursary issue if 
you are not ready ju st ask for more time .  
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 20  Hon.  Omondi : Mr. Speaker I th ought the Speaker had already given a ruling at that 
particular time if I am not wrong, about the bursary and he  said that we are going to bring the 
report after one week.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you . Yes Hon.  Rosemary?  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Mukavi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think we are turning this debate into  a 
joke, we have been asking for the bursaries for quite a long time and I ask my Chairman who 
is very able to be able to answer that question  within not even a week , as soon as possible . 
The people down there are suffering people are asking for bursaries and we are never getting 
an answer so i nstead of diverting issues the Chairman Mr. Speaker I would like to ask him to 
bring that report and w e close that chapter once and for all. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Milka?  
 
 Hon.  (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity  I just want to inform 
my able Chairman  Ibrahim Omondi that you do not have to have a Ward to ask for bursaries ; 
we ar e all Hon.  Members  of this House and we have people who depend on us and we also 
represent people so whether elected or nominated we need bursaries .Thank you so much.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Thoya?  
 
 Hon.  Thoya:  Mr. Speaker with all due respe ct the time is now to say that all 
Members  are equal in this House ; there are no nominated MCAs , there are no elected we are 
all Hon.  Members  of this House and if this character trait is not stopped from now we are 
going to s ee what we are seeing in other Counties whereby nominated MCAs are not 
supposed to say anything in the House. Therefore with all due respect Mr. Speaker we want 
that Hon.  Member  to withdraw and apologize especially to the special MCAs who are here 
because in the near future they are g oing to be here to be seen and not to say anything related 
to the issue of bursary . If Hon.  Moses Aran was wrong to ask for bursary I am asking for and 
on behalf of Mikindani Ward and let me make this very clear that we need those bursaries , 
tena tunazihit aji ingekuwa ni sawa m ungeita kikao maalum kesho tukaja tukazungumza …. 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Thoya , under Standing Order 73 you 
are out of order ! Hon.  Members  I have already ruled on the issue of bursaries not unless we 
use Standing order 1 01. Hon. Ibrahim you have been mentioned please withdraw the 
statement for the House to proceed…  
 
(Applause ) 
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Thank you Mr.  Speaker Sir , before I withdraw … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just withdraw.  
 
November 15 , 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           94 
DISCLAI MER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 21  Hon.  Omondi : Before I apologize Mr. Spe aker Sir my statement was very clear I was 
just answering the Member  who said. .. 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Just withdraw the statement.  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : I did not talk about nominated Members , I have not mentioned I 
cannot apologize for something I have not done . I have  not mentioned anywhere about the 
nominated MCAs  where it is coming from I do not know ; what  I was talking about the Hon.  
Member  when he said the Ward that he represented so that so I was asking him what does he 
represent? I did not talk about the issue of  nominated MCAs where is it coming from?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Ibrahim as the Chair I have directed 
that under Standing Order 101 you have been mentioned so just withdraw the statement that 
the Hon.  Member  does not represent any Ward. 
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Okay I withdraw.  
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEM ENT BY CHAIRPERSON C OMMITTEE ON TRANSPOR T, INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND PUBLIC WORKS ON JOMVU MADAFUNI JITON I RABAI ROAD  
 
 Yes Hon.  Prisc hilla?  
 
 Hon.  (Mrs.) Mumba: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama tena kujibu swali hili 
la Jomvu Madafuni jitoni Rabai road . Barabara hii iko chini ya KENHA ambayo ni  serikali 
kuu iliyofanya ubomoaji ule na h ata juzi nafikiri watu waliona Naibu wa Rais ndiye aliyekuja 
kufungua hiyo barabara , kwa hi vyo h aituhusu sisi Kaunti  kwani haiko  chini ya wizara yet u. 
Ahsante.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon.  Members  there being no other business the House stands adjourned until the 20th 
November , 2018 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 4: 14p.m. 
 
 
 
 