August 31 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         95 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednes day, 31st August , 2016  
The House met at 2.3 0pm. 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats . Yes C lerk?  
PAPER  
       Yes Hon.  Kibwana?  
       Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank  you Hon.  Speaker ; as the Chair of the Health Committee 
Mr. Speaker today I would like to give this Motion on emergency of health services….  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon.  Kibwana  we are on Order number five ; 
layin g of Paper; a matter concerning M aweni heal th dispensary…  
(Interruption ) 
       Yes what is it Hon.  Dan?  
       Hon.  Onyango:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa , ningependa kujulisha Nyumba hili kuwa 
hakuna quorum… 
(Laughter ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): I am sure the regi ster will confirm first if the 
Members are roaming around ; what is th e status of the register , before  we ring the bell... 
(Sergeant -At-Arms hand ed over the County Assembly  attendance  register  to the Temporary 
Speaker  Hon.  Mwalimu)  
August 31 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         95 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 
        I can see there is quorum as per our register ; as I stated yesterday if there is a matter that 
needs voting  we will cons ider ringing the bell for quorum.  
       Hon.  Onyango:  Mr. S peaker this is a House of rules and procedures , and I have 
confirmed ……  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): I have ruled that in the register it clearly states 
that there  is quorum in this Hon.  House , yes Hon.  Kibwana do you have the paper … 
(Applause ) 
       Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker I am very happy to lay the Paper before 
this Hon.  House ; the Paper on emergency treatment ... 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): It is not emergency treatment Hon.  Kibwana  
we are in order number five ; Paper concernin g lack  of medicine at Maweni …. 
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Hon.  Speaker  according to the record of the House you gave me 
two weeks when this matter as raised in this Hon.  House  on the issue of M aweni and you granted 
me two weeks.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): The two weeks are over.  
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Not yet Hon.  Speaker.  It was last week.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Ok permission granted . Yes Clerk.  
MOTION  
       Hon.  Kibwana.  
       Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker once again , as the Chair of the Health 
Committee there was a rep ort before this Hon.  House on  the issue of emergency at the Coast 
General Provincial Hospital  which was raised by Hon.  Sheillah Mumba ; the issue of emergency 
at the Coast Provincial Hospital . 
August 31 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         95 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3 
        It is clear that the issue of the meaning of emergency mos t of us or most of the people do not 
know the meaning, but  Hon.  Speaker when we went to the ... 
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Move the Motion ; look for a seconder and then 
we will start then we will discuss the Motion, when  you start discussing  the Motion before yo u 
move.  
       Hon.  Kibwana  Swaleh : Hon.  Speaker,  I would like to move this Motion  on emergency 
treatment at the Coast General Hospital and I would like my friend and coll eague to second the 
Motion.  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Chirer i: Thank you Hon.  Speaker  I second the motion.  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon.  Kibwana , continue.  
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker  for your guidance. Hon.  Speaker as I had 
stated before the issue of emergency has a lot of theories and to go straight to the point ; Mr. 
Speaker  we found that emergency is something that must be determined….  
(Interruption ) 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon.  Kibwana a s a point of correction as the 
Motion states, it’s the adoption of this repo rt so read your report for the House to adopt , duly 
signed by all Members . 
       Mr. Sp eaker Sir,  this report is necessitated by the direction of the Speaker following a 
statement which was raised in the Assembly by Hon. Prischillah  Mumba on 24th July, 2016 
during plenary ses sion on the issue on Emergency treatment at Coast Provincial General 
Hospital.  
  
       Hon.  Speaker,  observations and findings ; 
August 31 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         95 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4 
        Mr. Speaker Sir,  the Committee thereafter embarked on establishing the true position on the 
ground.   
       Hon.  Speaker , on Monday, 15th August, 2016 the Committee visited Coast Provincial 
General Hospi tal and came up with the following: - 
       Hon.  Speaker , the Committee arrived at CPGH at 10.40am and were received by the 
following officers: - 
(i) Deputy Chief Administrator  –  Dr. Njomo  
(ii) Human Resource Manager  - Dr. Bebora  
(iii) Director of Nurs ing  - Elizabeth Kivuva  
       Hon.  Speaker Members were taken to Casualty u nit where em ergency case s are being 
handled ; Members observed that  at Casualty unit there is t riaging d esk where emergency cases 
are being identified . 
       Hon.  Speaker this was necessita ted by the fact that what everybody is calling emergency 
case could not be one , also many patients prefer to go to Casual ty unit because of short  queue 
compared to out -patient unit. 
       Members  also observed that at emergency/casual unit there  are emergency drugs to cater for 
emergency cases.  Casualty doctors are supposed to stabilize the patient condition while waiting 
for specialists to attend particular cases ; drugs which casualty patients are being asked to 
purchase from the pharmacy are not  for emergency cases but rather when the patient is out of 
danger.  
       Hon.  Speaker  at the Radiology Unit there is a big challenge in terms of staff ; there is only 
one Radiologist and a Radiographer only, while the hospital is fully equipped with x -ray 
machines.   
       This Unit al so makes an effort to identify urgent cases and fast track  them but also there is a 
risk in it  since there is in adequate staff at different level s then there is a possibility of affecting 
service delivery.  
       Most patients avoid following rightful procedures and seek  for shortcuts by claiming that 
their cases are  of an  emergenc y nature .  
August 31 , 2016                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         95 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 
        Members also note d that the re is a massive improvement in service delivery at CPGH as 
compared to some years back.  
       Hon.  Speaker my Committee recommended the following;  
       The County government should employ more staff where necessary to further improve 
service delivery . 
       Hon. Speaker the last conclusion  is for t he County Assembly to consider and adopt this 
report.  
Thank you , that is the report Hon.  Speaker and I request  this Hon.  House to adopt this report.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Having no other considerations I agree with 
you that you are satisfied with the reports and I propose the question that this House adopts this 
report o n emergency treatment from the Health Committee at Coast General Hospital.  
(Question put and agreed  to) 
       The House stands adjourned till tomorrow at 2.30  pm. 
The House rose at 2.45pm.  
 