October 29, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            96 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes o nly. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 29th October , 2019  
The House met at 2:36 p.m.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seats.  Yes Cl erk? 
 
STATEMENTS  
RESPONSE TO STATEMEN T BY CHAIRPERSON COM MITTEE ON TRANSPORT , INFR ASTRUCTURE AND 
PUBLIC WORKS HON . PRISCHILLAH  MUMBA ON THE STATUS OF THE STREET LIGHTS IN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes Chairperson Committee on Transport, Infrastru cture and Public Works or any 
Member from that Committee to respond on the Status of the street lights in the County?  
 
(Silenc e) 
(Hon. Nyiro rose) 
 
Yes Hon. Nyiro I understand that you are a Member of Transport Committee. Are you a 
Member of Transport Com mittee?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Yes Chair I am a Member of that Committee?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Then any response on concerning the said issue 
on street lights?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Mr. Speaker I have a response here on the status of str eet lighting in the 
County now… is from the Chief Officer Transport, Infrastructure and Public  Works County 
government of Mombasa and it was directed to the Clerk of the Assembly Mr. Salim Juma. So if 
you allow me…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ):  Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 

October 29, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            96 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes o nly. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  Hon. Mwamwiri : (Off mic rophone ). 
 
 Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Hon. Speaker . I remember the last time I read a communication 
I was the Chair of the day and the communication was straight forward; that whenever there is a 
response the copies should be made available to all Members so we should not be going again st 
the directives or the  communication from the Speaker . Let the Hon. Member and the Committee 
adhere to the communication you gave them the other day, thank you . 
 
(Consultations)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Chief Whip?  
 
The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti . Nimeweza kuanga lia 
Mheshimiwa Nyiro ambaye ni Mwanakamati katika Kamati ya Idara ya Uchukuzi na Masuala ya 
Usafiri katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa lakini ni dhahiri shahiri hata kama yeye kabla asome 
majibu hayo twaomba i wekwe katika kumbukumbu ya Bu nge hili kama wao walikaa kama 
Wanakamati kwanza kujadili  majibu  hayo kabla kuweza kuingia katika Bunge hili. Kwa hivyo 
tungependa aweze kutuweka wazi kama walikaa katika Kamati hiyo kuweza kujadili majibu  
hayo ili iweze ku ingia rasmi katika Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ili kufuata she ria na 
taratibu za Bunge. Ahsante.  
 
(Consultations)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro : Mr. Speaker as I can see most of the Members are anticipatin g that this 
maybe a response but it is good for them to be calm so that I can inform them whatever the 
content of this letter is. Mr. Speaker what I have in my hand is a document s howing the number 
of times our Committee has written to the Department…  
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
Hon. Bwire:  Mr. Speaker I have no problem with what the Hon. Member is going to read 
but I am just afraid Hon. Speaker that we are opening another issue that you or your office gave 
the directive over.  
 
(Applause)  
 
Mr. Speaker if we will have this response read without Members having the copies then 
let us not again demand for more copies from any oth er Member who will be bringing the 
response. So I just pray Mr. Speaker that you give dir ectives over such issue because it was a 
communication from the office of the Speaker and we have to adhere to it. Thank you.  
October 29, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            96 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes o nly. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Bwire but as the Hon. Member 
has said that it is not a response as such.  It is a letter  that the Committee has written to the 
Department concern ed. Yes Hon. Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think we need to appreciate with your good heart 
and leniency but wherever that Hon. Chair passes so me guidelines we need to adhere , it is not 
just a response but anything that he is reading we are supposed to follow it up through a written 
copy ; seated here  we are not certain of whatever he is reading is the right information and we are 
not in a hurry because this thing can be done even tomor row. If at all you are serious about t he 
guidelines that you did over  Mr. Speaker we are not in a hurry but let the House rules and 
regulations be followed. Thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Yes Hon. Nyiro proceed . Hon. Members Hon. 
Nyiro has said that he does not have the response so when he brings the response we will order 
the Committee concern ed or the person concern ed to adhere to the Chair’s request that each and 
every response must be circu lated to each and every Member . So what he has is not a response 
but he is showing the House how the Committee has trie d to request for that statement . Yes 
proceed Hon. Nyiro?  
 
Hon. Nyiro:  Thank you for your indulgenc e Chair . Mr. Speaker I also beg the Members 
to be patient because whatever I  am reading I am sure it  is pleasant to them. Mr. Speaker this 
letter has been written from our Clerk  of the Committee and it has also been confirmed by our 
Senior Clerk; the County Assembly Clerk tha t indeed a number of letters ha ve been written from 
the man y requests that have been coming to this House and indeed this request have been sent to 
the relevant Department but up to today the Department of Transport, Infrastructure has never 
responded to any of these requests that this House has been requesting. So Mr. Speaker up to 
today we cannot give responses on the status o f the street light because the Department has not 
responded and this one is a letter confirming that i ndeed letters were sent to the Department from 
the Clerks for them to respond but they have not responded. Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Nyiro . Yes Hon. Faith?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika . Bwana Spika nakumbuka hili suala mimi 
ndio nililet a katika hili Bunge na ilikuwa mwezi w a saba na katika kikao chenye tulikaa hivi 
majuzi ulitoa directive  ukasema umewapatia muda wa wiki mbili ambapo hizo wiki mbili 
zilikuwa ziishe wakati kipindi kile tukienda katika michezo ya CASA . Mheshimiwa Spika 
nasikitika saa hii kukosa majibu ya swali langu , kama kweli wanajua walifanya kazi ya uhakika 
kwa sababu mimi niliuliza kujua ni kwa nini wenye walipewa kandarasi walileta vifaa ambavyo 
ni ghushi; taa zawaka siku mbil i na zina zima Mheshimiwa Spika ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalim u): So Hon. Faith that was what was written on your 
statement?  
 
Hon. Mwende : Kabisa Bwana Spika hivyo ndivyo nilivyoandika.  
October 29, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            96 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes o nly. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu ): So you will ... 
 
(Interruption)  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Sikuongea tu kwa mdomo niliandika Bwa na Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Nyiro you will have to go back to the 
Hansard and the Clerk’s office to get the statement from Hon. Faith concerning her issues so th at 
you respond back to this Hon ourable  House. Yes Hon. Faith?  
 
Hon. Mwende:  Mheshimiwa Spika nikinukuu vizuri hili suala tumekuwa tukiregelea 
muda kwa muda headline  ilikuwa inasoma , status  of street light s lakini mimi nilisema sub 
standard  hata kile kikao ambacho tulikaa nilisema vitu ambavyo vilikuwa haviwezi dumu na 
nilisisitiza na ndipo Spika akapeana directive.  Nakuomba kwa himaya ya Kiti chako Bwana 
Spika kwa sababu naona hili suala kama limeshindikana kwa  Idara  naomba uweze kutoa 
directive  ya mwisho Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu hii h oja yatuumiza sana kule mashin ani 
kwa kurekebisha mataa sisi wenyewe. Ahsante sana Bwana Spika.  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Thank you. Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika taarifa tulio  
nayo kutoka kwa Mheshimiwa Nyiro binafsi sikuw eza kuelewa jukumu alilopewa kama Kamati 
kwamba walishindwa na kutekeleza kazi ile wamekuja kushtakia Bunge hili kwa hatua zaidi ama 
amekuja mlilia nani ka tika Jumba hili wakati yeye ni Mwanakamati mwakilishi aliyetumwa kwa 
minajili ya  kutafuta suluhu ya ma tatizo yanayokumba wananchi na yeye anakuja kulia katika 
Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naomba kulifahamu hili kutoka 
kwa Mheshimiwa Nyiro. Anamlilia nani?  
 
The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Members I now request the Committee 
concerned to respond back to this Hono urable House on this matter in a week’s time and make 
sure as a Committee you sit and deliberate on that issue so that when you bring back to this 
Hono urable Ho use you will be having a respon se that all the Comm ittee Members wi ll know 
what transpired in the Committee level so that you read on the same page. So I am giving you 
one more week for you t o make a proper follow up as a Committee and as I said earlier go back 
to the records either the Clerk’s office or the Hansard records and see whatever that the Hon. 
Member raised so that when you bring back a response it aligns with what she had requested. 
Yes Hon. Mohamed Mohamed?  
 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri 
pengine watu h awafahamikiani juu ya hili suala. Hili suala ni kuwa mwenye alileta swali hili 
anasema kuwa hizi ni sub-standard . Ni wazi  Mheshim iwa Spika Kenya haitengenezi  street lights  
na ni lazima mataa haya yamekuja kutoka nje, ku confirm  jambo hili ni kuleta confirmation  
kuon yesha kuwa Kenya Bureau of Standard s walipitisha hizi taa na zinafaa  kuingia kwa soko . 
Walete waje wa…  
 
(Interruption)  
October 29, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            96 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes o nly. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Hon. Hatimy I think I have already ruled on this 
issue so let us wait the  Hon. Committee to at least bring back the said report and I said that the 
Committee should go to the Clerk’s office or the Hansard records and see if when she raised the 
issue she actually stated that the bulbs are sub -standard and if not then we will res pond on what 
she requested on that same day. Yes Clerk?  
 
BILLS  
 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY FINANCE BILL, 2019  
FIRST READING  
 
Yes Clerk , first reading?  
 
(The Bill was read ) 
 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members the House stands adjourn ed until Wednesday 30th October, 2019 at 10: 00 
a.m. 
 
The House rose at 2:54 p.m. 
 