September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday, 1st September, 2016  
The House met at 2.3 8pm. 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Members, have your seats. 
Yes C lerk. 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       Hon.  Members the House ha s received the Annual Development Plan 2017/2018 
pursuant to Standing Order Number 126 (3) and I will Commit the Development Plan to the 
Finance and Budget Committee to work on it and before we proceed I will also like to take 
this opportunity  for the Leader of the Majority to communicate  to the House .  
       Leader of Majority ( Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante Bwana Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii 
kujulisha Bunge letu tukufu ya kwamba sasa ni wakati wa show yetu ya Mombasa na kama 
tunavyojua leo ndio inafunguliwa rasmi na Rais na ikifikia siku ya Jumamosi mgeni mashauri 
kwa ile show  itakuwa ni Gavana wetu wa Mombasa Ali Hassan Joho . 
       Kwa hiyo ningeomba waheshimiwa wote ikiwezekana tuwe kwa wingi kwa hiyo siku ya 
Jumamosi tuwe na Gavana Ali Hassan Joho katika sherehe hiyo ya Show . Ahsante sana 
Bwana Spika.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Leader of Majority and that's the 
Communication from the office of the Leader of Majority and  we hope the Hon.  Members 
will be present to welcome His Excellency the Governor on his day because Saturday is the 
Governors' day , so Hon.  Members please honor the invitation from the Leader of Majority . 
Yes Clerk .    
PAPER  
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 
        Hon.  Amir Thoya or any o ther Member from Public Work s and Transport Committee, 
any M ember? Yes Hon.  Kibwana are you a Member?  
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Yes Mr. Speaker S ir am a Member of the Committee. Thank 
you Mr. Speaker mine is just to rely a message that the Chair is not around and the report is 
not ready so I just  want through your Chair to allow us more time so that we compile this 
report and to bring it in this House.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Mary . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Mr. Spe aker Sir the Hon.  Member should not tell us the 
report is not ready we would like to know why the report is not ready?  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Kibwana .  
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : Hon.  Speaker am very happy with the question that my 
colle ague has ask ed; the reason is that the County Executive was not around and you know 
this report is very crucial so we thought it is wise we wait for him because he will be around 
on Thursday so as to make it fair in this committee a nd the Chai r we just pray that M embers 
to be patient that you give us more time with the compilation of this report. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. S peaker it is v ery sad that the M ember of the 
Executive is not around ; he doesn't travel with his job there are some few people who do the 
job, when we enquire about a report it is not him who does that report there  are juniors who 
can give the report on his behalf but it means if he is going to be dead God forbid it means we 
will not get the report and this matter is very crucial and it is not the first time we are getting 
this report regarding this department. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mw alimu) : Yes Hon.  Saad . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you Mr. Speaker ; for the purpose of clearing the air we as Members 
of this Committee as stated that our stand our member who has presented the position of the 
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 
 Committee it is important and crucial that this H ouse accept our plea just as  a plea requested 
by many C ommittees in this House. Thank you.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you , from what Hon.  Members ... 
from their concern s is that the issue before the House of requesting for more time has 
increased in this House so let it be the last time committees or M embers o f Committees to 
come to this House because I am sure this is a business which was agreed during the House 
Business Committee so if you have got anything better writ e it during th e House Business 
Committee and the T able Clerk will communicate to such C ommittees and rem ember we 
shall discipline some C ommittees through my Chair ... 
(Applause ) 
       So Committees better wake up and be informed , I mean what I said. Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
       I remember from the C ommittee on Administrati on and Security or Chairman or C lerk 
communicate to this C ommittee and we will trap this C ommittee they will not travel to any 
visit if they will be delaying or sleeping in the business of this House, th is is a Honorable  
House I shall coordinate with the Chairman of Liaison committee and the Leader of  Majority 
please take note the Leader of Minority C ommittee must work , you are responsible Hon.  
Members let us pull up our socks Hon.  Members. Yes Clerk . 
PAP ER 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Committee on Labour .  
       Hon. Ogalo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika hii kitu ilikuwa nataka 
kuleta ... 
(Laughter ) 
       Lakini kusema kweli sijaambiwa kuwa kuna ripoti natakikana nilete ...  
(Laughter ) 
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 
        Pamoja na  Kamati ya Fedha  na sijajua hata kama Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha  Chair 
anajua hajaniambia naona Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Fedha anajua hilo...  
(Applause ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Chair of Finance any input . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika naona Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Leba  
hata sijui anaongea nini?  
(Laughter ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : The issue was to be table d by the L abour 
and Social Welfare Committee and Committee on Financ e and B udget so Clerk of the 
Assembly communicate ; let him communicate to th ese C ommittees and if there's any issue I  
said in this House the Labour C ommittee you are also suppose d to sit together to bring this 
report so Hon.  Members...yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri naona hata Table Clerk wanakosea 
manake wao ndio wanafaa watuambie kuna jambo hili na hili maadamu chochote 
kimeandikwa kuwa leo kinaingia kwa Bunge ...kwa hiyo lazima Table Clerks wawajibike 
kufanya kazi ya o.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think the information the Table Clerks are 
informed so the Table C lerks whenever there's a business the Clerk to communicate to the 
concern ed Committees. Yes Clerk . 
PAPER  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) :Yes Hon.  Kizito Opeya .  
       Hon. Opeya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I had a bit of problems we did not get more 
information on the matter so we request for more time to go for a site visit and bring the 
report back in the House in one week time .  
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 
        The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Kibwana , the Chairman of 
Implementation has stated the reason why they lack the paper is not with us today so he has 
requested for one week ; Clerk make sure that the report will be in this Hon.  House next wee k 
Wednesd ay and the previous C ommittees communicate to them that we will give  them a 
week time for them to present their reports in this Hon.  House . Yes Clerk . 
PAPER  
       Hon.  Wangudi . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Thank y ou Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker am working on  the report and we 
are waiting for some information from the Executive and we have not complet ed the site visit 
and once the C ommittee has completed the site visit we will bring the report before the 
House.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So y ou are saying in a week time or two 
weeks time . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  As per the situation I request for two weeks Mr. Speaker . 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay, Clerk .  
PAPER  
       Hon.  Ibrahim Kondo  
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika kupitia kwa 
Kiti chako nafikiri tuliweza kukaa katika mkutano na tukakubaliana tutaleta wiki ijayo kwa 
sababu zisizoweza kuepukika kupitia kwa waziri mhusika na jana tulikuwa pamoja 
tukaahidia kuwa Jumanne tutakuwa na mkutan o na yeye na ripoti hiyo tutaileta B ungeni siku 
ya Alhamisi. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
(Applause ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6 
        Yes Hon.  Ogalo . 
       Hon. Ogalo:  Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa na taarifa  na nikapeana  Ummi ai chapishe  na 
mpaka sasa haijarudishwa hapa kwa nini?  
(Laughter ) 
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : When you can bring it back?  
       Hon. Ogalo:  Thursday .  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : So Thursday then the Table C lerk wil l track 
that issue and in the next House  Business C ommittee we will allocate time for that report. 
Yes Cler k. 
STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon.  Prischillah Mumba . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Prischillah  Mumba : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika ; nimesimama hapa kutaka 
kutoa taarifa k uhusu majukumu ya Kiranja  mdogo wa Bunge .  
       Kama mnavyojua hapa kuna viranja wawili ; kuna Kiranja  mkubwa na Kiranja  mdogo na 
mimi nikiwa Naibu  wa Kiranja  wa Bunge kuna majukumu mengi ambayo yanahitajika 
kuyafanya kwa niaba ya Bunge hili na kwa niaba ya kazi ambazo zinatakikana zifanywe 
lakini ninajua nina vikwazo vingi kwa sababu sijaelewa majukumu hasa kamili mpaka dakika 
hii kama Bunge kuu linavyofanya niweze kuiga ile mifano ili nisipate vikwazo . 
       Ndiposa nikaona kuwa kwa sababu sina mahali p a kufanyia ile kazi ama majukumu wala 
kuiga kuwa niweze kujua majukumu yangu nikawa nimeomba fursa hii Mheshimiwa Spika 
uweze kunielewa kilio changu nikaweze kusoma haya majukumu hata kama ni Bunge kuu la 
kitaifa ili niweze kujua kwa sababu tunajua Bunge  kuu na Bunge  la Kaunti haya ni mabunge 
sawa na ninajua kule majukumu yamebobea kisawasawa kwa sababu ninaona kule ni 
mabunge ya kitambo ambayo yanajua majukumu kikamilifu hapa sasa nikiangalia jukumu 
langu ni  kutolewa tu nje niite Waheshimiwa  waje waingie n dani nikishatia Waheshimiwa 
ndani kazi yangu imeisha . 
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 
        Sasa nashindwa hayo ndio majukumu pekee yake na ninataka niweze kuyajua kikamilifu 
niende Bunge la Nairobi Mheshimiwa Spika naomba unilinde kwa sab abu kuna sauti ambazo 
sizielewi.  
       Ninakuo mba Mheshimiwa Spika maana ndio ninajua wewe ni mtu mwenye busara toka 
tumeanza naona umetaka kuona watu waweze kuwajibika na waweze kufanya majukumu yao 
inavyotakikana . 
       Mimi ni mmoja niko katika hicho kilio uweze kuniruhusu niweze kusoma majukumu 
yangu kisawa katika Bunge la Kitaifa nije niwe nikiwa nimebeba mikoba ya kisawa sawa na 
mimi niweze kuadhibu ambao watakuwa majukumu yao watakuwa hawayatimizi wakati 
unaofaa . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri nimesema na nafikiri nimeelew eka vizuri haya ni m ajukumu 
ya N aibu wa Kiranja  wa Bunge hapa saa hizi mtu akitaka kunitafuta mimi ajue atanitafuta 
kona gani? Ajue atanipata wapi? kwa sababu niko juu ya hewa natembea juu ya hewa hapo 
ofisini . 
       Kwa hiyo naomba Mheshimiwa Spika unipe ju kumu hil o nikawez e kufanya kazi hii ili 
nilete ripoti yangu kamili vizuri na niweze kukaa nikiwa na kiranja wa Bunge niweze 
kumuambia kiranja wa Bunge  majukumu yako ni haya na mimi haya ni yangu utaniwachia na 
ni lazima niyafanye. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       The Tempo rary Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Prischillah you will sit 
with the Speakers panel committee ...  
(Applause and Laughter ) 
       As Speaker Panel C ommittee we will guide you ... 
(Laughter ) 
       The C ommittee will guide you for you to know your ma ndate and we will see if need for 
you to go and benchmark but first the Speakers P anel will show you how to perform your 
duties so let 's sit with the C ommittee. Yes Clerk . 
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 
 STATEMENT  
       Yes Hon.  Zainab Said . 
       Hon. (Mrs.) Zainab Said:  Ahsante Bwana  Spika kwa kunipatia hii nafasi mimi nilileta 
Mswada  na hakuna utekelezaji  uliofany wa; ni kweli pale Mama N gina ukitaka nafasi ni 
lazima uombe lakini hatujajulishwa tunaweza pata ile nafasi kivipi? A hsante.  
(Applause ) 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  The  Clerk to track the M otion and give back 
the report in two weeks time. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       The L eader of Majority Hon.  Mwidani . 
       The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker I think this Motion was read on 
23rd August, 2016 and now I don't know how it appeared here back as a M otion ; maybe the 
only stage which was remaining was just to put a question so that we adopt that report , 
actually the Clerk has a record here as when the M otion was read here and it was discussed . 
       So Mr. Sp eaker I think to alert the House is now an issue of just adopting the report. 
Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
       The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes the Leader of Majority I have 
instructed the Clerk, and will communic ate to your office of the said Motion  that had some 
issues that were to be rectified putting in to consideration the mover of the report . 
       There were no  minutes accompanying the report  and the issues that were raised in the 
Assembly of the report the financial years the report was  not showing which financial year 
have done the said projects . 
       Let them correct this  and also the mover has requested that he needed to go back to the 
Kenya Port Authority so I will give you as the Leader of M ajority three weeks time. Yes 
Clerk . 
September 1, 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         96 
DISCLAIMER:  The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 
 ADJ OURNMENT  
       Hon.  Members the House stand adjourned until 6th of September, 2016 Tuesday at 
2.30pm.  
The House rose at  3.09pm. 
 