November 21, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           97 
  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informat ion 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday, 2 1st November,  2018  
The House met at 2:37p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Members  we may be seated. Yes C lerk?  
 
PAPER  
REPORT OF THE AUDITO R GENERAL ON THE FIN ANCIAL STATEMENTS OF  MOMBASA COUNTY ELIMU 
FUND FOR THE YEAR END ED 30th JUNE, 2017  
 
 Yes Hon.  Hamisi M usa Mwidani please lay down the paper.  
 
 Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this 
opportunity to lay a paper , report of the Auditor G eneral on the financial statements of Mombasa 
County Elimu Fund for the year ended  30th June, 2017 . 
  
(Paper laid ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Clerk?  
 
THE REPORT OF THE AU DITOR GENERAL ON THE  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  OF MOMBASA COUNTY 
EXECUTIVE FOR THE YE AR ENDED 30th JUNE, 2017  
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi M usa Mwidani again?  
 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Mr. Speake r let me also lay another paper , the 
report of the Auditor G eneral on the f inancial statements of Mombasa C ounty Executive for the 
year ended 30th June, 2017.  Thank y ou sir. 
 
(Paper laid ) 
 

November 21, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           97 
  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informat ion 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank  you Hon.  Hamisi M usa Mwidani.  Hon.  Members  i 
commit this report to the Public A ccounts and I nvestments Committee . Yes C lerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
STALLING OF MWACHE DAM PROJECT  
 
 Yes Hon.  Renson Thoya?  
 
 Hon.  Thoya : Mr. Speaker Sir I want to seek a statement, stalling  of Mwache dam project 
from  the Chairperson Committee on Water, Sanitation and Natural Resources : 
 
 1. Whether  he is aware that the County Assembly o f Kwale has passed a resolution 
distancing itself from the planning/rolling out of the Mwache dam project that was b eing 
financed by the World Bank;  
 
 2. Whether  he is aware that the County Assembly of Kwale subsequent ly put a public 
notice in the N ation newspaper on 20th November , 2018 notifying the public that it will not 
participate in any plans /project relating to Mwache dam;  
 
 3. Whether  he is aware that this resolution has negative impact on the residents of 
Mombasa, considering  that the dam wa s meant to curb water shortages; and,   
 
 4. Whether  the County g overnment of Mombasa have any plans or measures to ensure 
the project kicks off.  Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Renson Thoya, can you please explain to 
us how  is this statement going to help the County of Mombasa , the one that you are asking?  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker you are aware that ther e is water shortage in  Mombasa C ounty 
and it was the view of the national g overnment that the County A ssembly of Mombasa to do a 
project at Mwache dam so that we can help the residents of Mombasa at large . It was all rosy 
until we learned from the lo cal dailies yesterday that the C ounty Assembly of Kwale has 
resolved to distance itself from the project and as you are aware Mwache dam is in Kwale and if 
at all they are not going to participate that mean s the project will not take off , so Mwache Dam 
projec t is of great necessity to the C ounty government of Mombasa and i. ..that this was a 
resolution of the Kwale  County Assembly . We need also to come up with a resolutio n that will 
bring on board the County A ssembly of Kwale to see that the project does not stop . Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Thoya, I can see there is a new Member  in 
the House, yes  Hon.  Mwamwiri ? 
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Thank y ou Mr. Speaker. I think  the issue does not concern us 
because we passed a resolution asking our C ounty government to invest in water desalination 
and the issue was passed here and the tendering process has already started so in the near  future  
we shall be depending on water from our C ounty and not Kwale C ounty , it will be an issue to 
Kwal e County but not us Mr. Speake r. Thank you.  
November 21, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           97 
  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informat ion 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Mwamwiri . Yes Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy?  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa S pika,  acha nimpongeze aliyeleta hii 
taarifa , ni ya muhim u kwa Mombasa na ni lazima liti liwe mkazo sana kwa sababu sisi 
tunavyojua Gavana  wetu alitia sahihi na shirika la World B ank kufanya jambo hili lakini sasa 
tunaona K aunti ya Kwale inaleta siasa ambazo sidhani zitasaidia jambo lolote ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Hatimy please tell us in details so that we can know 
because the G overnor has signed documents regarding Mwache dam or it is regarding the 
desalination plant ? Those are two different  things.  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  About  one year back in France  the Go vernor  signed an  
agreement na World Ba nk and he was accompanied by the CEC Water...  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Regarding the Mwache Dam?  
 
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mwache dam,  kuwa wataleta maji Mombasa kwa hivyo 
tunaona kumebadilika mambo kwa hivyo ni jambo ambalo lazima tuliti lie umuhimu wa kuweza 
kulijua ili tup ate kujua sisi watu wa Mombasa . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank y ou Hon.  Hatimy. The Chair on W ater, Sanitation 
and N atural resources i think is not around, any  other Member , the Vice Chair? Yes  Mwalimu 
Mgwisho?  So Hon.  Mwalimu i think you have heard the statement from the Members  what they 
want to know about this issue , the other things which they have raised is not even on this paper 
you can get them from the Hansard and please if you can get the response ... is one week ok ay or 
you need ...? Yes Hon.  Bwire?  Yes?  
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Chair.  Mr. Speaker as a represe ntative of Junda I am not 
aware and it has never co me to my attention whether the G overnor signed anything to do with 
the so called Mwache dam project and i find it irrelevant to discuss something that i have never 
heard  or  have never seen . As a representative of the people the Kwale County Assembly did 
what they did because it was within their manda te because how and whether the G overnor signed 
it so that we will be discussing something that we have information on.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Sp eaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Bwire, are  you a Member  of that 
Committee?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  No I am not.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : You are not , ok so i think i said here very clearly to the Hon.  
Mwalimu Mgwisho that there are things which have been mentioned which are not on this paper 
so you should get the Hansard and  come back with the response . So i think those are some of the 
things that Hon.  Mwalimu you w ill come and tell us from your C ommittee.  Yes Hon.  Hatimy?  
 
November 21, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           97 
  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informat ion 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4  Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I have infor mation that nilikuwa nataka kumw ambia 
Mheshimiwa Bwire kuwa G avana alipokuwa wame tia sahihi  ile alikuwa hajaingia katika hii 
Nyumba kwa hivyo G avana ali tia sahihi kabla ya uchaguzi wa 2017 , alikuwa U faransa na akatia 
sahihi mkatab a, Kamati ilete hiyo ripoti pia . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon.  Mwidani i think you are the best person to tell us 
about this.  
 
 Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): I think Mr. Speaker I stand with your direction 
because according to the report whi ch will be brought here by the C ommittee it might mention 
all the items that have been indicated here especially the ones that have been said by Hon. 
Hatimy ; that document was signed almost three years back so i think with the Committee…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : It was one year now , it is three years . 
  
 Leader of Majority  (Hon.  Mwidani ): Back. 
  
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ooh three years back,  so it was the last regime?   
 
 Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Yes so I think as you have said with the 
Committee they will come with a very good report.  Thank you Mr.  Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : I think Hon.  Mwalimu you will get the questions from the 
Hansard if you  do not get them here from the O rder paper, the questions which the Hon.  Bwire 
has asked then you can give us the details, so  how long do you need?  One week is ok ay or you 
need two weeks?  
 
 Hon.  Mwalimu Mgwisho:  I need two weeks Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
(Laughter ) 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Two weeks or one month?  
 
 Hon.  Mwalimu Mgwisho:  Two weeks is enough Mr. Sp eaker . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Are you sure ?  
 
 Hon.  Mwalimu Mgwisho:  I am sure.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Ok, Hon.  Members  I think two weeks is enough for the 
Members  of Committee on W ater, Sanitation and N atural resources ; i can see even Hon.  Ramla 
she is here and you are in the same C ommittee as well . 
  
(Hon.  (Ms.) Ramla  Said nodded ) 
November 21, 2018                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           97 
  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for informat ion 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5  The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  So please take note of the things Hon.  Members  want to 
know . Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members  this H ouse stands adjourned until Thursday 22nd November at 2: 30p.m.  
2018.  
 
The House rose at 2: 51p.m. 
 
 
 
  