October 30, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Wednesday, 30th October , 2019  
The House met at 10:05 a.m 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members you may be seated.  Yes, Clerk?  
 
PETITIONS  
PETITION FROM EAST ACTION BUS INESS COMMUNITY MOVE MENT ON THE STANDARD  GAUGE 
RAILWAY (SGR) MONOPOLY  
 
Hon. Members, Pursuant to Standing Order 195 , I have rece ived a petition from E ast 
Action Business  Community Movement on t he Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) . Hon. Members, 
Pursuant to Standin g Order 202, I now commit this Petition to the Committee on Transport , 
Infrastructure and Public Works for consideration. The C ommittee shal l within sixty  days 
respond to the Petitioner , by a way of a Report and table the same before the floor of the County 
Assembly  and also  Hon. Members just to remind you the other Petitions that were committed to 
this Hon ourable  House, make sure Commi ttees the House receives the Reports on the same . 
Thank you . Yes, Clerk?  
 
PETITION FROM JUA KALI MOMBAS A ASSOCIATION ON JUS TICE AND COMPENS ATION FOR LOSS OF 
BUSINESS AND PROPERT IES 
 
Hon. Member s, pursuant to Standing Order 195 we have a petition from Jua Kali 
Mombasa Asso ciation , on Justice and Compensation for loss of business es and properties . Hon. 
Members, pursuant to our own Standing Order 202, I now commit this Petition to the Committee 
on Trade, Tourism and Investment committee,  Committee on Justice and Legal Af fairs and 
Committee on Transport, Infrastructure  and Public Work and Committee  on Labour.  The 
Committee s named shall within sixty days  respond to the Petitioner by a way of a Report and 
table the same before the floor of the County Assembly . So I will want  the Chairs of these 
Committee s mentioned to work as join t Committees and make sure the Petitioners get the 
response in time . Yes, Clerk?  

October 30, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 PAPER  
QUARTERLY REPORTS AND FINANCIA L STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL PERIOD END ED SEPTEMBER  
30th, 2019 . 
 
Yes, the Leader of Majority  party?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speake r for giving me this 
chance to lay Paper on Quarterly Reports and Financial Statement for the Financial Period ended 
September 30th, 2019 . Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
(Paper laid) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Members, the Q uarterly Reports and 
Financial Statement s tabled by the Leader of Majority for the year ended September 30th, 2019 
stands committed  to the Committee on Finance,  Budget and Appropri ations  for consideration.  
Yes, Clerk?  Yes Hon. Chief Whip?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa  Mwenyekiti ningependa kupitia Kiti chako 
na usaidizi wa Makarani , kulingana na kipengele cha 166 kuhusiana na quarterly reports , 
haijaweka wazi endapo kuna sheria rasmi ya kwamba any quarterly report , inapelekwa katika 
Kamati lakini vile vile baada ya Kamati , Ripoti yao inastahili kuja katika Bunge hi li kwa mda  
gani? Sasa ningependa kupitia Kiti chako na usaidizi wa  Makarani wa Bunge  waweze kutueleza 
vizuri , maana nikis oma sheria ya County  Government Act Section 166 imeelezea tu executive  
kuweza kuleta Ripoti katika Nyumba hi i, lakini haikuzungumzia kwamba Ripoti hii inakuwa 
committed through the Committee  na vile vile haikutoa mda w a kuripotiwa endapo Kamati  
wataiongelea,  itaing ia ndani ya Nyumba hii kwa mda gani , ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Chief Whip . The Report as it has 
been tabled by Leader of Majority is now within the presence of  Assembly and Hon. Members 
the Report is with you , it is just that it i s taken to the Committee on Finance , but Hon. Members 
also are at liberty to peruse and the Committee will table a Report on the same on what the  have 
peruse d and the Hon. Members will discuss , but for further clarification we  will clarify further in 
the afternoon si tting as to when the Report is go ing to be discussed in this Hon ourable  House . 
Yes, Clerk?  
 
STATEMENT  
DEMOLITION AT TUDOR WARD , BUXTON AREA  
 
Yes Hon. Tobias  Samba?  
 
Hon. Samba:  Yes, thank you Mr. Speaker . I am i nquiring on a Statement that  I had 
requested  last week ; it was done on my behalf by  Hon. Bwire about the  demolition  at the Tudor 
Ward Buxton  area.  I did some follow up and right now Hon. Speaker it  is heading nowhere a nd 
no one seems to be responsible  because when I followed up with the Cha ir of Transport she told 
me that it  was supposed ly directed to the Department of Labour and it was an urgent issue until 
today it has  not been addressed . 
October 30, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 So Hon. Speaker I was requestin g if you can  give further instructions that will be more 
convincing and more  favourable to my Tudor Ward people . Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Tobias Samba for the reminder ; 
as per our vote book the Report was supposed to be tabled in this Hon ourable  House by 16th 
October , which means as we were in recess it was supposed to come this week  but unfortunately , 
the House Business  Committee have not allotted time as to when it is to come , so after 
consultations  we will  wait for the House Business Committee to allot it by next week Tuesday , 
they will bring the report.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Thank you Hon. Speaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes, Chief Whip?  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Spika k wa sababu mimi ni Mwanachama  
wa Kamati ya House Business na jambo hili nimelipata kupitia wiki hii baada ya House Business  
na ningependa uongozi wako kupitia Kiti chako , endapo utanipatia ruhusa hii ili niiseme katika 
Bunge hili siku ya leo mchana . Mhesh imiwa Spika, kwa sababu ni jambo ambalo linaumiza 
wananchi wetu na Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, n i kuhusiana na maswala 
ya kitengo cha I nspectorate . Saa hizi imefikia wakati wakubwa katika Inspectorate wanaandika 
watu ambao sio wafanyi  kazi wa Kaunti kati ka vizuizi , imefikia waka ti hivi sasa katika wakubwa 
wa Inspectorate ...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Chief Whip . 
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Yes?  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is as if you are introducing a nother issue and 
yet you are a Member  of the  House Business  Committee .  
 
The Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Ningependa ruhusa yako endapo nitai andika  siku ya leo 
mchana iweze kuja katika Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ruhusa yako . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalim u): Hon. Chief Whip as much as the procedures of 
this House are concern ed, you will wait for the House Business  to allot the day , as to when you 
are going to discuss the issue that you have raised , in as much as there is a misuse and abuse of 
office s as you h ave said , but just draft the Statement and take it to the Clerk and the House 
Business Committee will decide as to when it is going to come to this House . Let us follow our 
Parliamentary  procedures . Yes, Hon. Thoya?  
 
Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think you  have ruled the Statement by Hon. 
Samba that is going to be allocated time next week , it is going to be prudent if you categorically  
put it is it the Transport Committee or it  is Labour Committee?  
October 30, 2019                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                            97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of th is Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : As per the v ote book, it was Transport 
Committe e that was supposed to bring a Report , so the Table Clerks will communicate to the 
Committee concern ed on  whatever that has transpired today on issues on the pending Petition 
and the pendi ng Reports . Yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Hon. Members the  House stands adjourned until Wednesday 30th October , 2019 at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10:21 a.m. 
 
 