September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  1 
 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 7th September, 2016  
The House met at 2.32pm . 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members you may s it, yes Clerk. 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Hon. Enock Mwadziwe . 
       Hon. Mw inga: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker maybe before I give my Notice of 
Motion, guide us because we have two order papers ; so I don’t know which one i s… 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : One is a supplementary O rder paper so let us 
proceed Hon. Enock.  
       Hon. Mwinga : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I would like to give a Notice of 
Motion c oncerning familiarization with Ward A dministrators.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
FAMILIARI ZATION WITH WARD ADMINI STRATORS  
       That aware that the office of the W ard Administra tor is established pursuant to S ection 
51(1) of the County Government Act 2012;  
       Speaker Sir , further aware  that they are employed by the C ounty Public S ervice; 
Recognizing that they p lay a critical role in service delivery in the wards and hence the need for 
peace ful co-existence with the MCA 's within the W ard;  
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  2 
        Mr. Sp eaker concerned that since the Ward A dministrators were employed, they have not 
been formally introduced to the Members of the County A ssembly and this may undermine the 
working relations;  
       Mr. Speaker i urge this assembly to resolve that;  
1. The County Secretary with the County Public S ervice to  arrange for a forum where the W ard 
Administrators will be forma lly introduced to the MCA 's to enhan ce service delivery within the 
Wards.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes C lerk. 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Yes Hon. Sa ad, Supplementary O rder paper . 
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you Mr. Spe aker, on behalf of Hon. Hatimy the Chairman for Finance, 
Budget and A ppropria tions I would like to give the Notice of Motion on A uthorization to utilize 
Kshs. 1,006,557 for Governor’s office rent in Nairobi.  
       Mr. Speaker ; 
        That aware that the Council of G overnor 's is a statutory body an d has provided offices for 
all County G overnors on rental basis in Nairobi.  
       Further aware that the County government of Mombasa C ounty executive budget for 
2016/2017 has no allocation for office rent.  
       Noting that His Excellency the G overnor’s office in Nairobi has outstanding rent arrears 
amounting to Kshs. 1,006,577 to date.  
       Concerned that failure by the C ounty government of Mombasa to settle these arrears would 
be det rimental to His Excellen cy the G overnor’s duties '. 
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  3 
        I therefore urge the C ounty Assembly to resolve that:  
                   1.  The C ommittee on Finance , Budget and Appropriatio ns resolve to recommend to 
the County A ssembly that the expenditure of Kshs. 1,006,577 be paid  using the County 
Assembly’s office rent vote.     
                  2.  That the funds of the forego ing expenditure be paid by the C ounty treasury from 
the County executive.  
Thank you.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Saad and Hon.  Dunca n unless the mo ver 
asks for a leave from this H ouse to all ow the Notice of M otion to be discussed I will give the 
opportunity  but if the mover does not ask for a leave we will proceed, yes Hon. Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Mr. Speaker I seek leave to seek this notice to be moved today 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you.   
(Question proposed)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : I will propose a question for the Hon.  House to 
either consider the need  to discuss as proposed by the Chairman of F inance . 
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
       Yes Clerk. 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Hon. Ndanda as per your request that you brought in front of my office, is that you wanted 
to amend this  to a statement right?  permission granted. Y es Clerk. 
STATEMENT  
       The Tem porary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Kibwana Swaleh . 
       Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker.  
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  4 
 (Interruption ) 
       Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker there's a virus in the machines  we cannot get clear information  
please can we get better and clear in formation , thank you. The microphones have got virus.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Murfad, Hon. Kibwana may 
you proceed, Hon. Kibwana proceed.  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker for allowing me to read my stat ement to 
this Hon.  House  on the engagement in uncontrolled gambling within the villages by the Chinese.  
       Hon. Speaker, this is my concern that imag ine I was just going around my W ard and I al so 
happen to go to visit other Wards;  I found out that the  Chinese nowadays have established some 
sort of gathering in open areas in every market place in every corner of a village  where  they have 
established a box where they are doing gambling.  
       Hon.  Speaker my  concern is a concern to other M embers , and  is that this gambling is 
creating a lot of insecurities and also it brings some theft in the se areas.  
       Hon.  Speaker it is my concern regarding also the youth that they also play this gambling and 
we are aware that we have schools and education standa rds are  becoming low and I think  to me 
this is a very dangerous trade so I think I would just ask this Hon.  House to see how we can 
control this gambling  as it is destroying our youth who are our feature leaders. Thank you Hon. 
Speaker.  
       The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon. Thoya, I hope you are not contributing on 
this statement.  
       Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika  si nia yangu kuweza 
kuchangia . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Are you contributing o n this statement ? 
       Hon.  Thoya : Si nia ya kuweza kuchangia bali kutokana na tatizo ambalo Mheshim iwa 
ameleta,  ningeomba kama itawezekana kupitia kwa kiti chako tupate nafasi ya kulijadili kwa 
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  5 
 sababu hata kwangu, mtaa umeharibika kwa sababu ya hizi kam are ambazo ziko katika kila 
kichochoro. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Amir Thoya, but first I w ill 
give an opportunity to the Youth, Gender and S ports committee to follow up this matter and by 
their report it is going to, the report it is going to be debated in this Hon.  House and I would like 
the Committee, the named C ommittee to take this matter as an urgent issue that wil l need to be 
discussed in this H ouse in a week's time.  
       So Youth, G ender and S ports, work on this issue and if po ssible you can also engage the 
Trade Committee and Childhood, Security and T ourism if you wish but take this matter as an 
urgent issue and in a week's time we need the report to be discussed. Yes Clerk.  
STATEME NT 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ibrahim Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo : Ahsante Mheshimiwa.  Mheshimiwa Spika nimesimama mbele ya 
Jumba hili ili kuweza kuongelea kitengo ambacho ni muhimu, ni kitengo ambacho ki meshikilia 
nafasi ku bwa katika K aunti yetu ya Mombasa , kitengo cha wazima moto.  
       Mheshimiwa S pika kuna matatizo ambayo yanajitokeza kila leo  kupitia kwa kitengo hi chi, 
bidii na juhudi ya Gavana  wetu kutuletea magari mapya ya wazima moto, ambapo magari yale 
yana manufa a ya kila namna.  
       La kusikitisha Mheshimiwa Spika  magari yale hayajaweza kutolewa na bado yamekaa 
yamewekwa  katika store  ya ofisi kubwa ya wazima moto na mbali na hayo wafanyi  kazi 
wanatatizika wakati wanaenda katika shughli ya kuzima moto.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika  magari yamekuja na kila kitu, yamekuja na viatu vya kupambana na 
moto , nguo za kupambana na moto, kofia za kupambana na moto, lakini ajabu ni wiki iliyopita 
ilitokea moto katika maeneo ya Jomvu na kukawa na shida mpaka gari ikabidi kutaka  kuchomwa 
kwa sababu baadhi ya vifaa ambavyo ni vya mawasiliano pia havimo na vinapelekwa katika 
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  6 
 store  ambako wale wahusika wanaenda kuzima moto bila kuwa na mawasiliano kupitia 
wanaohusika na mambo ya usalama.  
       Nikisema hivyo ni kwamba wazima moto wanapokwenda katika shughuli lazima 
waandamane aidha na polisi au vile vil e waandamane na askari wetu wa K aunti.  
       Ningependa Mheshim iwa Spika swala hili tulichukulie na uzito ili wale wahusika waweze 
kuwa katika hali nzuri. A hsante Mheshim iwa Spika.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Committee on disaster and security the two 
committees to work on this statement and not less than or in two weeks time we need the report 
in this Hon.  House. Yes Hon. Siminyu.  
       Hon. Siminyu : Mr. Speaker I  have a statement if you allow me.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : I think we’ll have the statement for Hon. 
Ndanda first and then we will consider yours.  
       Hon. Mohamed Ndanda : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi niko na 
taarifa ambayo inahusiana na FKF ambayo ni Football Kenya Association ya kwamba sh irika 
hili la soka hapa katika K aunti yetu, kaunti yetu iliweza kuchangia vya kutosha ili kuweza, zile 
kazi zake ziweze kuendelea vizuri.  
       Naweza kutoa mfano ya kwamba ku pitia ile akiba ambayo inaitwa kupitia Hassan Joho 
Foundation, iliweza kugharamia Kshs. 900,000 na vile  vile pia hapa mwaka wa kwanza K aunti 
yetu ikalipa Ksh. 2,800,000 , mwaka tena wa pili K aunti yetu ikachangia katika mfuko ule ule ili 
zile ratiba zake zi weze kuendelea , FKF ikatoa Kshs. 3,500,000 na zile zengine tuliwez a 
kuchangia kama Mombasa kaunti.  
       Lakini maajabu ni kwamba Mheshimiwa S pika kuna kitengo kinaitwa Mombasa Coast 
Branch sasa wanataka kuvunja hili s hirika ambalo liko hapa katika K aunti  ambapo mimi 
nimeona, vile ambavyo sisi tulikuwa tunataka kukuza zile talanta za vijana zitakuwa zimepotea 
na pia zile pesa zetu ambazo tumeekeza pale ndani, zitakuwa zimepotea na zaidi ya hivyo katika 
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  7 
 katiba yao hio ambayo sa sa hivi wanatumia, ni kwamba w ao walikuwa wanatumia kitu kinaitwa 
province  na saa hii sisi tuko na kaunti.  
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika  kupitia taarifa yangu  nilikuwa ninaomba kama B unge hili 
kupitia uwezo wako vile utakavyoamua tuweze ku muita ama  tuwaite wale ma afisaa wa Coast 
Branch  na iwa po watakataa kufika katika ile K amati utaka yoiidhinisha basi na sisi kama K aunti 
tuweze kuwafungia wasifanye shughuli yoyote mpaka waweze kukubaliana na sisi Mombasa 
kaunti kwa sababu vijana wetu watakuwa hawawezi kufaidi  na vile vile sisi kama  Kaunti 
tutakuwa tumepoteza kama vile ambavyo ilikuwa nimetoa mifano ya kwamba kama Kaunti 
zimechangia hivi sasa karibia Milioni saba. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Ndanda the Committee on 
Youth, Gend er and Sports to work with the Committee of Finance because i have seen some 
financial issues . 
       The two Committees to work together and as the prayer to summon the respective people 
and we need the report in two weeks time so the two committees to wo rk on this issues. Yes 
Hon.  Hatimy .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kama itawezekana usitupe siku nyingi kwa 
sababu kama wameweza ku  clear  Kaunti yetu Mombasa Kaunti kwa sababu kama tumeweza 
kukaa siku tatu ya kueleza dira ndani ya Mombasa hi i Kwa hiyo kama tunaweza kufanya kwa 
muda mfupi vile inavyowezekana kwa sababu itakuwa vijana wetu wanaumia ikiwa wamezuiwa 
kuche za mpira.  
       Kwa hiyo  naomba kama itawezekana utupatie wiki moja hili jambo hili tulitatue 
Mheshimiwa Spika. A hsante sana M heshimiwa Spika.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Well I t hink it will depend on the two 
Committees if you will work the quickest time possible to bring that report then in a week 's time 
the Assembly will receive the report so the Hon.  Chairs f or Youth she's around you will work 
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  8 
 with the Finance Committee as the Finance Chair has stated that it is a burning issue so please if 
possible try as soon as possible to bring back the report to this Hon.  House. Yes Hon.  Siminyu  
       Hon. Siminyu:  Thank  you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I will like to support the representation 
of Mombasa County in several activities , including the  just the concluded Mombasa Show . 
       Mr. Speaker there was no representation of the Assembly ; there was no any stand there . Mr. 
Speaker as i remember last few week s we were at Meru  at the Governor Councils there was no 
stand for Mombasa County .  
       The Mombasa County Assembly each and every County Assembly had a stand but to us 
Mombasa County Assembly we did not have a stand there in the Showground ; we didn't have a 
stand and this is very important so that people can understand what the Assembly is doing.  
       Mr. Speaker I would like from your Chair you direct the Committee so that to look in to this 
matter so that we can come up with a solution ; we have to have representation everywhere we go 
and we have done wonders , we have so many views from the wananchi I wish we had a stand 
there . 
       Mr. Speaker we would expect the wananchi to understand our mandate as Members of the 
County Assembly.  
       Mr. Speaker I beg to direct the committee of Agriculture to tell us why we didn't have a 
stand at Mombasa Showground and everywhere we are having representation but Mom basa 
County Assembly is missing .  
       Mr. Speaker it's a  burning issue and i see Members discussing it ; I would like to take this 
opportunity to seek leave so that it can be discussed in this House because it is important for this 
House to discuss and find the way forward where Mombasa County Assembly is repres ented in 
each and every thing pertaining  to its operation s. Thank you.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon.  Siminyu , as it is a matter 
before the Assembly I direct the County Assembly Service Board CASB to bring a report on 
why ther e was no stand for the Assembly ; after they bring back their report that when we are 
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page  9 
 going to discuss this issue and am sure they've got an answer on the table so soon like tomorrow 
afternoon we would like to hear from the County Assembly Service Board on why we have 
failed in two occasion s after that we are going to discuss or i will give an opportunity to your 
statement to turn into a Motion. Yes Leader of Majority Hon.  Mwidani . 
       The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Yes Mr. Speaker mine is just to  request more 
time. 
       To be sincere Mr. Speaker the report may not be tabled tomorrow because we have an 
exercise of getting s hortlist for those who had applied for  jobs vacancies of the Assembly so my 
request is just give us time until next week Tues day then we can bring the report. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : So next week Tuesday the report will be ready . 
       The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Most probably.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay next week Tuesday, Yes Hon.  Nyamvula . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . The same point Mr. Speaker I wonder if 
we can expand that to our performance of the Agricultural sector ; the performances we know 
that they are budgeted and they are given the budget allocation for the show but to that we need 
to expand to performances .  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Thank you I would like the Clerk to 
communicate to the Department on what Hon.  Nyamvula has raised for them to reply t o this 
House the same day on Tuesday ; we need a report from the Department on the matter which was 
raised by Hon.  Nyamvula and the C ommittee on Agriculture to be presented. Yes Hon.  Ibrahim 
Kondo . 
       Hon. Ibrahim Kondo:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshi miwa Spika kama 
tunavyofahamu kitengo cha Fedha katika kila wizara ni kitengo ambacho ni cha umuhimu na 
kitengo hicho kimechukuliwa kama uti wa mgongo kwa wizara yeyote.  
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page  10 
        Mheshimiwa Spika katika wizara yetu ya fedha na uhasibu kumekuwa na matatizo n a 
matatizo yenyewe Bwana Spika ni kama kila leo kila kukicha yanazidi kuongezeka .  
        Mheshimiwa Spika sisi kama waheshimiwa kuna watu tumewaandika katika kitengo cha 
fedha na uhasibu lakini cha kushangaza leo sisi ndio tunakuwa tunasukumana na kupele ka mbio 
mambo ya fedha katika shughuli zetu.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika la kusikitisha tena zaidi ni baadhi ya nakala ambazo zinapotea kila leo 
katika ofisi ile ya fedha na uhasibu ambapo zinahusiana na mambo yetu ya pesa . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika tunafahamu kwamba kitengo chochote kinahusika na pesa ni lazima 
kiwe na nakala zake na nakala ambazo zinawekwa kwa njia mwafaka ; hivi leo, kesho ama miaka 
kumi ukihitaji nakala z ile unazihitaji lakini leo sisi hapa tuna ma  'imprests ', tuna mavitu tunadai 
na kila siku  tukienda katika maofisi tunaambiwa vitu vimepotea . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ningeliomba kupitia kwa kiti chako suala hili lichukuliwe kwa uzito na 
liweze kuangaliwa kwa njia mwafaka ili kitengo kile kiweze kuimarika na kazi ambazo 
zinafanyika kwa njia sawa . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Ibrahim I think that's an administrative 
issue of which the Table C lerk will communicate to the Clerk of the Assembly and see how they 
will work on that issue ; not an issue for t he Hon.  Members though it concerns the Hon.  Members 
but we will take it administratively so the Clerk should communicate to the County Assembly 
Clerk. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
      Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I beg to move a Mo tion  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy read the motion)  
      That aw are that the Council of G overnors is a statutory body and has p rovided offices for all 
County G overnors on rental basis in Nairobi.  
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page  11 
        Further, aware that the County government of Mombasa C ounty executive budget for 
2016/2017 has no allocation for office rent.  
       Mr. Speaker, n oting that His Excellency the G overnor’s office in Nairobi has outstanding 
rent arrears amounting to Kshs. 1,006,577 to date.  
       Mr. Speaker , concerned that failure by the C ounty government of Mombasa to settle these 
arrears would be detrimental to His Excellency  the G overnor’s duties '. 
I therefore urge the County A ssembly to resolve that:  
1.  The committee on Finance Budget and Appropriati ons resolve to recommend to  the County 
Assembly that the expenditure of Kshs . 1,006,577 be paid  using the County A ssembly’s office 
rent vote.     
2.  That the funds of the foregoing expenditure be paid by the County treasury from the C ounty 
executive.  
 
       Thank you Mr. Speaker  I beg to move.  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy  moved)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Any seconder ? Yes Hon.  Siminyu .  
       Hon. Siminyu:  I second . 
(Question proposed)  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that the Mot ion on 
Authorization  to utilize  Kshs. 1,006, 577 for the Governor's office be discussed in this House .  
(Question proposed and agreed to)  
       Yes Hon.  Hatimy . 
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa ufupi ni kusema kuwa hii ni kuwa 
executive  hawana vote ya kodi ya kulipia ofisi.  
       Kwa hivyo wameomba kusema kuwa watumie vote yetu wao watupa pesa yaani itatupa sisi 
pesa tuwalipie sio kuwa watatumia pesa zetu , ni wao watatupa sisi pesa sisi nasi tulipe kwenye 
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page  12 
 vote ya kulipia kodi ya ofisi  mpak a wakati tut akuja kutengeneza bajeti ya supplementary  
tutawatengenezea vote ya kulipia kodi ya ofisi  na wao.  
       Kwa hivyo nafikiri hakuna makosa yeyote ya kuleta fikra hii ili kusiwe na aibu ya Mombasa 
kuonekana kuwa hailipi  kodi ya ofisi Mheshimiwa S pika.  
       Kwa hivyo nawaomba waheshimiwa wenzangu tukubaliane kuwa vote ya pesa tuwalipie 
halafu na wao tuwalipie ili tupate kuondoa jambo hili Mheshimiwa Spika. A hsante Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Nyamvula . 
       Hon.  (Mrs.)  Nyamvula:  Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nasimama nikiunga mkono huu mswada 
ambao umeletwa ndani ya Nyumba ...  
(Applause ) 
Ya kwamba tupeleke ile pesa kwa Gavana  kwa sababu ni muhimu kama Mombasa Kaunti 
tuonekane kama tunachangia hata kama itatok a kwenye vote yetu ya Assembli ili tuchangie 
mambo yaendelee vizuri . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika naomba waheshimiwa wote waliunge mkono suala hili ili Mombasa iwe 
Kaunti 001. A hsante.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Leader of Majority Hon.  Mwi dani. 
       The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Ahsante sana Bwana Spika pia nimesimama 
kuunga mkono hili suala kwa sababu Bwana Spika wiki jana nilikuwa Nairobi hata mimi 
nilishuhudia ile ofisi ya Gavana  pale iko na utapata kwamba kila Gavana  ana ofis i pale na kila 
ofisi ya Gavana  imewekwa nembo  yake. 
       Tulikuwa na mkutano na tukaenda huko kwa Gavana  wa Mombasa; k wa  hivyo Bwana 
Spika ni kama alivyosema mwenye Mswada huu kuwa executive  ndio wanalipa ila ni vote ndio 
itatumika . 
       Kwa hivyo Bwa na Spika hili ni jambo ambalo liko wazi ni kuwa ni hiyo transaction  tu kwa 
sababu wao hawana vote ya kulipa kodi za ofisi , kwa hivyo Bwana Spika ningeomba Bunge hili 
tupitishe bila kuwa na shaka na hakuna ambacho kinatumika chetu ni zile zile pesa ambazo 
zitakuwa za executive  na vote ni yetu. A hsante Bwana Spika.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Siminyu  
September 7, 2016                      COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         97 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page  13 
        Hon. Siminyu:  Mr. Speaker this thing should be done with speed so tha t we cannot bring 
shame to our g overnor . 
       Mr. Speaker  every Governor has an office there and their duties they are done for the 
welfare of the County , and it will be sham e for the County 001 for their G overnor to not pay 
rent. 
       I fully su pport because it will help our G overnor to work towards the achie vements and 
according to the Constitution. Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Amur Murfad . 
       Hon. Amur : Ahsante Bwana Spika.  Bwana Spika mimi nataka tu niongezee hii mambo ya 
kulipa  kodi sijui mwezi mmoja mmoja ; mimi nafikiri ingefaa tulipe mara nne  ama mara mbili 
kwa mwaka  ama kila mwaka  kwa sababu ya ku jitenga na mambo madogo madogo  ya ulipaji wa 
kodi. 
       Ni heri tulipe kodi yote Bwana Spika, hayo ndio maoni yangu; tulipeni kodi yote, mara nne 
ama mara mbili kwa mwaka kuepuka mambo kama haya madogo madogo ya kulipa kodi. 
Ahsante .  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members the matter have been 
deliberated enough I have no otherwise but to put a question that the Motion on authorization  to 
utiliz e Kshs . 1,006,577  for the G overnor's office rents in Nairobi  be adopted .  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
ADJOURNMENT  
       The House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 9:00 am.  
The House rose at  3.14pm . 