September 7 , 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         98 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of thi s Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wedne sday, 7th September , 2016  
The House met at 9.12a m. 
(The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS   
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Kindly  Hon. M embers may you 
have your s eats, yes Clerk .  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
       I have a communication Hon.  Members from the ODM Party .  
       I have been told to comm unicate to you concerning your p arty issue on Saturday ; so all 
Members from that p arty you are invited by your pa rty on Saturday you are going to have an 
occasion  to mark 10 years , so Hon.  Members from that p arty you are all invited at Mama 
Ngina. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       What is it Hon.  Wangudi?  
       Hon. Wangudi:  Mr. Speaker I have st ood on Order Number 7. Statem ent. 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon.  Wangudi as per the 
parliamentary proceedings you are to communicate to the Clerk or the Speaker of the 
Assembly unless it  is a concern of the County or n ational concern ; if it is just a Stateme nt 
then we will allocate time for your Statement .  
       Hon. Wangudi:  It is a concern for the County and this Statement concerns this House .  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : You may proceed . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Mr. Speaker Sir my st atement is about the microphones that we are 
using in this House it seems that they are having a problem and we can have a 
Communication from the Chair so that we can have a technician so that they can be repaired ; 
sometimes we are not heard , it seems lik e they are opening their throat...  
September 7 , 2016                 COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         98 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of thi s Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2 (Hon. Wangudi demonstrat ed the sound of clearing one's  throat ) 
       So I think Mr. Speaker you can look at this matter so I don't know the Department 
concerned may be , through your direction Mr. Speaker they can ensure t he gadgets work 
properly. Thank you.  
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay a letter will be written to the 
Director of the Hansard Department through the Clerk of the Assembly to make sure the 
gadgets are working as per what we want as  an Assembly. Yes Clerk . 
MOTION  
       Ther e was a Communication that the m over of the Motion wanted this Motion to be 
postponed , until tomorrow afternoon. Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
       The House stands adjourned until today afternoon . 
The House rose at 9. 20am.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  