November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Thursday, 22nd November,  2018  
The House met at 2:36p.m. 
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy  Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members  have your seats . Yes Clerk?  
 
STAT EMENTS  
SHORTAGE OF DRUGS IN COUNTY HOSPITALS  
 
 Yes statement on , shortage of drugs in County Hospitals . Yes Hon. Faith Boniface.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.)  Mwende : Thank you Mr. Speaker. Hon.  Speaker pursuant to Standing 
order 41 (c)  I rise to seek a statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Health Services 
on the shortage of drugs in County hospitals.  Hon. Speaker , does the Chairperson know that 
there is a shortage of drugs in County health facilities for instance, Coast General Hospital 
which has led to patients buy ing their own drugs, regardless of having to pay for hospital 
registration and doctors consultation fees.  Hon. Speaker, I therefore request the relevant 
Committee to go on the g round for a fact finding mission  to substantiate the aforementioned 
concerns an d report back to the House before we adjourn for the long recess.  Thank you Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Members  from Committee on Health the 
Hon.  Member  has requested that you bring back the response before we go for the long rece ss 
so the House is giving the Health Committee  one week’s time  for them to report back to this 
Honourable  House. Yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON OF HEALTH HON. KIBWANA SWALEH ON 
HEALTH CONCERNS  
 
 Chair on Committee on Health…  
 
(Silence)  
 
 Any Member  from Health Committee? No Member  from Health Committee in this 
House?  

November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  
(Silence)  
 Yes what is it Hon. Amur . 
  
 Hon. Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker since there are no Members  we kindly request for 
deferment of this issue until next week Tuesday becau se most of the Members  have travelled.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok, yes Hon. Thoya what is it?  
 
 Hon. Thoya : Mr. Speaker as much as majority of the Members  from that said 
Committee are not here but we have just seen the Chairman within the Cha mbers I do not 
know if  it can be justified that he has travelled because in the past ten minutes we have seen 
the Chairman within the Chambers.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amur . 
 
 Hon. Murfad Amur : Mr. Speaker with all due respect the Cha irman had a sick 
mother she has just arrived f rom Nairobi.  Mr. Speaker we can not hold him at ransom he has a 
sick mother. Thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok, I ca n see the Vice Chair for Health.  I 
think the Vice Chair will be  in right posit ion to respond on this issue but as far as the ..., okay 
we are in order number 8 sorry, Ser jeant just call the Hon.  Vice Chair . 
 
(The Serj eant-At-Arms executed the instruction)  
 
 Yes Hon. Fatma Kushe we are in order no.  8 we need a response on that issue. Hon. 
Fatma the House is waiting for the response . 
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika 
nakuomba na naomba Jumba  hili kwa heshima na taadhima wiki ijayo tutakuja na jibu 
muafaka … 
 
(Interruption)  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Fatma you had requested for a week , 
the issue was raised by Hon. Shebe Athman and it has taken almost a month since he raised 
this issue and I re member  last sitting last week you said this week the response will be ready 
and not unless th ey are some technicalities that you are to tackle.  
 
 Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : I am sorry Mr. Speaker I was not around and my Chair 
was not feeling well. So we kindly request until next week.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Ok granted, yes Clerk?  
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT BY CHAIRPER SON COMMITTEE ON EDU CATION , INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY AND MV 2035  HON. IBRAHIM OMONDI   ON THE STATUS OF BURSARY IN  THE 
COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Ibrahim Omondi, status of bursary in the County . 
November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. I a m going to read a response f or the 
bursary statement. Mr. Speaker Sir, I wish to give the following statement on the status of 
bursary in the response to the concerns raised by Hon. Raphael Musumba Bwire in the House 
on the 94th Sitting seeking to know fro m the Committee on Education, Information 
technology and MV 2035 on the actual status of Bursary in our County.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, the update from previous bursary Financial Year 2016/2017:  
 
1. Amoun t of Kenya shillings issued as b ursaries in FY 2016/2017 and FY 2017/2018 
23,134 cheques totalling  to Kshs.175 Million plus administration costs ; 
 
2. Cheques not presented: they are 173, and we have contacted the beneficiaries several 
times to deposit the cheques and  these have now expired ; 
 
3. Cheques not collected: 159,  beneficiaries were also contacted sever al times to collect 
the che ques and they have also expired;  
 
Mr. Spea ker Sir, the current status of bursaries is; t he Elimu Fund received from the 
County Treasury Kshs.20 Million in April , 2018 and 30 Million in July , 2018 into the 
Elimu Fund account. In August , 2018  Mr. Speaker Sir,  we planned to use the Kshs.50 
Million for only Secondary school beneficiaries. Later , H.E. the Governor instructed 
that we wait and combine this amount with the Kshs.100 Million allocatio n for FY 
2018/ 2019 and make the funds available for beneficiaries of all the four categories ; 
namely  Mr. Speaker: Special needs, Secondary s chool, College (driving school, 
certificate and diploma) and finally university.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, the Bursary forms  have been designed and are ready for printing and 
are awaiting confirmation of availability of funds to facilitate printing of forms and 
final logistics. The Department has requested the Department of Finance for the 
Kshs.100 Million and the request is be ing processed.  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, the expected date for the issuing  of forms for the FY 2018/2019 
bursary depends on when funds are available from the Finance Department hopefully 
by end of December , 2018.  
 
            Thank you Mr. Speaker sir, and to that  I also have, if you could allow me with due 
respect to also give the evidence just to confirm what I have read.  
 
(Applause)  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Renson Thoya.  
 
            Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Spika, mimi naajabiki a lakini hata hivyo ni lazima 
tukubali, nashukuru kwa ndugu yangu kuweza kuleta ripoti hii, na nakushukuru sana, lakini  
ndani ya majuma mawili yaliyopi ta ulikuwa hapa kutuletea ripoti ya vile jinsi mitihani  
itaendeshwa ukatuambia watoto wetu watakunywa ma ziwa na nusu mkate, tuliweza 
kuyasikia hayo, hayo  hayakuweza kutendeka, nataka uweze kudhibitisha katika Jumba hili 
kwamba haya unayoyanena wakati huu, hayo yatakuwa ndiyo ama yatakuwa kama yale ya 
mkate na maziwa ya siku ile.  
 
November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4             The Deputy Spea ker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. The Leader of M ajority is up.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker  for giving me this 
opportunity.  I want to support the re port of the Chairman Education; Mr. Speaker I think he 
has mentioned everything  black and white and let us give him support so that when it reaches 
December we see the fruits of results. Mr. Speaker I think the children in Mombasa have 
done well in KCPE so we will be having so many candidates enrolling in form 1, so when the 
money is  there and if we can get those bursaries I think they will really help our people so 
Mr. Speaker I want to support the department for the good work they have done. Thank you.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amur.  
 
            Hon. Murfad Amur: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I also want  to support it but with 
caution;  there is this 173 cheques which were not collected and 159 were not presented, that 
means that there is a lot of money pending in that education account. I would kindly request  
the Chair to also inform the people that we need to know how much is that money so that it 
can be combined with 150 million and the amount will grow so w e will reach may be 200 
million. I want just to make sure that we get the total amount of the uncollec ted cheque which 
has expired, the money has not been utilized so that 150 plus 332 cheque amount will 
empower us to go may be to 200 Million . Mr. Speaker, that is my concern this money should 
not be in the account yet we are lo oking for an extra money, eve n this money should be 
converted to the 150 plus whatever we have in the account and given the figure of total and 
uncollected cheques plus the cheques which were not presented so the amount will now go to 
above 150 million Mr. Speaker. Thank you Mr. Speak er. 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Fatma Mote . 
 
            Hon. (Ms.) Fatma  Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii, 
kwanza kabisa ningependa kumpongeza Mwenyekiti  wa elimu na si mwengine ni 
Mheshimiwa Bomoa  kwa kuweza kutuletea taarifa ya uhakika. Mheshi miwa Spika ninaamini 
taarifa iliyokuja hapa katika Bunge ni taarifa ya ukweli kabisa na twashukuru  kwamba 
watoto wetu wengi wameweza kufanya vizuri . Bila shaka nina hakika na ninaamini, 
Mheshimiwa Spika nisikilize vizuri , nina hakika na na zungumza bila kigegezi kwa sababu 
mimi mwenyewe kwanza niko katika Kamati  ya fedha….  
 
(Interruption ) 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Somebody is up.  
 
            Hon. Thoya:  Mr. Speaker  I would like to know from where you sit if the Member  
who is on air is a Member  of education as much as  she is trying to hit the nail on the head 
kwamba hii ripoti ni  ya uhakika, yeye ni Mwanakamati wa elimu ? Ninataka kujua hilo.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Fatma, are you a Member  of that 
Committee?  
 
            Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi si Mwanachama  wa Kamati hii  
lakini ni Mwanachama wa Kamati ya Fedha  na nina hakika kwamba pesa ziko watoto 
watasoma . 
 
(Applause)  
November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5             The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you.  
 
            Hon.  (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Mheshimiwa Spika naregelea tena kusema nashukuru 
kwa kuletewa ripoti muafaka.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Renson Thoya is up, what is it? And 
Hon. Renson and plus the Hon. Members  I’ve just allowed the reaction on this statement but 
put in mind that a statement is not debated, it is just that I have allowed the Hon. Member  to 
react to the statement from Hon. Ibr ahim so give somebody a chance or the time that we have 
given him or her to express her concerns so that we proceed with the business of the day. Yes 
Hon. Renson Thoya.  
 
            Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker . I think my question was very clear tha t the 
speaker that was on air is not a Member  and is much better when you give information you 
are in a position to justify and substantiate and in that regard I would kindly like you as the 
Speaker  to ask her to  withdraw that statement because she is not aware of that information, 
she is from finance Committee, thank you.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes let Hon. Fatma proceed, yes Hon. 
Fatma.  
 
            Hon. (Ms.) Fatma Swaleh : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nafikiri 
nimemjibu vizuri nikamwambia kuzungumza uhakika ni kwamba Kamati  ya fedha ni 
kwam ba pesa ziko, na nina hakika Mheshimiwa Spika na nimefurahi sana kwamba watoto 
wetu wamepita na katika Kaunti ambazo zinaon goza kwa kutoa bas ari, Mombasa Kaunti 001 
inaongoza . Mheshimiwa Sp ika, watoto wetu watasoma wala Waheshimiwa wasiwe na shaka 
tuweze ku shirikiana pamoja. Ahsante sana.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay thank you . Yes Hon. Faith.  
 
            Hon. (Ms.) Mwende : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi kama Mwanakamati 
wa elimu  mumetupeleka mbio sana kuweza kuleta majibu lakini mchezo ma hali ulipofikia 
utakuwa katika Kamati ya fedha, hapo ndio ngoma iko , Januar i tusipopata basari, huo mzigo 
uende kwa finance kwa sababu kila kitu tushatengeneza.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think the Member  from finance has clearly 
said in front of this hono urable House that the money will be available, t hat is a Member  of 
finance Committee who has clearly stated that money will be available, so she must put in 
mind that this is not a public baraza, you can proceed Hon. Faith. 
 
            Hon. (Ms.) Mwende : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, wajua hili jambo  la basari  
mumetupeleka m bio nalo sana na changamoto ilikuwa ni hela, kwa hivyo ifikapo mwe zi wa 
Disemba nina uhakika wakitupatia pesa hakutakuwa na majibizano mengine ya kusema 
hakuna  basari . Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Ramla.  
 
            Hon.  (Ms.) Ramla Said:  Ahsante sana Mhes himiwa Spika, mimi ningeomba kutaka 
kujua tofauti ya cheques not presented  na cheque not collected . 
 
November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6             The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : I think the Chair is the rightful person to 
respond.  
 
            Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I think it is very important for me to 
clarify the concern that the Hon. Member  has just raised . When you talk about the  cheques 
that are not presented  they are 173 in number, meaning that those ones are beneficiar ies who 
were supposed to have received t hose cheques, t he total number is 173 that mea ns there are 
173 beneficiar ies but what happened is that the cheques were not presented because the 
beneficiar ies who were supposed to collect, w ho were supposed to come for th ese cheques, 
they were supposed to have collected the cheques then after col lecting they were supposed to 
take them to the bank and now  transaction takes place, the cashing takes place  but 
unfortunate ly the beneficiar ies did not collect those cheques . Mr. Speaker Sir, and that is 
now... no sorry I was talking about the cheques that are no t collected, am sorry Mr. Speaker 
Sir, the cheques that are not collected sorry ..., the cheques that are not collected are 159 and I 
was saying that beneficiar ies did not take th ese cheque s and therefore did not take th ese 
cheques, they did not present them but let me answer on the side on the cheques which w ere 
not presented. Mr. Speaker Sir it is very  sad indeed that the beneficiar ies got the cheques, 
they took the cheques, they were given the cheques and again it is very sad indeed that after 
the cheques have been given to beneficiar ies they did not take it to the bank  so that they can 
benefit , so that they can get the money from the bank, and therefore th ese ones also leave  a 
questio n. That is why should people actually collect cheques then after c ollecting the cheques  
they can not go and present them so that the cheques can be cashed Mr. Speaker Sir? Thank 
you. 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk. 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE OF FINANCE HON. MOHAMED HATIMY 
ON REPORT OF CONTROLLER  OF B UDGET  
 
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy.  
 
            Hon. Moh amed Hatimy:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika kwenye 
taarifa  iliyokuja.. . 
 
            The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Use your mic rophone . 
 
            Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Taarifa  iliyokuja Mheshimiwa Spika, nilikuwa si ko 
kwenye hii Nyumba lakini ningekuwako ningejaribu kueleza kufahamisha Nyumba hii ya 
kuwa first quarter  iko tayari lakini second quarter  nafikiri due date  yake itakuwa ni 15th ya 
mwezi wa  Januar i. Kwa hivyo second quarter  haiko tayari Mheshimiwa Spika  hivyo basi  
ukiniruhusu niendelee  nataka kusema kuwa ripoti niko  nayo kama tunavyojua kuwa hii 
Kaunti imegawanywa vipande viwili ; tuna executive  na Assembly , kwenye quarterly report  
ya executive niko nayo tayari lakini ya Assembly  bado sijaipata . Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa 
Spika naomba ruhusa kupitia kwako uturuhusu ripoti ya pili  iwe itakuja ule muda utaka o 
tupatia , siwezi kusema lini lakini vile utatoa muongozo  wako. Mheshimiwa Spika, kwenye 
ripoti ambayo niko nayo ni kusema kuwa serikali ya Kaunti  ilikuwa ipokee shilingi 
5,758,760,000 hi yo ni equitable share  alafu tuko na condition al grant  ya Level 5 Hospital...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Chairman finance I think it will be prudent 
enough if Members  will have copies of the report that you are taking us thro ugh now , atleast 
the summary of the report.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika unajua hi zi ripoti ndio zinazotolewa na 
Controller of Budget  na Controller of Budget walikuwa bado hawajazitoa na kama 
utaniruhusu itabidi nipige copy  kwa sababu kitabu nilicho  nacho  ni kikubwa . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Not the whole book but I can see it  is like if 
you have a summary of what you are taking us through now.  
 
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Yes the summary niko nayo ndio itabidi nipige nasema 
kutokana na hiki kitabu Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Okay then let us  just bring the report , if you 
bring back the report in a week's time so that the Members  might have some copies I think to 
me it will be okay for the House and the  Committee . 
 
 Hon. Moham ed Hatimy:  Sawa  Mheshimiwa Spika kama waweza kutoa uamuzi  
kutoka Nyumba hii  Karani wa Bunge  aweze kufanya copies  maanake hii Nyumba baada 
huduma hasara, twatoa pesa kwenye mifuko yetu kupiga copy tumechoka , kwa hivyo kama 
Karani  atafute atapiga  sina shida . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : It is okay just give the Table Clerks the 
report that you are taking us through so that they prepare it next week we will be having 
copies for the Hon . Members , just give us the summary.  
 
(Silence ) 
 
 And also if you will be in a position to get the quart erly report from the Assembly you 
can also produce them together but as far as the House is concerned we shall work on this 
report next week Thursday . The Committee will provide the House with this statement from 
Hon. Athman Mwamwiri, so Table Clerks make s ure the copies will be with the Hon . 
Members  during our next sitting . Yes Clerk. 
 
RESPONSE TO STATEMENT  BY CHAIRPERSON COMMI TTEE ON LABOUR AND S OCIAL WELFARE ON 
THE RECRUITMENT OF W ORKERS AT  THE COUNTY GOVERNMEN T IN THE DEPARTMENT OF FIRE  
 
 Yes Hon . Renson Thoya.  
 
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, am standing here in r egards to a statement 
that was requested by Hon . Murfad Abdallah Amur on the  recruitment of workers at the 
County government in the department of fire on Thursday 15th November,  2018 during the 
94th sitting.  
 Mr. Speaker Sir upon the  request of this statement the Committee on Labour and 
Social Welfare arranged for a sitting on Thursday 22nd November,  2018 at 11 :00a.m in the 
Committee room to del iberate and consider the matter . It was during this meeting the 
Committee resolved to bring the following  to the attention of this House : 
 
 
November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 8  1. The Motion was brought by  Hon. Mwaka Zahoro and passed in this House on 
Tuesday 17th October,  2017 during the 14th sitting where it was resolved that the County 
Assembly Rules and Procedure Committee to undertake  a comprehensive review of the 
Standing orders and recommend appropriate amendm ents on the approval of the County 
Assembly ; 
 
 2. The Chief Officer Devolution  and Public Administration was vetted by the 
Committee on Justice  and Legal Affairs and the Committee has a strong feeling that the 
process  should have been expedited by Committee on Labour and Social Welfare ; 
 
 3. That pursuant to the Second Schedule of the County Assembly Standing order the 
Committee on  Labour and Social Welfare is listed as a sectoral Committee mandated to deal 
with all matters relating to labour , trade union relation wi th manpower human resource 
planning, gender culture and social welfare , youth, National youth service, children welfare, 
national heritage , vetting reports . Mr. Speaker Sir this itself is misleading ; it is from this 
concern that the Committee finds itself in a difficult place to exerc ise its role and therefore 
the Committee kindly seeks clarification of its mandate and exact department it is supposed 
to oversight before it can continue taking further assignments, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes H on Amur.  
 
 Hon. Murfad  Amur : Mr. Speaker it is very sad for a very respectable Member , my 
senior learned fri end who after one year in this Assembly  does not know the duties of labour 
it is very sad indeed ! After one good year he has been a Chair and he never kn ew the duties 
of that Committee until today when we ask a crucial question about people being employed 
behind our backs he is te lling us it is not under their Constitutional rights to inve stigate this 
and bring a report . With all due respect to my leaned f riend , brother it is shameful to say  so 
that the Committee does  not know their mandates  they had been given officially ; the powers 
that the Committee has it is to oversee all the departments it is given the mandate s more than 
any other sectoral Committee the y have the mandate of entering in any department an d 
investigate and give a report . The much we delay those people will be employed permanently 
and the buck stops with us ; me and you , how were they employed , where do they come from 
maybe some are not from M ombasa County and that is my worry . By the time we get this  
report Mr. Speaker they have their PF numbers , they have been stationed in departments and 
we will be  liable to answer to our voters . Mr. Speaker this is a serious issue and I respect my 
learned brothe r but this is not the time to fool us Mr. Speaker Sir, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) :  Yes Hon . Ibrahim.  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Mr. Speaker Sir thank you for this particular golden o pportunity you 
have given to me . I just want to react on the statement that  have just been read by the 
Chairman of Labour ; I think  it is very sad and unfortunate that the Chair comfortably and 
confident ly stand up and tell us that he is not able as I quote that he is not able to give us full 
report on what  is happening on the employment opportunities . When this statement was 
brought to this House I re member  very well the very Chair with due respect he stood and told 
us and even confirmed that we give him time so that he can go and find out and give us a 
credible and compreh ensive report  on what is happening  because I re member  Hon. Amur 
wanted to know why in the departments , in several departments there are some employments 
which were going on, people were warming up for employment  and as he requested he said 
that as Member  of the County Assembly we were not aware of any of that taking place . 
November 22, 2018                COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        98 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electroni c version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 9  Therefo re the ball was brought to the Chair and he confirmed today he will be giving 
us a very comprehensive report on what is going on only  for him to  stand  up and tell  us that 
he is not a ble to do that.  I think Mr. Speaker Sir this is very dangerous , this is very serious 
and you have to rule on this because it  is like the Chair seems like it is very hot for him and I 
think he is just trying to sh y away from the Chair and therefore do something Mr. Speaker, 
thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Hon. Renson Thoya I think as per your 
response you are unable to respond on the sta tement that was raised in this House concerning 
the recruitment of workers by the County government . So I hereby rule th at the House will 
communicate to this House an ad hoc Committee that will look upon this issue so that they 
bring back a report so in our next sitting . We will communicate to you the ad hoc Committee . 
Yes Clerk. 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members  there being no othe r business the House stands adjourned until 
Tuesday 27th November at 2: 30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:36p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 