November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 28th November , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Ninety Ninth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  2:53p.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Temporary  Speaker (Hon.  Frankline Makanga ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga ): Let us be seated Hon ourable  Members.  Yes 
Clerk?  
 
STATEMEN T 
MAKUPA ROUNDABOUT MANHOLE INCIDENT  
 
Yes, Honourable  Samir Bhaloo, MCA Tud or Ward please make your statement.  
 
Hon. Bhal oo: Honourable  Speaker , thank you so much.  I stand pursuant to Standing 
Order 40(1) to request for a statement from the Chairperson, Committee on Transport and 
infrastructure regarding the recent incident at the Makupa round about manhole  incident, where 
three employees of Mombasa County government lost their lives during a drainage unclogging 
operation.  Honourable  Speaker , this tragic incid ent raises critical questions about the safety and 
preparedness of  County employees engaged in suc h tasks. Th erefore, I seek information and 
clarification on the following matters:  
 
1. Employment status and qualifications : 
 
a) Can the Committee confirm whether the indivi duals who l ost their lives in the 
incident were County employees?  
b) Were these individuals properly qualified and trained for the specific task of 
unclogging drainage systems?  
2. Compensation Plans:  
a) What plans does the County government have in place  to compensate the families 
of the deceased employees?  
b) Could the Com mittee provide details on the compensation framework, including 
any insurance coverage or financial support for the  affected families.  
3. Safety measures and protocols:  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 a) What safely measures and protocol s were in place during the drainage unclogging 
operation.  
b) Will the Committee investigate whether there were any lapses in adhering to 
safety standards, leading to this tragic incident.  
4. Emergency Response:  
a) How timely and affective was the emergen cy response in rescuing the indivuals 
who survived the incident.  
b) Are there recommendations for improvements in emergency response procedures 
to prevent si milar occurrences in the futu re? 
 
Honourable Speaker , this incident has brought to light  significant concerns abo ut the 
welfare and safety of County employees undertaking hazardous assignments.  It is crucial to 
address these issues promptly and comprehensively to prevent the recurrence of such unfortunate 
events.  I kindly request that the Committee on Tran sport and Infrastructure facilitate the 
provision of a detailed state ment addressing the concerns outlined above.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you Hon ourable  Samir Bhaloo  for 
your statement request .  Pursuant t o Standing or der number 40 (1) I  will read , notwithstanding  
Standing order 27 The Speaker shall interrupt the business of the County Assembly every 
Tuesday to at 4:00  p.m to facilitate Members to make general statement of topical concern, 
considering  the public interest on this matter . I would therefore with the permission o f the Chair,  
that I allow  Members in the House including the one who ha s requested for the said statement to 
dwell in to it, I will give a minute each so that maybe  you can a lso ask any further  quest ion that 
you wish to ask and all other Members you are also free to contribute to the said statement that 
has been brought before this House . So Hon ourable  Samir Bhaloo , if there is anything that you 
wish to add in relation to the same ? You are free to do so with a minute.  
 
Hon. Bhaloo:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I thin k I have nothing to add on  to, thank you . 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga ): Thank you very much . Yes, Honourable  
Hamida Noor , please make your contribution?  
 
Hon. Noor : Thank you Mr. Speaker I sta nd to support this Motion. I stand here to 
support this Motion by saying that…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga ): Honourable  Hamida it is not a Motion;  it is a 
statement request.  
 
Hon. Noor : I stand here to support the statement request.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) :  Thank you.  
 
Hon. Noor:  I stand to say that Mr. Speaker that we need people to be taken to places 
where the gutters are supposed to be removed or because this rain that we are havi ng now it is 
unpredictable.  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 It has been said it is El  Nino but sometimes we hear that it not El  Nino but the rains that 
we are getting right now it is something that we have never ever experienced.  
So, we need our people to be trained on this; to be taken for the trainings so that they know if 
their disaster of this sort come up, they will k now what to do b ut randomly anybody from the 
department to be taken there and doing such jobs it is a risk . Already , we have lost lives and I 
think with the Department of Transport and Infrastructure has  to ge t into this , thank you very 
much.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makang a): Thank you Hon ourable  Hamida Noor . Yes, 
Honourable  Juma Manuari?  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari : Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante kwa kunipa nafasi ya kuendelezesha 
Taarifa  ya ndugu yetu Samir Bhaloo . Ila mimi siwezi ku sema mengi zaidi ya hapa isipokuwa 
taarifa yake tayari ish ajieleza ; haya majibu yakija ndio hapo sasa tutapata jibu ama neno la  
kuzungumza baada ya haya majibu yakija na kwa kuwa mimi ni mmoja wa Kamati ya uchukuzi 
hii ya transport  siwezi kusema sana wacha tukaione tukishapata jibu kamili ndio tutarudi katika 
Jumba hili tuchangie lile ambalo liko  mbele yetu n a tuelezee yale a mbayo yako mbele yetu.  
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga) :  Thank you so much Hon ourab le Manuari, 
Yes Ho nourable  Samuel Mwaura MCA Kongowea Ward ? 
 
Hon. Mwaura : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika umenipa nafasi ili namimi niweze 
kuchangia kidogo kuhusi ana na swala ambalo liko mbele ya Nyumba hii. Mheshimiwa Spika 
maswala ya janga ambalo limetu kumba ni swala muhimu sana na ni swala ambalo lazima 
tuliangazie na ninaarifiwa ya kwamba kuna Kamati ya kuhusiana  na majanga katika maeneo yetu 
ya Wadi na hatungelipenda kuona tukio kama hili likifanyika tena.  Kwa hivyo kuna umuhimu 
wa swala hili kujibiwa kwa haraka na Kamati h usika. Pia kuna umuhimu wa sisi kufahamu  na 
kujua kweli zi le Kamati ambazo tunaambiwa zipo kule mashinani na kule katika Wadi; je, hizo 
zimepelekwa katika mafunzo ya kukabiliana na majanga ama wanachukua tu vijana wetu tu  wale  
ni mtaani halafu anaishia kumalizia kwa majanga na pia na wao hizo Kamati za  kukabiliana na 
majanga ama timu za kukabili ana na haya majanga. Habari ya malipo yao ya kulipwa kwao 
kuna kuwa namna gani kwa sababu sidhani kama wako kw enye  payroll  ya Kaunti Mheshimiwa  
Spika . Kwa hivyo ni swa la ambalo tunalingojea kwa hamu tupate kujua na tupate ufa hamu wa 
kilichojiri na kana kwamba walipitia mafunz o na kama wale wengine wako katika maeneo 
mengine nao pia kama wamepitia mafunzo ili kukabiliana na majanga. Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika na Ahsante Mheshimiwa Samir Bhaloo kwa ajili y a kuuliza swali muhimu 
kama hili. Ahsante.  
 
The Tempo rary Speaker (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you Hon ourable  Samuel  Mwaura . 
Yes, Honourable  Benard Ogutu?  
  
Hon. Ogutu : Thank you Chair. Chair , I am a Member of Transport Committee . 
  
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga ): Yes. 
 
Hon. Ogutu : Going by what Hon ourable  Manuari has said we should wait and get the 
response from the Department and again dig more to know the nitty gritty.  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 The issue of disaster mana gement team in my Ward it is a multi -sectorial team , some 
even come from the national government . So, I do not know how the County government  will 
pay some body who is in the payroll of the national government . So, it is noble Mr. Speaker that 
we take the Department to task s o that we can know whatever has been highlighted  in the  
State ment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker,  and for that matter we request for two weeks so that we can 
come up with  a detail ed report on the same. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you Hon ourable  Ogutu and being a 
Member of the Committee . I hereby give direction s that you respond to this House on behalf of 
the Committee on Transport and infrastructure within one week . Honourable  Ogutu , because this 
is a matte r of the public interest lives has been lost and we are worried that should r ains 
continues we w ill end up losing more lives so  one week will be sufficient to be able to give back 
the report to this Hon ourable  House.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  That is okay but two weeks will be e nough. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga) :  Yes Clerk . 
 
MOTION  
MEASURES TO MITIGATE THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF TORRENTIAL RAINS AND FL ASH FLOODS DUE TO 
INADEQUATE STORM WATER DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE IN MOMBASA COUNTY  
 
Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi, MCA Airport Ward, please move the Motion?  
 
Hon. Omondi : Yes, Mr. Speaker thank you very much for the opportunity. Mr. Speaker , I 
would like to move the following Motion;  
 
WHEREAS,  recognizing the imperative of sustainable urban development, in accord ance 
with the principles enshrined in Article  10 of the Constitution of Kenya and the obligations 
arising from international treaties, including  the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction, to which Kenya is a signatory , 
 
WHEREAS,  adhering t o the principles of devolution as outlined in the Fou rth Schedule of 
the Constitution of Kenya, s pecifically Part 2 , assigning functions and powers to County 
government, and cognizant of  the need for effective storm water drainage systems as a 
critical component of public infrastructure , 
 
UNDERSCORING  the critical necessary to rectify the deficiencies in the current storm 
water drainage infrastructure in Mombasa County, intensified by intense torrential rains 
resulting in loss of lives and property destruct ion, 
 
HIGHLIGHTING the susceptibilities of current feeder roads, especially those beyond the 
Central Business District (CBD) , to flash floods due to the lacking essential storm water 
drainage infrastructure , 
 
ACKNOWLEDG ING the efforts of the County government in unb locking drains during 
heavy rains , 
 
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 COMMENDING His Excellency,  the Governor for his proactive pronouncements and 
diligent efforts to alleviate the adverse consequences of destructive torrential rains , 
 
NOTING the necessity fo r immediate short -term measures to repair existing drainage 
infrastructure and address immediate needs during the heavy rains season, while also 
recognizing the importance of a complete and holistic drainage  network covering all wards 
in the C ounty , 
 
FURTHER EMPHASIZING the importance o f working with communities and 
stakeholders to address inadequacies in the current storm water drainage system and 
finding lasting solutions that community will  own, 
 
RECOGNIZING the need for partnership with donors to fund m ajor storm water drai nage 
system construction and overhaul and the establishment and operationalization of an 
emergency task force to unclog and repair storm water drainage infrastructure , 
 
ENCOURAGING gover nment agencies and contractors construc ting and repairing roads to 
consult with the County government, ensuring alignment with infrastructure plans , 
 
EXPRESSING CONCERN over the potential negative impact and consequences of 
inaction or inadequate measures on road integrity, as well as adjacent properties , 
 
UNDERSCORING SERIO US CONCERN regarding the potential loss of lives and 
destruction of property during this season of heavy rains if urgent and effective measures 
are not promptly implemented , 
 
NOTING WITH DEEP CONCERN the existing inadequacy of s torm water drainage 
infrastructure alo ng all feede r roads in the County.  
 
I, therefore, urge this Assembly to RESOLVE:  
 
1. THAT the County government takes immediate short -term measures to repair existing 
drainage infrastructure to address the immediate needs during the heavy rains seas on, 
 
2. THAT the County government collaborates with communities and stakeholders to 
address inadequacies in the current storm water drainage system and find lasting solutions  that 
the community will own , 
 
3. THAT the County government partners with donors to fund major s torm water d rainage 
system construction and overhaul , 
 
4. THAT the County government  establishes and operationalizes an emergency task force 
team to unclog and repair storm water drainage infrastructure , 
      5. The last prayer Mr. Speaker is THAT government agencies and contractors constructing 
and repairing roads consult with the County government to align their infrastructure plans 
seamlessly.  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Thank you , Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker , I request Hon ourable  Bhaloo to second the  
Motion.  
 
Hon. Bhaloo:  Honourabl e Speaker , I second the Motion.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you. I now propose a question that 
the Motion by Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi on measures to mitigate the adverse effects of 
torrential rains and flash floods due to inadequate storm water drainage Infrastructure in 
Mombasa County be considered by this Hon ourable  House in the same terms as moved . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi, please mak e your contribution?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  Yes, Mr. Speaker Sir thank you. Mr. Speaker Sir , we all know in this 
particular Hon ourable  House what our County is undergoing at this particular time and not only 
our County  but almost all over the Country . Mr. Speaker , we all know the effects of the rains that 
we have been having ; destruction, loss of lives taking place in every corner of the County ...Mr. 
Speaker , therefore  it is with this respect that I have come up with this particular Motion to inform 
the under assigned or responsible par ties to be able to  take caution of this. Mr. Speaker,  I want to 
start by  saying that  I have done my observations and I found out that most of these agencies who 
are involved in building the feeder roads in our Wards are just built anyhow  without good plans, 
without good provisions of the drainage system and this one leads to flooding in those particular 
areas.  Mr. Speaker , it is very important that the e ngineer or the agencies that are concerned with 
constructing those feeder roads to do a bit of public par ticipation, it is very important to meet the 
people around that particular place because the people who live there have got a lot of 
knowledge on how the drainage in that particular place is  so that as the engineers who put  up the 
roads,  they consider such particular factors as they put up roads .  
Mr. Speaker Sir, you will find that when these people put up the roads without consulting 
or without putting proper measures for the drain age systems the water end s up in to peoples’ 
houses and again it is a lot  of destruction that takes place in these p articular houses and even 
destruction of lives . Mr. Speaker , just talking of an incident that just happened around Makupa 
Roundabout ; a very serious one which everybody needs to know on what happened , this is one 
of the thing s that is addressed  in this parti cular Motion . Mr. Speaker , another issue briefly that 
comes to this Motion is that immediately a fter the rains we need to bring some of these roads 
into good condition ; you find tha t most of the roads have been destroyed , most of them are not 
working and  therefore it is very important  for the concerned agencies to ensure that the repair s 
are done immediately . Another issue that comes out finally from this particular Motion…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Honourable  Nusura Mwinyi , your 
movements are wanting ; please take your seat , you will be the n ext to make your contribution, 
thank you. Yes , proceed Hon ourable  Ibrahim . 
 
Hon. Oyugi:  Finally , Mr. Speaker the preparedness ; this issue this term ha s been used  
severally  in this particula r House and we need to see its impact on the ground.  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 The team ; the emergency team that is concerned with emergencies , how are they capacity 
built, how trained are th ese particular people those are the things  that each and  every person is 
asking. So, the Motion  is also touching on  that the County government  and they  should be able 
to come up with a very able team which should be ready  for such emergencies that tak e place in 
our areas, Mr. Speaker I would like to humbly urge the Honourable Members  in this particular 
House to support this Motion so that we may be able to prevent some of the things that happen s 
during rains. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Ibrahim 
Omondi. Yes , Honourable  Rogers Allen Katana , MCA Shanzu Ward please make your 
contribution.  
 
Hon. Kata na: Thank you , Mr. Speaker . As well as I also want to contribute in th e Notice 
that was given by H onourable Member from Tudor, Hon ourable  Samir Bhaloo but maybe 
because of time or some good reasons known to you Honourable Speaker you oversaw that. 
Personally,  I just stand to support this very timely Motion and because Mr. Speaker all has been 
said, it is just a matter of making sure that whatever we pass here, I do not know exactly Mr. 
Speaker what good mechanism we can put in place so that whatever issue we pass h ere is 
actua lly put into im plementation or minus that , we shall be s tanding here giving good adv ice to 
the government...  
 
[Interr uption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Honourable  Mbaya, please take your seat , 
there is some very good information that you need to take to the people of Timbwani and your 
movements in and out may interfere with you getting such information, humbly take your seat. 
Thank you, yes proceed.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you , Mr. Speaker...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Yes, Honourable Mbaya?  
 
Hon. Hamis i Mbaya:  Nakuomba Mhe shimiwa Spika nimebanwa na h aja vibaya sana, 
nakuomba Mheshimiwa  Spika nimebanwa na haja ndogo sana naomba  nijisaidie nirudi . 
 
The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Okay, you are allowed you have three  
minutes to be back because you cannot miss the ve ry important information that, yes proceed 
Honourable  Allen Katana . 
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker because Lik oni people seem to be pressed so much, I beg to 
support. Thank you.  
 
The Temporary Sp eaker  (Hon. Makan ga): Thank you Hon ourable  Allen Katana. There 
is a question you asked about  the mechanisms in place as far as it conce rns implementation and 
the Chair Committee on Im plementation is in this House, so can you respond to that Chair and  
proceed  to make your contribution over the same.  Yes, Honourable  Samuel Mwaura?  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 8 [Applause ] 
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity to make my own 
contributio n towards this Motion and also to give a confirmation on the follow up of my 
Committ ee towar ds implementation o f this very M otion and not only this, but  the many Motions 
that have been passed in this House . Mr. Speaker , we do not have to keep on reminding the 
Executive  of their roles and responsibilities, but this House and my Committee is so much 
committed to see the implementation of all the Motions are fully done and especially this one 
that touches on people lives . Right before we go to this order for the Motion Mr. Speaker , you 
were speaking of  a statement concerning two or three  persons who perished due to  the ongoing 
rains and the disasters that we  are facing as a County . Mr. Speaker , it must be noted that this 
Count y is not well prepared in terms of disaster mana gement as the mover of the Motion says 
that there is good intention from the Governor and the work  done is being seen on the ground, 
but it is still wanting and that is the reason  to why I b elieve the mover of the Motion has seen it 
necessary for him to bring  this Motion. I rise t o support it Mr. Sp eaker though  I just want to say 
that what  we are passing right now , is exactly what is in the law and what are the roles of the 
County government  of Mombasa , they k now very well that very clearly that they are re sponsible 
for this job of  unclogging the drainages and ensuring that they are no blockages Mr. Speaker. I 
stand to support and commit myself to seeing to it that they are doing exactly what  is supposed to 
be done by themselves Mr. Speaker. Thank you.      
 
The Temporary Spea ker (Hon. Makanga ): Thank you Hon ourable  Samuel Mwaura, 
while ma king your contribution and s aying that you keep on reminding and at one point seems 
like you  are like  giving up. Reminding the m on what they need to do ; you should be reminde d 
that according to Standing Order No. 188, and I will have the pleasure of reading them for you as 
the Committee on Implementation: 188; 
  
1. There shall be a Select Committee to be known as  the Committee on 
Implementation, where you are the Chair . 
 
2. The Committee shall scrut inize the resolutions of th e County Assembly (including 
adopted Committee Reports ), petitions an d the undertaking s given by the Executive 
Committee and examine: - 
 
(a) Whether or not such decisions and undertakings have been implemented and 
where implemented the extent to which they have been implemented and whether such 
implementation has taken place within the minimum time necessary ; and , 
  
(b) Whether or not legislation passed by the  County Assembly has been 
operationalized and where operationalized the extent  to wh ich such operationalization  has 
taken place within th e minimum time nec essary.  
 
The Committee, an d I want you to kn ow this so that you do not become a helpless 
Chairman, you need to understand that you have been empowered by the Standin g Orders 
and the Constitution ; 
 
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 9 3. The Committee may propose to the County Assembly sanctions against any 
Member of the County Executive Committee who fails to report to the relevant Select 
Committ ee on implementation status without justifiable  reasons.  
 
Therefore,  Honourable  Samuel Mwau ra there is no single reaso n to feel helpless  and 
giving  up.  You are a believer of the Bible an d it says in Timothy:  remind them even though they 
know . So do your work and you have been given power s by this Assembly that when  it is 
difficult for them to listen to you as the Chair do the sanctions  and the House will be able to  take 
full charge.  
  
Hon.  Mwaura:  Mr. Speaker , I stand guided and  I oblige  we obviously know ou r roles 
but we do  not always want to step  on peoples toes  and it is our oblig ation though to ensure that  
every stone will not be left un turned so I oblige.   
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga ): Thank  you.  Yes, Honourable  Bernard 
Ogutu?   
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. Makanga) :  Honourable  Bernard Ogutu you are in the 
Assembly you are somehow  dressed I know you are the cap tain for Tag of war but maybe  if you 
could cons ider tucking  in your shirt you are a senior Member of this house and a respectable 
person for that matter and t he Patron Ramogi which is an association that this households  in high  
esteem . So maybe you can do that and then you just proceed to make your contribution 
honorable Bernard Ogutu .  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you  Chair for  that direction. C hair sometimes I understand that 
always the Speaker is blind and I don’t know to what extend Mr. Speaker but I will do that  
immediately I finish giving my contribu tion. Thank  you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker , I stand to 
support the Motion by Hono urable Bomoa , Ibrahim Omondi it is a very good Motion but it 
should not be brought into the  House because of whatever happened at Makupa . Mr. Speaker , as 
we are speaking today  in North Eastern there are areas where  all roads are swept ; where do you 
direct the blame  to, they built the roads , there were proper  infrastructure  but they were swept that 
is what we c all disaster so on this .  
I am supporting it Mr. Speaker basica lly because of the prayer number five , that most of 
the roads done by different Agen cies KEN HA, KERA , KURA, the y never consult anybody and 
the exten t they do their work  they do not put drainage as a priority .  So, that is the only reason 
Mr. Sp eaker that drives  my attention to supporting this Motion , but in terms of whatever 
happened, it was planned by God t hat those three gentlemen will  die the same death . Mr. 
Speaker , they could not escape  it and we have seen  the Governor, we  have seen the Minister 
doing what they could do and we have not seen anybody bringing a Motion here or a Statement 
to congratula te them of the good things they are doing . So, I think we will discuss this when we 
will be  responding to the Statement. But  I support based on prayer number five , thank you Mr. 
Speaker . 
  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 10 The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you so much Hono urable Berna rd 
Ogutu. You can just tuck  in; i give you the perm ission  to tuck in just where you are … so, that 
you do  not or the zip is in bad condition ? Okay you can proceed to , yes Hon ourable  Patrick 
Mbele Member of County Assembly Bamburi Ward .  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa nafasi hii u menipa na vile vile 
nimshukuru Mungu kwa zawadi ya  uhai. Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza nimpongeze Mheshimiwa 
mwenza, Mheshimiwa Bomoa  kwa kuleta Mswada  hii ambayo kwangu imekuja kwa wakati 
ufaao, na vile vile inagusa donda sugu  la Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa . Mheshimiwa Spika Kaunti  
yetu ya Mombasa leo hii , ningekuwa na uwezo wa kibinadamu w a kuweza kusema tufanye 
lolote , ni kwamba ningesema itafutiwe yule almaktum ainunue aivunje alafu waitengeneze upya 
kulingana na zile drainage system  zilivyo . Lakini sina huo uwezo  kama Mheshimiwa na hata 
kama mkaaji wa Mombasa kwa  sababu naipenda Kaunti yangu  lakini ni wakati  ambao sisi kama 
Waheshimiwa katika Bunge hili na sisi kama wenyeji na watu waliopewa uwezo wa kuweza 
kuamulia watoto wa Mom basa yale ya kufanya ama yale ya kufanyiwa hili kub oresha maisha 
yao. Ni muhimu sasa tuanze kupanga mikakati ma alum . Yani vipi jiji letu la Mombasa 
tutahakikisha ile  storm water drainage  kwa Kiswahili sijui inaitwa nini i we inafanya kazi 
kulingana na vile inafaa kuwa inafanya kazi .  
Mheshim iwa Spika , natambua kuwa Gavana alioko kwa sasa  na hata yule alipita 
waliridhi mji ambao kwa kiasi fulani kuna sehemu ambazo zimepewa title deeds na hizo ndio 
sehemu wali fanya mipangilio . Lakini leo hii kuna seh emu nyingi sana ndani ya Mombasa 
ambazo  watu wameenda kuishi wamechuku a mashamba na wamejenga manyumba ambazo 
hazina  stakabadhi  na hazijafanyiwa planning  kulingana na vile zinafaa kufanyiwa planning  na 
watu wetu wa idara ya plannin g. Kwa hivyo ni muhimu kando na hata ya kuwa tupate title deeds  
lakin i ni muhimu idara ya planning  iingilie kati swala la ni nani anajenga  wapi? kwa kiasi gani?  
Kwa kima gani? Ndio tuweze kupata njia mwafaka ya kuweza kupitisha maji,  stima na vitu 
vingine ambavyo ni muhimu kwa binadamu kuwe za kutumia.  Leo hii ndani ya mfano tu 
nikisema kule Bamburi,  kuna watu wengi ambao kwa  kutojua ama kwa kuta ka kupata mahali pa 
kuishi wamejenga juu ya mito , wamejenga katikati ya maziwa na nd iposa leo hii mvua inapokuj a 
maji yanafuata mkondo wake na kubeba nyumba, vifaa , mifugo na wa tu inakuwa ni ke ro na 
shida kubwa kwa sisi katika Kaunti.  
Kwa hivyo kidole tunaponyoosha kuna vinne vinatuangalia  Mheshimiwa Spika ; vya 
kuangalia ni vipi katika siku za usoni, maisha yetu yataweza kuboreka k wa kuwashauri watu  
wetu na  serikali . Hivyo basi,  ni muhimu ya kwamba  leo hii tuweze kutafuta njia za kuweza 
kuwaambia watu wetu waliojeng a katika mito waweze kutoka  kwa njia ambayo ni ya ubinadamu 
na ikishindikana kwa ub inadamu tutafute njia ingin e ambayo tunaweza  kuwasaidia kwa sababu 
hata tukiwaacha kwa kuwaonea huruma bado maji yatafuata mkondo wake na yatawaadhiri.  
Vilevile katika maziwa Mheshimiwa Spika ina huzunisha kuwa katika sehemu kama kule 
kwangu Bamburi kuna  sehemu ambazo nyumba zaidi ya 30 ambao  zilijengwa ndani ya  ziwa. 
Najiuliza swali moja ; watu wetu wa idara ya  mipangilio  hata si infrastructure  walikuwa wapi 
walipokuw a wanaruhusu watu wajenge katika hizi sehem u? Hata tunapopiga mahesabu ya 
kutengenez a storm water drainage,  lakini kuna umuhimu wa watu wetu wa idara ya  mipangilio  
kufanya mikakat i kuweza kutupangia mji huu wetu katika njia ambayo iko sawa la sivyo sa a hii 
wanaendelea kujenga wameona maji saa hizi lakini kesho mtu mwingine atakuja auziwe katika 
lile lile ziwa na akuje ajenge mtu yule ambaye hajui. Kwa sababu  mji wetu tunapokea watu 
wengi kila mwaka je? Mtu atatoka Kisumu aje anunue katika ziwa atakuja ajenge , je? tutakuja 
kumla umu katika siku zijazo?   
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 11 Kwa  hivyo Mheshimiwa Bomoa  ahsante kwa kuleta  Mswada huu , umefanya jambo la 
maana sana na ni muhimu tufunguke akili na macho  kando na kuangali a tutajenga vipi hii mitaro  
na storm water drainage  lakini muhimu zaidi  pia, tuwaongoze  watu wetu ni wapi wanafaa 
wajenge , kwa kiasi gani , nyumba inapanda vipi na inashuka chini vipi , ndio t uweze kuepukana  
na mikasa kama hii . Mheshimiwa Spika , vile vile nitoe risala zangu za rambi rambi kwa yale 
amba yo yalitokea juzi , wenzetu watatu wal iweza kufariki dunia kutokana na ule mkasa 
uliowapata , si jambo la kuchukulia dhi haka ama kufanya mzaha , ilitokea hawakupenda na 
hakuna ambaye alipenda , lakini vile vile nafikiri pi a ilikuwa  ni ishara  ya kwamba Mungu 
anatukumbusha . Kuna me ngi ambayo tunafaa tujitayarishe nayo , kuweza kuwapa mafunzo  
vijana wetu, kuweza kuonyesha njia sawa ya kufanya kaz i gani kwa wakati gani  ili tuwe ze 
kuepuka na  mikasa kama ile . Lakini nipongeze Gavana na idara ya Uchukuzi  kwa kile ambacho 
walifanya na nitakie zile familia afueni haraka ingawaje walipoteza watu wao , ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Tempor ary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you so much Hon ourable Patrick 
Mbele for your contribution . Yes, Hon ourable  Leila Nyache, Member of County Assembly 
Kipevu Ward and Chairperson Water and Clima te Change.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika na mimi kuweza kuniona, nachukua 
fursa hii k umpongez a Mhe shimiwa Ibrahim Omondi kwa kuweza kuleta hoja nzuri na kwa 
wakati ufaao. Pili nataka n iseme kwamba Mh eshimiwa Mbele ni ka ma amemaliza kila  kitu, kwa 
sababu amegusia yote yale ambayo yanahi tajika kufanywa. Mimi nitagusia tu hiki kip engele cha 
kwanza ya kwamba , zile drainage  zilioko sasa hivi ningeomb a idara  ya infrastructure waweze 
kuzishug hulikia , kwa sababu nyingi sasa hivi ni zile amba zo ni za kitambo na pia hazifanyi 
vizuri . Tumeona juzi mvua imenyesha , hizo drainage  zime  block , zengine zime bomoka b omoka , 
kwa hivyo zimetuletea pia mafuriko kiasi katika Mombasa yetu hii.  Na pia nitoe pole k wa wale 
waliopatwa na mkasa huu wa  juzi hapo makupa , tunasema ile ni bahati mbaya . Walikuwa kazini 
pia wao hawakujua y a kwamba wataweza kw enda na  maji ama wata weza kupoteza  maisha yao 
pale, angalau wangejua hata hawangeingia pale .  
Kwa hivyo tunawaambia pole lakini tusinyoosheane vidole , ile ni bahati mbay a na pia 
sisi tunasema Inna lillahi wa  Inna illa iyi Rajiuun  kwa sisi Waislamu , kila nafsi itaonja mauti na  
siku ya ko ikifika huwa ni sababu tu inatafutwa . Siku zote watu wanafanya zile kazi na hakuna 
lile amb alo linatokea . Ilikuwa wamepangi wa siku yao ni hio imefika s iku hio na ilikuwa ni 
sababu, kw a hivyo  tunawaombea Mwenyezi  Mungu aweze kuwahifadhi  mahali pema penye 
amani. Pia nataka niseme hivi , mimi pale kwangu p ia kuna barabara k wa Wadi ya Kipevu kuna 
barabara ili jengwa kitambo na cabro , lakini iko juu na hio imesababisha nyumba kadha pale 
kuweza kuingia maji . Kwa hivyo pia hizi barabara zetu pia ziangali we, tunaomba idara  ya 
transport  waweze kuangalia hizo barabara , ni vipi wataweza kuzirekebisha ili mradi watu  wetu 
wasiweze kuingiliwa n a maji , ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika nime simama kuunga mkono hoja hii 
ahsante.  
 
The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you so much Hon ourable  Leila Nyache 
yes, Hon ourable  Juma Mbaya Memb er of County Assembly Timbwani Ward.  
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii , isipokuwa 
jina langu kamili naitwa Hamisi Salim Mbaya sio Juma Mbaya.  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 12 The Temporary  Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you so much . 
 
Hon. Hamisi Mbaya:  Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza nasema Ahsante sana kwa kunip atia 
nafasi waka ti ule muda ilikuwa nimebanwa na haja ndogo sana na ukanielewa , ukanipatia fursa 
ya kwenda kujisaidia , kwa hilo  nasema ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika.  Nimesimama kuunga 
mkono hoja h ii kwa asilimia sabini . Ahsante sana.   
 
[Applause ] 
 
        The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you Hon ourable Hamisi Mbaya . Yes, 
Honourable  Juma Manuari Member of County Assembly Bofu Ward , please make your 
contribution.  
 
        Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika . Nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja ya 
ndugu yangu Mhe shimiwa  Bomo a, ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
       The Temporary Speaker  (Hon.  Makang a): Thank you  so much Hon ourable  Juma Manuari . 
Yes, Honourable  Nusura Mwinyi please make your contribution an d then the mover of the 
Motion should be able to respond.  
 
        Hon. Nusura Mwinyi:  Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii . Kwanza 
nataka nimpongeze sa na Mhe shimiwa  Bomoa  kwa hoja yake hii nzuri na nataka kusema  ameilet a 
kwa wakati mzuri unaofaa.  Mimi natak a kusema kwamba hii hali haiku athiri peke ya ke Makupa , 
imeathiri wana  Mombasa wote isipokuwa tu  pahali kulipo tokea maafa ni hi o sehemu ambayo 
nimeitaja n a nataka kusema hivi , sisi pia wenyewe kama wananchi ama wana  Mombasa , pia tuna  
makosa ambayo tunayafanya .  Nataka kutoa mfano hai wa pale kwangu Mtongwe pale kona 
mbaya ; kuna watu wamejenga mahali ambapo w alikuwa wanajua kwamba hapa hii ni njia ya 
kupeleka maji , lakin i utam uona mtu amenunua sehemu ile, akajenga nyumba pale na akijua hapa 
kisha mbeleni patamletea madhara . Lakini kw a kuwa  ameuziwa ile sehemu kwa be i rahisi nafuu , 
akaona ni bora ajenge ma hali pale , lakini  sasa mtu kama yule amejeng a yeye pale , ameathirika 
yeye na wameathirika watu wengine . Njia za m aji tumezi funga sisi wenyewe ; kwa hivyo sote 
tuna makosa. Nimesimama kuunga mkono hoja ya Bwana Bomoa  ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
         The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you so much for your contribution,  
Honourable  Nusura Mwinyi kwa Kiswahili umesema maji yamerudi kwao nyumbani so 
Honourable  Bomoa , you can respond now to th e Motion.  
 
           Hon. Omondi:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker , I would like to take this 
opportunity, with all due respect to thank all the Hon ourable  Members who have  contributed 
towards this particular important Motion. Mr. Speaker from the mood of the House , it is true that 
Members have felt the need to implement this particular Motion , now I can sense the mover of 
the Motion that it’s all system go . Now Mr. Speaker , I would like to encourage my brother 
Honourable  Mwaura who is the Chairman  of Implementation  to ensure that  this Motion is taken 
seriously with the depart ment and it is implemented ful ly. Mr. Speaker , thank you very much and 
I thank the Membe rs for the support.  
 
        The Temporary Speaker  (Hon. Makanga) : Thank you Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi and 
the Honourable  Members for your contribution .  
November 2 8, 202 3                      COUN TY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER : The e lectronic version of the O fficial Hansard Report  is for  informatio n 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repo rt can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 13         I there fore rise to put the question that th e Motion by Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi on  
Measures to Mitigate the Adverse Effects of Torrential Rains and Flash Floods due to Inadequate 
Storm wat er Drainage Infrastructure in Momba sa County be approved by this Ho nourable  House 
in the s ame terms as moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
          The Motion by Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi on Measur es to Mitigate the Adverse Effects 
of Torrential Rains and Flash Floods due to Inad equate Storm water Drainage Infrastructure in 
Mombasa Count y is adopted by this Hon ourable  House . Yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
          This House stand s adjourn ed until Wednesday 29th November, 2023 a t 10:00 a.m. Thank 
you. 
 
The House rose at  3:50p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 