November 2 7, 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 27th November,  2018  
The House met at 2:33p.m.  
 
(The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members  have your seats . Yes, Clerk . 
PAPERS  
FIRST QUARTERLY REPO RT ON BUDGET EXPENDI TURE 2018/2019  
 Yes Hon.  Leader of M ajority . 
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker , let me take this 
opportunity as Deputy C hair of Finance to lay the P aper, first quarterly report on budget 
expenditure 2018/2019 . 
 
(Paper laid ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Members  I now stand to commit  the 
laid report on budget expenditure , the qu arterly report on budge t expenditure 2018/2019 to 
the Committee on F inance and the report will be debated in this House hopefully by next 
week bef ore we go for recess, thank you. Y es Hon.  Bwire.  
 
 Hon.  Bwire: Thank you Mr. Speaker, mine is  just a concern whe ther the paper that 
has been laid is an order paper or is  the first quarterly report on budget expenditure  as 
required. T hank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Amur . 
 
 Hon.  Murfad  Amur: Mr. Speaker with all due respect to my colleague this is a 
report that was requested by Hon.  Mwamwiri so the Committee has just brought that back to 
the Committee and the Committee will inform the House, the report that has been requested 
by Hon.  Mwamwiri.  
 

November 2 7, 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 2  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Sumba Bwire the  report before the 
Leader of Majority  is the quarterly report not unless you want to peruse the report you are at 
liberty to peruse it but it is before the Honourable  House.  
  
 Hon.  Bwire: Mr. Speaker my concern you see i s when now the Hon.  Majority wants 
to lay the  paper ; I don't know whether the first that was brought to your tab le was the one that 
was to be laid or the one that was to be laid is the one that has come with Mr. Chairman.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : It is a copy o f the report that was bro ught 
before me. Yes Clerk. 
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon.  Mwidani ): Maybe to remove  doubt to the Member...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Hon.  Majority leader I have ruled on that 
issue so let the Assembly proceed . Yes Clerk. 
 
NOTICE OF MOT ION  
ADOPTION OF TUK  TUK OPERATORS RULES  
 
 Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy . 
 
 Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy:  I wish to give a notice  of Motion  on adoption of Tuk Tuk 
operators rules . 
 
(Hon . Mohamed Hatimy moved)  
 
WHEREAS Tuk Tuks are authorized to operate under the T raffic Act of the Laws of 
Kenya ; 
 
WHEREAS the County government is ma ndated under Schedule Four of the 
Constitution to regulate road transport under its area of jurisdiction;  
 
WHEREAS there have been increased incidences of acts of insecurity and 
malpractices by operators of Tuk  Tuk cabs and if left unregulated the public wil l 
continue to be exposed to security and safety hazards;  
 
WHEREAS there is need for legislation to effectively and efficiently regulate this 
sub-sector for greater public safety and security;  and, 
 
WHEREAS it is the intent that these rules shall be applicable to all Tuk  Tuk owners, 
drivers and agents (herein  after called the ‘operator(s)’) until otherwi se rescinded or 
amended by the County Assembly;  
 
NOW,  THEREFORE,  be it resolved that the County Assembly of Mombasa  adopts 
the following Tuk  Tuk Operators Rules, 2018:  
 
The County Government of Mombasa to take enforcement measures to ensure that:  
November 2 7, 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 3 1. Every Tuk  Tuk operator shall be a registered member of an Associ ation 
recognized by the County government for the sub -sector. The Association 
shall among other things be responsi ble for the training of its Members  
on matters of safety and security of passengers.  
 
2. Every  Tuk Tuk cab shall:  
 
a) Be painted on the right hand side with the full and true name of the 
owner, his/her  business address and the total number of passengers 
allowed t o be carried thereof;  
 
b) Have a sticker paid for and issued monthly or such other time as is 
authorized by the County government;  
 
c) Have the photo of the driver displayed inside the Tuk  Tuk;  
 
d) Have installed three safety belts in us able form for use by pa ssengers ; 
 
e) Ensure that the Tuk  Tuk is washed and cleaned daily or at any time there 
is dust or dirt deposited therein.  
 
3. For the purpose of identification, every  Tuk Tuk cab shall be in one of 
the following zones:  
 
a) Island Zone  
b) Likoni Zone  
c) Changamwe Zone  
d) Jomvu Zone  
e) Nyali  Zone  
 
4. Every Tuk  Tuk operating in a particular zone shall be painted with a 
particular colour.  Colours painted for Tuk  Tuks operating in each zone 
shall be:  
a) Island Zone - Green  
b) Likoni Zone - Yellow  
c) Changamwe Zone - Red 
d) Jomvu Zone - Orange  
e) Nyali Zone - Blue  
 
5. The colour scheme shall not prevent operators from criss -crossing or 
passing through another zone.  
 
6. The County government shall adopt different number schemes peculiar to 
each zone.  
 
7. Every Tuk  Tuk driver shall while carrying passengers:  
 
a) At all times wear c lean official un iform prescribed by the County 
government ; 
November 2 7, 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 4 b) Be clean and well -groomed ; 
c) Refrain from smoking or spi tting while carrying passengers ; 
d) Carry his National ID and valid driver’s licence ; 
e) Drive within the prescribed traffic rules as per the law and  observe 
required speed limit ; 
f)    Ensure the safety and security of passengers, their luggage, other 
motorists and pedestrians ; 
g) Avoid foul and vulgar language agains t passengers or other 
motorists ; 
h) Avoid using violenc e or threats against passengers ; 
i)    Ensure pa ssengers do not leave any personal property before 
alighting and where such has been left to take reasonable steps to 
return the same to their owners or surrender at a police station 
nearby ; 
j)    Avoid obstructing other vehicles on the road.  
 
8. Tuk Tuk operators a nd the general public are sensitized on these rules 
and those who contra vene are prosecuted accordingly ; 
 
9. The County government shall have powers to enforce these rules and 
shall include prohibition of any Tuk  Tuk cab from operating or prosecution in 
a cour t of law for violating the same ; 
 
10. Photographic and video evidence of violations of these rules by Tuk  Tuk 
operators shall be admissible in court.  
 
11. These rules shall come into force six months after adoption.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk. 
 
RESOLUTION OF THE AS SEMBLY ON RESPONSIBI LITY BY PROPERTY OWN ERS TO MAINTAIN 
CLEANLINESS AROUND T HEIR PROPERTIES  
 
 Yes Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy . 
 
 Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy: Mr. Speaker my request is Hon.  Amur to read my notice 
please.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Hon.  Amur proceed . 
 
 Hon.  Murfa d Amur: Mr. Speaker on behalf of my learned  friend Hon.  Moham ed 
Hatimy I wish to give a notice of the following Motion ; resolution of the Assembly on 
responsibility by property owners to maintain cleanliness around their properties . 
 
(Hon. Murfad Amur  moved ) 
 
November 2 7, 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 5 WHEREAS environmental co ntrol is a function of the County government pursuant to 
the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of Kenya,  2010 ; 
 
WHEREAS there is need to provide guidance and direction on mai ntenance of 
cleanliness in the County to prevent unscrupulous dumping of waste mat erial which if 
left unchecked will lead to health hazards and pose a threat to public health and 
safety;  
 
WHEREAS it has been noted that there is a proliferation of trash dumped adjac ent to 
properties all over the County; and , 
 
WHEREAS it is the intent that t hese rules shall be applicable to all property owners, 
tenants and agents until otherwi se rescinded or amended by the County Assembly;  
 
NOW, THEREFORE,  be it resolved by the County Assembly of Mombasa as follows : 
 
The County government of Mombasa to take enf orcement measures to ensure that:  
 
1. A radius area of 10 metres surrounding each property is swept, washed and 
kept cle an free from litter and garbage ; 
 
2. All pavements and verandas fronting roads or which are deemed to be road 
reserves adjacent to properties a re free from hindrances or impediments for  
ease of passage by pedestrians ; 
 
3. A litter -bin is placed in front of every property for disposal of litter ; 
 
4. Garbage is separated into categories and be put in environmentally -friendly 
bags for ease of disposal ; 
 
5. The public is sensitized on proper garbage disposal and prosecute those 
infringing the law.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk. 
 
TRAINING OF YOUTH S BY THE KENYA  NAVY ON RESCUE DURIN G DISASTER  
 
 Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy . 
 
 Hon.  Moham ed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , before I go to another Notice of 
Motion , I seek leave under Standing order 45 to amend the Tuk Tuk Motion  to include (f) to 
include Kisauni zone paragraph 3 and 4, to amend the notice of Motion  (f) to read Kisauni. .. 
 
(Consultat ions) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Okay proceed.  
November 2 7, 2018             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                           99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  
Page 6  Hon.  Moha med Hatimy: Okay Mr. Speaker I wish to give a Notice of Motion  on,  
training of youth s by the Kenya Navy on rescue during disaster : 
 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy moved)  
 
WHEREAS the County government is mandated to provide rescue  and disaster 
management services  as per  the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of Kenya,  2010 ; 
 
WHEREAS the County government has fire brigade services and a Disaster 
Management Committee for such purposes as need may arise;  
 
WHEREAS there is need to increase m anpower and volunteer services to  complement 
the efforts of the County government  so as to assist whenever a situation arises in 
order to safeguard lives and property;  
 
WHEREAS there is need to involve the public in matters of rescue and disaster 
managemen t so that disaster situations are efficiently and effectively managed;  
 
NOW, THEREFORE,  be it resolved by the County government of Mombasa as 
follows : 
 
The County government of Mombasa in co operation with the Kenya Navy to train 
youth s in the County on matters of rescue and disaster preparedness.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon.  Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk. 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon.  Members  there being no other business the House stands adjourned until 
Wednesday the 28th at 9:00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 2: 55p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 