November 5 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 
Tuesday, 5th November , 2019  
The House met at 10:40a.m. 
 
(The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu ): Have your seat s? Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
 
PROGRAMMED ROTATION OF EARTHMOVERS AND ELECT RICAL TECHNICIANS IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Yes Hon. Charles Kitula?  
 
 The Chief Whip (Hon. Kitula ): Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker ; 
 
THAT AWARE  THAT upgrading of County roads and street lighting is a mandate of 
the County government as provided under the Fourth Schedule part 2, 5(a) and (b) of 
the C onstitution of Kenya , 2010;  
 
FURTHER AWARE THAT streetlights and access roads provide numerous benefits 
including but not limited to promoting transport, security, improving safety for riders 
and pedestrians;  
 
NOTING THAT  a well scheduled rotation of County earthmoving  equipments and 
Electricians in a specified duration will improve sup ervision and guidance from the 
Ward Administrators and offices of Members of the County Assembly;  
 
CONCERNED THAT lack of a well -establis hed calendar which is known by Ward 
Admin istrators and Members of County Assembly at Sub-County level has resulted to 
laxity and poor approach to priority areas by  the individuals providing these services;  
 
I therefor e urge this Assembly to resolve  that the  County government through the 
Depart ment  of Transport, Infrastructure and P ublic works;  
 
i) Earthmoving equipments and electrical  techni cians to rotate weekly in each 
Sub-County through a well sc heduled calendar known by both Ward 
Administrators and M embers of the County Assembly ; 

November 5 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  
ii) Total number of ma npower on ground and contact d etails of team leaders be 
known ; 
 
iii) Written prior communication by the County Executive Committee M ember o r 
Chief Officer be made to the Sub-County Administrator and area Members of 
the County Assembly in case of mechanical failu re or any other kind of 
reason.  
 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Kitula . Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
POLICY ON YOUTHS , WOMEN AND PERSONS WI TH DISABILITY  
 
(Consultations ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Mwalimu) : Yes Hon . Members we are in Order number 
7 on Notice of Motion because the Order P aper there was a repetition  in Order N umber 4 and 
order number 5 , it is just a clarification to the Hon ourable  House. Yes Hon. Mohamed 
Hatimy to give the Notice of Motion.  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Mr. Speaker Hon. Hatimy had an urgent matter in c ourt and he asked 
me to do the Notice of M otion on his behal f. I hope I am allowed to do so . 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Do you have a written note?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  No I don’t.  He has just made a call because he did not know that he will 
be late.  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 Mr. Speaker, protect me.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Okay proceed Hon. Milka?  
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you . Notice of Motion a policy on Youth, Women and Persons 
with D isability…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The De puty Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Bwire? There is a concern . Yes 
Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Have a seat Hon. Milka?   
November 5 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  
 Hon. Bwire:  Of course  Hon. Speaker . I am not objecting  but I am raising a concern . 
Mr. Speaker let  us have rules and regulations that will govern this House ; I remember one 
day when the Hon. Milka mandated me to read on her behalf a Notice of M otion concerning 
the dumping site I mean the dust bins  and I was remind ed that I should submit a written form 
signed by the Hon.  Member to permit me to read that Notice of M otion on her behalf. Mr. 
Speaker the Speaker of the day ruled out that there must be  a written form to mandate any 
Member to read anything on his/her behalf . So Mr. Speaker let us not open avenues that will 
bring some misun derstandings and some Members fee l that they are targeted or so. So I just 
wish to have or to ask you Chair if you have that written form or written letter and signed by 
Hon.  Hatimy mandati ng any other Hon. Member to  read that Notice of M otion on his behalf, 
thank you . 
 
 Hon. Samba : Point of order!  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Tobias Samba?  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker . I just want to quote Standing Order 47 (2) . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Okay read the Standing Order 47 (2)?  
 
 Hon. Samba : 47 (2) States that save for a special Motion, a Member who has a 
Motion standing in his or her name may  authorise, in writing another Member to move that 
Motion in the  Member’s stead.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : So this being a Notice of Motion…  
 
(Consultation s) 
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Hon. Speaker just like I said . I am not objecting but let it will be used as 
a reference ; let it be used as a reference and we should n ot open the avenues that will bring 
some confusion a nd misunderstanding Mr. Speaker , this being the House of rules and 
procedures, thank you.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Members . Hon. Milka ?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Concerned that , that St anding Order talks  about  a Motion yet we h ave a 
Notice of M otion here and why I am imploring upon this House or upon the Speaker to allow 
this to go on  it is because this is a Motion touching on women, disability and special groups 
and the matter that has  taken Hon. Hat imy to court is a  matter concerning this County and he 
was called in an urgent basis . So he was not able to write a note from court,  he is in court 
how would he have written a note?  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Okay thank you Ho n. Milka. Hon. Members , 
I will ask the Clerks to slot time for this notice of M otion in the afternoon so that the Hon. 
Member may write or he might be around in the  afternoon for him to give the Notice of 
Motion.  Yes Clerk?  
 
 Hon. Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker , afternoon is not a century away and the refore 
finally the Notice of M otion will be read. Thank you.  
November 5 , 2019                  COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4  
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon . Mwalimu) : Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members there being no o ther business the  House Stand s adjourn ed until 
Tuesday 5th November, 2019 at 2:30 p.m. 
 
The House rose at 10:52 a.m. 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 