September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Wednesday, 7th September, 2016  
The House met at 2.30pm.  
(Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Serah Nyamvula) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Be seated M embers. Clerk.  
PAPER  
       Thank you Hon. Kibwana Swaleh, Chairperson Committee of Health S ervices,  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. C hair for  giving me this chance; as the Chair of 
Committee o f Health services  am happ y today that am going to lay a P aper on R eport on lack of 
drugs at Maweni dispensary, thank you Hon. Speaker.  
(Paper Laid ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Clerk.  
NOTICE OF MOTION  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh.  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. C hair, Hon. Speaker sor ry. Now Hon. Speaker thi s 
is a Notice of M otion regarding the same report on the lac k of drugs at Maweni dispensary.  
       Hon. Sp eaker I would like to read the R eport, I wo uld like to seek leave of this R eport so 
that I will be able to read this….  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon.  (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Leave is granted Hon. Kibwana Swaleh 
please read the Notice of the M otion.  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker;  
(Hon. Kibwana Swaleh read the Report)  
       "The report on Committee of Health services, the R eport on lack o f drugs at Maweni 
dispensary.  
       Hon. Speaker the R eport, was nec essitated by, was brought as a S tatement here by area 
MCA , that was Hon. Kizito Opeya.  
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2        Hon. Speaker we delayed the R eport because of other circumstances today , I will be able to 
read the R eport, the report has introduction that is number  one . 
       This is the report of the Committee on Health Services of the County Assembly of Mombasa 
on Lack of Drugs at Maweni Dispensary… " 
(Interruption ) 
      Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyam vula) : Hon. Kibwana, sorry what we needed from 
you first of all was to read the N otice then you will ask if it is acceptable and to adopt then you 
read the R eport , so thank you for reading the Notice.. . 
(Consultations ) 
       Clerk, Hon.  Members apologies for that delay I was consul ting, now that the Notice of 
Motion has been read by the Chairperson of the Health Services C ommittee Hon.  Membe rs I put 
the question that the Report be read in the H ouse. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause ) 
       Hon. Swale h please proceed on reading the R eport, thank you.  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon. Speaker .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Continue.  
      Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Hon. Speaker I was also consulting .  
(Laughter ) 
       As you were  consulting I also had to consult on the R eport ; that is R eport on lac k of drugs at 
Maweni dispensary.  
       Hon. Speaker it has introduction, the introduction is number one ;  
       Hon. Speaker the Report of the Committee on Health Services of the Count y Assembly of 
Mombasa on Lack of Drugs at Maweni Dispensary.  
(Hon. Kibwana Swaleh resumed reading the Report)  
       "Hon. Speaker this R eport was necessitated by a request for statement by Hon. Kizito Okoth 
Opeya on 4th August 2016 seeking to know why the re was lack of drugs at Maweni Dispensary.         
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3        Consequently the Committee wrote to the Department and annexed herewith is the statement 
from the Department of Health on the matter.  
       Hon. Speaker number 2 is about observations and findings;  The Committee considered the 
statement by the Department of Health on the lack of drugs at Maweni Dispensary.  
       Mr. Speaker on the same observations and findings the statement does not show or indicate 
any lack or shortage of the drugs/medicine at th e medical facility. The statement shows frequent 
supply of drugs at the facility.  
       Hon. Speaker the Committee will appreciate if further details are provided by the questioner 
or if he is satisfied by the status quo.  
       Hon. Speaker N o. 3 regardi ng conclusion; The Committee is satisfied by the statement 
submitted by the Department of Health on the lack of drugs at Maweni Dispensary however,  it is 
still open to further investigation should it be found necessary.  
       Hon. Speaker N o. 4 on this Report is about recommendations; The Committee app roves this 
Report an d resolves to recommend to the County A ssembly for adoption. Hon. Speaker the 
County Assem bly to consider and adopt this R eport.  
       Hon. Speaker as I clearly indicated we have an extra  report dully signed by the department 
of health, and H on. Speaker if you look at the R eport it says;  
       Maweni dispensary is located on Maweni Sub County and serves a population of 12,947 
people. The villages served are Maweni, Kisumu ndogo, Mnazi Mmo ja and Shauri yako. The 
facility currently has a total of 7 te chnical sta ff i.e 5 nurses , 1 laboratory technologist, 1 
Pharmaceutical Technologist.  
       Hon.  Speaker the faculty offers the following services;  
 Immunization  
 Maternal child health  
 Antenatal clinic  
 HIV counseling and testing  
 Family planning  
 Growth monitoring  
 Nutrition counseling  
 Comprehensive care clinic  
 Delivery services  
       Hon. Speaker the on the report (a) the essential medicines and medical supplies; The C ounty 
government procured drug s amounting to 2 million shillings for Nyali and Kisauni sub -county in 
the month of June from KEMSA.  
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4        Out of this Maweni received a consignment worth Ksh.195, 000 , this was delivered in the 
first week of June.  
       On the 16th August 2 016 the faci lity received anti -malarial drugs a nd diagnostic kits for 
malaria ( Malaria RDT ) this supply was from KEMSA.  
       Hon. Speaker N o. 3 as from November 2015, procurement of non -pharmaceuticals has been 
unde rtaken with support from Wofak (estimated cost of K shs. 600,000),  the following 
commodities have been supplied; laboratory reagents, gloves, cotton wool, cervical cancer 
screening reagents.  
       Hon. Speaker (b) Equipments in April 2016, equipment of reproductive health services was 
procured by DSW. Mawe ni received equipment worth Kshs. 1 million.  
       Human resource -The C ounty government posted 2 additional nurses in the month of May 
and February , total number of nurses is 5.  
       Hon. Speaker, the c hallenges - As we are aware that we have challenges  as much as  there 
are good things on this R eport, lack of perimeter wall to prevent easy access to the facility, there 
has been incidences of security involving the staff at the facility ". 
(Hon. Kibwana Swaleh ended reading the Report)  
       Hon. Speaker there is the R eport that I was reading before this Hon.  House and I request that 
the House adopt s this R eport, thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you.  Proposer?  
       Hon.  Thoya:  Hon. Speaker I stand before this Hon.  House to second the R eport.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you Hon.  Members , I now put a 
question. Hon.  members I am putting a question that this R eport…  
(Interruption ) 
        Yes Hon. Mary what is the issue, you are on . 
        Hon. (Ms. ) Akinyi : Thank you Madam S peaker, I would  like to ask if it is really a Member; 
who is not a Member of this C ommittee is allowed to second the report.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon.  Members this is a question on the 
House, we will d iscuss that it was the ..., the issue here is to second then the dis cussions will 
follow thereafter. S o will as many as of  the opinion that this Report, the R eport on lack of drugs 
at Maweni dispensary be adopted.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
       This R eport is adopted.  
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 (Applause ) 
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Yes Hon. Saad what is it ? 
       Hon. Faraj : I think M adam there is a mistak e we have adopted the R eport even before we 
delibera ted even a single word on this R eport.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : We are now going to start deliberations.  
       Hon. Faraj : Okay thank you.  
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh : Thank you Hon.  Speaker I think today is my day I’ve been standing 
here and s eating …  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : It is also my day . 
       Hon. Kibwana Swaleh:  It is also your day thank you. Hon. Speaker I think the Members  
have copies of this R eport and as clearly stated the R eport we got it from the department of 
health services and to show that Ma weni dispensary as  far as this R eport is concerned has been 
supplied with drugs.   
       Hon. Speaker I think that Maweni dispensary is among the old dispensaries which were 
under  Municipal;  to find that the drugs that w ere sent there were frequently  done i f you look at 
the dates that I have read before this Hon.  House.  
       Hon. Speaker as much as we also  have some good things in this R eport it is clearly defined 
that any R eport that is brought to this Hon.  House there is an element that is missing ; this is an 
issue  of human resource . 
       Hon. Speaker, the issue of human resource is a big challenge to this C ounty and you’ll find 
that it is across all the facilities within the faciliti es.  
       Hon. Speaker also when you look also at the other challenges they normall y arise when you 
go for site vis iting or you go to any facility.  
       It is an  issue of also the drugs and these  people have said that maybe sometimes the supply 
that also lacks  because of the demand i t is also sometimes a challenge  but am happy that my  
department , my C ommittee is working closely to see this challenge has been overcome . 
       I would also urge this Hon.  House always to support this department because it is the back 
bone of our County when it comes to health service ; the services and we hope that yo u have been 
accorded a lot of  support that we continue asking for more support from this Hon.  House 
especially when it comes to budget issue s in the area  
       So my conclusion Hon. Speaker we have done our job and I think it is upon the Membe rs to 
approve this R eport and allow for  some more investigations trying to see if the problem that we 
will be able to overcome it . 
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6        Hon. Speaker I am glad I have finishe d this R eport , it has taken a long time thank you . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon . (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Yes Hon. Saad.  
       Hon. Faraj : Thank you very much Ho n. Speaker for this opportunity.  Hon. Speaker for the 
first time to day I am disappointed with the R eport which has been brou ght to this H ouse.  
       Madam S peaker we have been h ere for the past four years ; we know very well how a R eport 
is suppos ed to be framed and structured.  
       Madam S peaker if you look at the document, they are two attached documents, one is the 
purported minutes of the meeting which did not even follow th e procedure of the meeting , as you 
all are aware there was supposed to be a place where it shows that we needed to confirm the 
minutes of the previous meeting on this minutes but generally it is only attachments . 
       Madam  Speaker if you look at it very  carefully and the last part which was being referred to 
by the Chair was a letter which was written as a response from Dr. Khadija h Shikely who has 
brillian tly done her job, but with the exception of I don’t  know the C ommi ttee or the leadership 
of that C ommittee . 
       Madam C hair we are saying that this purported R eport which has been brought to this House 
is not a R eport and we cannot see , even find where the conclusion is , the resolutions of the 
Committee, t he findings of that particular R eport whether  or not if they went to the site and had a 
feeling of that particular place . 
       So Madam S peaker for the first time I am saying t hat I am disappointed with our C hairman 
for having not done his job as he is supposed to do the job…  
(Applause ) 
       Mada m Speaker this is a shady job that has been done by I don’t know who  to blame but it is 
either the Committee C lerks have failed to perform their job diligently and they decided that they 
would come here and patch up the situation so that it can seem like t he job was done , but in 
reality there is no Report here M embers , thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon. Mary Akinyi . 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa S pika. Mheshim iwa Spika hata mimi pia hii 
Ripoti inanikangany a kwa sababu kwanza aliyesema kuwa hii R ipoti ni  ya kweli pia si mmoja 
wapo wa K amati hii . 
       Alafu tukiwa tunaangalia hii Ripoti tunapata kuwa K amati yenyewe haikujadiili sana yale 
mambo kutokana na hii ba rua ambayo imetoka kwa Chief O fficer  ambayo pi a katika hii Ripoti 
imetoka kwa Chief O fficer . 
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7        Katika ukurasa wa mwisho  ambayo imetuambia changa moto ambazo ziko katika hio 
hospitali hua kuna changamoto ya kuwa hakuna ukuta  na pia kuna ukosefu pia w a usalama na 
nashindwa K amati hii haikujadili vil e wange weza kujadili haya mambo kwa kinaga ubaga . 
       Kwa sababu ya weza ikawa kwa vile hakuna ukuta kwa hio hosp itali pengine nd io kwa 
sababu hata haya madawa hayako, ya weza kuwa hata vile hakuna ukuta  na pia kuna ukosefu wa 
usalama pengine kuna dawa am bazo zilipelekwa mle ndani na kwa vile hakuna ukuta  zikaibiwa.  
       Kwa hivyo mimi Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba kupitia katika Kiti chako Kamati hii irudi 
ikajadili R ipoti hii vizuri watulet ee R ipoti ambayo hata tukiwa tunaangalia hapa  itatupatia jibu 
sawa  ambalo sisi pia tutaweza kuona ni shida gani ambayo iko?  
       Kwa sababu Mheshimiwa Spika hat a ikiwa tunaangalia katika hii R ipoti, katika hii barua 
ambayo imeletwa kutoka kwa Chief Officer  katika hapa juu inatuambia idadi ya watu ambao 
wanaenda katika  ile hospitali...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon.  Mary the re seem s to be loud 
consultation s please Hon.  Members consult h onorably. Yes Hon.  Mary . 
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Mheshimiwa Spika hata tukiwa tunaangalia idadi ya watu ambao 
wanaenda katika ile hospitali ni wengi sana tukiwa tunaangalia ile bajeti ambayo idara ya afya 
ilipeana kwa ajili ya kununua madawa katika ile hospitali.  
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh , Chairman . 
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : The R eport has not shown any number of people who are going to 
the dispensary but that is the population in Mkomani Ward .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula ):  Okay Hon.  Swaleh let Hon.  Mary complete 
her submissions, thank you.  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika Mheshimiwa 
mwenzangu anataka kunika nganya ndio nisifikie katika yale ambayo nilikuwa nataka 
kuzungumza . 
       Ndani ya hii R ipoti Mheshimiwa Spika sijui kama population  na watu  iko na tofauti gani?     
       Kwa sababu naomba msamaha niisome kwa K ingereza , "Maweni Dispensary is Located in 
Nyali Sub County and it serves ...", ndiposa nikasema Mheshimiwa Spika kuwa  inahudumia idadi 
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 ya hawa watu elfu kumi na mbili , zaidi ya watu elfu kumi na tatu ambapo watu wanahudumiwa 
katika hii Zahanati  ya Maweni . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika ikiwa tunaangalia idadi ya watu ambao wanahudumiwa katika hii 
Zahanati  na ile bajeti ama mada wa ambayo walinunua kulingana na kupitia hii kiasi ambayo 
walipewa kupitia kwa hii Zahanati  inaonyesha wazi kuwa haya madawa hayakuwa yanatosha . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika mimi narudi ikiwa ninakaa chini nikisema Kamati hii iende 
ikatutengenezee Ripoti nzuri ambayo tunaelewa ili tukaweze kujadiliana vile tunaweza kusaidia 
wakaazi wa Maweni ambao wanahudumiwa katika ile Zahanati  ya Maweni. A hsante sana 
Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon.  Karume . 
       Hon. Karume : Thank you Madam Speaker for according me this opportunity also to 
contribute on the ongoing debate ; first and foremost I would like to con cur with my colle agues 
Hon.  Saad who has raised great concerns ... 
(Applause ) 
       In the first place Madam  Speaker  I want to believe the R eport has not been adopted because 
the question was proposed and not put because if we are adopting a honorable  Report instead of 
adopting a honorable R eport we should be setting a very dangerous precedent ... 
(Applause ) 
       Madam  Speaker...  
(Interruption ) 
       Hon. Kibwana:  JAP. 
       Hon. Karume:  There's a M ember who said JAP Madam Speaker he should withdraw that..  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon.  Members maintain order please !  
       Hon. Karume:  Thank you Madam Speaker for protecting me , in the first place Mad am 
Speaker I ought to know the Committee M embers who participated which I did not he ar the list 
be read, is it there?  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  It is there but  it was not read , yes Hon.  
Onje .  
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9        Hon. Onje:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika mimi ingekuwa ni vizuri kama Hon.  Kibwana 
aombe msamaha si vizuri Mheshimiwa Karume anaongea halafu anasema yeye ni JAP . 
       Hayo ni makosa Bi Spika lakini naona yeye a nakaa ha pa tu ananyemelea aone R ipoti hii 
tunapitisha ni vizuri asimame aombe msamaha ama hatuna JAP hii Nyumba wanachama wa 
ODM watupu .  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon.  Swaleh can we have the withdrawal 
please .  
       Hon. Kibwana:  Thank yo u Madam Speaker , I think my colleague that is Hon.  Karume is 
not a JAP Member and when I say it I mean it should not be taken as an issue here...  
(Interruption ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Please withdraw .  
       Hon. Kibwana  Swaleh : I withdraw . 
(Applause ) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon.  Karume continue . 
       Hon. Karume:  Thank you my Hon.  Colleague . Madam Speaker there are many aspects that 
needed to b e featured in this R eport which are missing , okay I have been informed that the list of 
Committee M embers have been appendix ed in this Report which I do not know if I happen to be 
one of them because I applied to be a Member of this C ommittee . 
       So in the event my name is there then I have an issue Madam Speak er otherwise going with 
the verdict of this R eport it indicates that there's a problem there which was raised by a 
representative of that area and I want to believe that there's more than that because the Hon.  
Members is representing a Ward and being one o f its role we know its representation and having 
brought  this issue in this Hon.  House he must have certain issues regarding the statement that he 
has raise d. 
       So am going to believe even if the verdict or the response to the respective department I was 
expecting to hear whether they invited the Hon.  Member to come and set the record straight 
before having this issue in the House he had an issue on hand so I have a request to our Hon.  
Chairman whom I respect the most to do the Hon.  thing of withdrawin g this R eport for another 
date for us to be able to adopt ... 
(Applause ) 
       Madam Speaker I oppose. Thank you.  
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10        Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Hon.  Wangudi . 
       Hon. Wangudi:  Ahsante Madam Spika kwa ruhsa hii ili niweze kuchangia Ripoti il ioko 
ndani ya Jumba hili.  
       Mheshimiwa Spika ninaweza sema kwa siku ya leo ni siku ambayo hatuna bahati ; ni siku 
ambayo tumetarajia kupata Ripoti kutoka kwa Kamati ya Afya na R ipoti hiyo Madam S pika ni 
kana kwamba haijafika n dani ya Nyumba hii  na niko na sababu za kutosha kueleza kuwa Ripoti 
hiyo haijafika ndani ya Ju mba hili.  
       Mheshimiw a Spika kwanza kabisa aliyetoa Ripoti hii aliposoma R ipoti ya kwanza ambayo 
ni stakabadhi ya Bunge hili iliotiwa sahihi na Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti ambaye a nawakilisha 
Wodi ya M iritini alisema ya kwamba kuna R ipoti nyengine kutoka kwa department .  
       Bi Spika na hapa tunapoangalia kwenye  mapendekezo yaani  recommendation  tunasema 
kwamba , "The Committee  approves the report and resolve to recommend to the Co unty 
Assembly for adoption ...". 
       Sasa Madam Spika sijaelewa ni R ipoti iliyotoka katika department  ama R ipoti ile ambayo ni 
ya Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Bi Spika kama unavyojua R ipoti hairuhusiwi kuingia katika Jumba hili isipokuwa ni 
staka badhi ya Bunge hili ; aidha uje kama ushahidi ama ni stakabadhi ya Jumba hili . 
       Mheshimiwa Spika sasa hapa anavyosema kwamba Kamati  izingatie ama Bunge izingatie 
Ripoti hii nimechanganyikiwa ni R ipoti ya County As sembl y ama ni ya department .  
       Bi Spika ishara tosha kuwa hatuna R ipoti ndani ya Bunge ni kama wanavyosema katika , 'the 
committee is satisfied by the statement submitted by the department of health ...'. 
       Mheshimiwa Spika K amati hii haijafanya kazi inajaribu kuzingatia taarifa  ambay o imetoka 
katika department  na inapoendelea na kusema , 'However it is still open for further investigation 
should it be found necessary ....'. 
       Bi Spika ni  kumaanisha kwamba kazi hii haijamalizika ... 
(Applause ) 
       Kuna mapengo mengi ambayo yanatak ikana yawe yamezibwa na R ipoti ije ikiwa 
imekamilika Bi Spika , na ripoti kama hizi twataka tuseme ya kwamba ni stakabadhi ambazo 
zinaleta aibu katika Bunge hili . 
       Bi Spika hakuna R ipoti hapa ambayo tunaweza  kusema Kamati yetu ya Afya ni K amati 
ambayo  tunaipenda na katika kazi imelegeza kamba . 
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11        Bi Spika ningeomba kupitia Kiti chako cha heshima kiwapatie  Kamati hii nafasi 
watengeneze R ipoti ya heshima ilete katika Jumba hili ambalo ni la heshima. A hsante.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyam vula) :  Hon.  Onje . 
       Hon. Onje:  Ahsante sana Bi Spika , mimi pia naipinga hii Ripoti na si ati napinga kwa 
sababu wenzangu wanapinga ; napinga tu kulingana na vile mimi ninaisom . 
       Naona kuna udanganyifu sana kwenye hizi kurasa hata ukiangalia utan gulizi hata 
hauridhishi Bi Spika, kwanza hii K amati ambayo inaongozwa na Mheshimiwa Kibwana Swaleh 
Wanachama  hata hakujua kama wanafaa wakae hapa ili waweze kuitetea R ipoti yao kwa sababu 
hawajui hawakuenda . 
       Ni kitu nafikiri Mwenyekiti anafanya kazi  peke yake akiingia mahali anataka kuwa mbele 
ndio sababu Bi Spika unaona hata kuunga mkono hii R ipoti wakati aliposoma iliungwa mkono 
na asiekuwa Mwanachama.  
       Ripoti nzuri ni ile ikiletwa Bi Spika ni Wanachama  wakae waseme ni kweli na tuone ni kitu 
cha sawa sawa . 
       Kwa hivyo tunamuambia Mwen yekiti wa Afya wewe usituletee R ipoti hapa sisi hatuna 
wakati wa kupoteza hapa ni kuchapa kazi tu , hapa hakuna mchezo ni wewe na kup itia kwa kiti 
cha Bi Spika wapewe nafasi ya kwenda kufanya tena manake hata sijui hizi karatasi yeye 
mwenyewe ameziokota wapi?  
       Haikai hata kidogo Bi Spika hata sitaki kusoma kwa sababu vitu vikiingia hapa Bungeni vile 
ambavyo havina maana ni heri tusimame kidete kusema ya kuwa huyu Mwenyekiti anaona kazi 
inamshinda kwa sab abu kam a mimi ningelikuwa kwenye hiyo K amati ni vile tu ni  bahati mbaya 
siko kwenye hiyo K amati mimi ningeanza kusema tumtoe Mwenyekiti na tuweke mwengine kwa 
sababu idara hii ni muhimu sana. A hsante sana.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa hii fursa , nimesimama kuunga 
mkono Ripoti hii ambayo imeletwa na Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Afya ...  
(Applause ) 
       Mheshimiwa Spika mimi nawakilisha Frere Town iliko katika eneo Bunge la Nyali na 
hospitali ile Bi Spika inayozungumziwa iko katika eneo Bunge letu na kitu ambacho nata ka 
wenzangu wafahamu ni kwamba Kamati ya Afya ni K amati ya Bunge ambayo iliweza kutoka 
ikaenda mashinani na kwenda kuangalia hali halisi ilivyo na ndio maana wameweza kuleta 
Ripoti hii.  
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12        Mheshimiwa Spika hospitali inayozungumziwa ni hospitali ya Kaunti  na kama 
inavyoonyeshwa katika R ipoti iliotoka kwa Chief Officer  wa Afya ilionyesha kwamba hospitali 
hii iko na wafanyi  kazi ambao wameandikwa na ser ikali yetu ya K aunti pia vile vile inaon yesha 
huduma ambazo zinapatikana katika hospitali ile ndogo . 
       Kitu ambacho Mheshimiwa Spika waheshimiwa wengi wanashindwa kujua ni kwamba kuna 
tofauti ya hizi hospitali kwa sababu wao hii wanaita hospitali laki ni ukweli wa mambo ni 
kwamba ni zahanati na zahanati huwa ni hospitali ndogo ...  
(Applause ) 
       Kwa hivyo kitu cha msingi Mheshimiwa Spika ni kwamba zahanati ambayo inazungumziwa 
hapa kulingana na ushahidi unaonekana ni kwamba iko na madawa ; ni kiwango tu cha 
kutosheleza kile kiwango cha zahanati lakini si kweli kwamba ni hospitali ambayo inatarajiwa 
kuwa na madawa ama huduma ambazo pengine zinaweza kutole wa kwa hospitali ya level 5 ya 
Coast G eneral . 
       Ni kama mgonjwa kutoka kijijini aende pale apat e huduma na kama pengine ugonjwa wake 
unazidi anaweza kuwa referred  akawe za kuletwa katika hospitali ya Coast G eneral . 
       Kwa hivyo kulingana na kiwango na capacity  tunaona ya kwamba Mheshimiwa Spika 
Kamati ya Afya imefanya kazi yake imeleta R ipoti kat ika Bunge hili kwa hivyo sioni kama kuna 
tashwishi yeyo te isipokuwa ni kuunga mkono R ipoti hii kwa sababu Mwenyekiti amefanya kazi 
yake. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Hon.  (Ms.) Akinyi : Point of Information . 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Yes Hon.  Mary inform the House . 
       Hon. (Ms.) Akinyi : Thank you Madam Spika.  Madam Spika I would like just to inform this 
House the dispensaries were built to reduce the work load at the Coast general let the House be 
informed. Thank you.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you , yes Hon.  Amir Thoya . 
       Hon. Thoya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika lakini bado itabakia pale pale kwamba hii ni 
zahanati na sio hospitali kamili . 
       Kwa hivyo ni  tujue kwamba kama imefikia kiwa ngo kwamba hospitali ile iwe hospitali 
kamili ni  kupitia kwa Bunge lakini  kufikia sasa Mheshimiwa Spika K amati ya Bunge ya Afya 
imetekeleza ujumbe wake na kama kutakuwa na mapendekezo  kama Mheshimiwa anavyoomba 
kuwa hiyo iwe hospitali na isiwe zahanati rip oti hii basi Mheshimiwa Spika iwe na marekebisho 
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 lakini kwa sasa Ripoti imefika kwenye Bunge na K amati imetekeleza jukumu lake kama vile 
ambavyo ilikuwa imetumwa. A hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon.  Jimmy O dari. 
       Hon. Odari : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii na mimi kuto a maoni 
yangu kuhusiana na hii Ripoti ilioletwa na Kamati ya A fya. 
       Mheshimiwa Spika hakika sioni sababu gani kuwa watu wanaanza kujibishana ; kwa sababu 
gani nase ma hivi ? Masuala ya afya ni masuala nyeti sana wakati Mheshimiwa Kizito Opeya 
ambaye ameleta  taarifa  kuhusiana na suala hili alipoleta hapa alikuwa na jambo ndio akalileta 
hapa . 
       Ni vizuri sasa kama W ajumbe tuzingat ie kwamba yeye ni M wakilishi wa  wale watu wa 
sehemu ile na ni M wakilishi wa kuwa anakuja kuzungumza kama sauti ya watu wa lile eneo . 
       Kwa hivyo ile taarifa  aliyouliza hapa aliuliza kwa niaba ya watu wa Maweni na wale watu 
wa eneo la Maweni si wenda wazimu sababu ya kutaka kujua kuwa m adawa hakuna ni kwa 
kuwa madawa hakuna iwe ni hospitali iwe ni zahanati . 
       Hata zahanati ina madawa kiwango chake hatutarajii kuwa zahanati itakuwa na madawa 
mengi kama vile Coast G eneral ama hospitali kubwa lakini kama hiyo zahanati kwa kiwango 
chake  haina madawa hilo ni jambo ambalo tunatakikana tuliangalie kwa ukamilifu . 
       Mimi ningetamani Mheshimiwa Opeya mwenyewe angekuwa hapa wakati majibu haya 
yanapeanwa ili aweze kutueleza zaidi kutokea na kilich ompelekea yeye kuja kutaka hii R ipoti 
hapa . 
       Kwa ajili hiyo M heshimiwa Spika mimi ningeomba Kamati na sioni hasara K amati irudi 
ikafanye kazi yake vizuri ilete R ipoti hapa kwa ajili ya manufaa ya wananchi , tunajibishana  
lakini wananchi wako pale pale, k wa hivyo mimi napinga ripoti. ..  
(Applaus e) 
       Temporary Speaker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) :  Hon.  Hatimy .  
       Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mheshimiwa Spika nashukuru 
kwa kunipa hii nafasi nichangie. Mheshimiw a Spika mimi naiunga mkono hii R ipoti...  
(Applause ) 
       Kwa sababu gani mimi naiunga hii Ripoti mkono, R ipoti kuna suala lilioulizwa la kusema 
kuwa hakuna madawa na Rripoti imejibu ikasema kuwa dawa ziko kama kawaida.  
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14        Ripoti si lazima iwe na kurasa  3 ama 4 ama 5 ndio itakuwa ni R ipoti...  
(Applause ) 
       Ripoti imejibu suala li liloulizwa kuwa hakuna dawa na R ipoti imesema dawa ziko , kwa 
hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika angalia sheria vile ilivyo na kusema kuwa hii stakabadhi hata kama ni 
karatasi moja imeleta introduction  iko, observations and findings  ziko, conc lusion  iko, 
recommendation ziko... 
(Applause ) 
       Sasa sijui hii tutaita nini hii? Sijui tutaita jina gani? Si lazima iwe na kurasa tatu, nne ndio 
itakuwa ni Ripoti, angalia prayers  iliuliza nini? N a imejibiwa . 
       Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika naona R ipoti iko sawa isipokuwa kama mn ataka kumwambia 
aliyeileta hii R ipoti aende akatengeneze minutes  iwe sawa ...  
(Laughter ) 
       Lakini isitupiliwe mbali hii Ripoti, R ipoti iko sawa lakini minutes  ndio ziende 
zitengenezwe ...  
(Applause ) 
       Temporary Spea ker (Hon. (Mrs.) Nyamvula) : Thank you Members for the deliberations I 
have listen ed with a lot of interest, Hon.  Members first and foremost it is very important when 
we ask questions in the House let us be present when the reports come in ...  
(Applause ) 
        That is my first note ; that is the responsibility of the Clerk to get in touch with Hon.  
Members to ensure that M embers kn ow that the Report or S tatement aree coming in to the House 
on a particular date so that is the first observation.  
       I woul d like to mention it so that in future all of us are aware and the Clerk should remind 
them.  
       Secondly , observation is the Report in terms of the C lerks , I think the C lerk on duty should 
take note because it also bears very heavy bl ame on them as pe r the way the R eport s are being 
brought in the House . 
        When the R eport has been put when it comes to the deliberations I just want to point out 
two things which the Members have pointed out on the first sentence says , "Maweni Dispensary 
is located i n Nyali Sub county and serves a population of 12,947 people ...". 
September 7, 2016                     COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          99 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only . A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15         I take that to be the population who visits the dispensary not the population of Maweni ; 
coming from Nyali am very sure it is not the population of Maweni but this is the population o f 
the people the dispensary serves and that is my second note.  
       My third note I do wish also to point out that there was a mistake that Hon.  Amir Thoya 
seconds the R eport and he is not a Member ...  
(Applause ) 
       But when it come to this R eport I  just wish to mention to the Chairman of Health this is one 
department every M ember of this House respects because of the good work it has done with the 
Chief Officer and the M inister for Health and so for me there are few issues which  are not 
moulding wel l in this R eport . 
       Members have pointed out but everything is oka y but the meat in the R eport is wanting and 
so on that mat ter my ruling will be that the R eport was incomplete ...  
(Applause ) 
       We need to do further investigatio n for it to be ado pted and the C ommittee lack s more 
articulation so the R eport can be revised and be brought back in the House there's nothing wrong 
with the layout. Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
       Yes Clerk . 
STATEMENT  
       Thank you , this statement not only I am referring t o another date because it 's my statement 
but because the statement has not been typed according to what has been asked . 
       I have not asked for due date of completion of the drainage at Kongowea Market, my 
statement was to find out the drainage passing  along the Frere Town Kisauni Cemetery , there 
was a big drainage being constructed by the County Government the statement is not correct to 
be brought next week. Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
       Hon.  Members this House stands adjourned until tomorrow afternoo n at 2.30 pm. 
The House rose at 3.26pm.  