February 26 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 1  
  
 COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Tuesday, 26th February, 2019  
The House met at 2:50p.m.  
 
(The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri)  in the Chair)  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members we may be seated. Yes Clerk?  
 
STATEMENTS  
BLOCKED ACCESS ROAD 
 
 Yes Hon.  Lucy Chireri? Please give the S tatement . 
 
 Hon. Chireri: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . My Statement is about b locked access 
road by a private developer.  
 
BLOCKED ACCESS ROAD BY A PRIVATE DEVELOPER  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir, I seek to know from the Chairperson Committee on Lands, Planning 
and Housing if he is aware that the road from Milango Saba Mshomoroni to Manoni 
Vikwatani has been made inaccessible by a private developer and what plans does the 
County g overnment have made to reopen the road.   
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri. Yes Clerk? Sorry 
Hon. Members I refer the matter to be referred to the...  
 
(Consultations  with Clerks at the T able ) 
 
 Thank you Hon. Lucy Chizi Chireri , again I refer this matter to the Chairman of 
Lands it is Hon. Ahmed Salama. Hon. Salama do you have the answer for the Statement from 
the Hon. Member?  
 
 Hon. Ahmed Salama:  Ahsante Bwana Spika hili swali nimelisikia la Mheshimiwa 
Chireri na kama  Kamati  ya Ardhi  tutaketi ili tulijadili wiki ijayo Alhamisi tutaleta majibu 
Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 

February 26 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 2  The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Kitula?  
 
 The Majority Chief  Whip  (Hon. Kitula) : Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti kumpa 
Mwakilishi wa Mtopanga wiki moja Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti sisi ni wanasiasa itampatia 
nguvu yule mmiliki ni jambo la kukaa leo au kesho halafu walete majibu lakini wakisema 
muda wa wiki moja itampatia nguvu yule mmilik i wa ardhi ... 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Lucy Chireri?  
 
 Hon.  Chireri: Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika pia mimi nitaunga mkono kinara  
wetu kwa sababu hili jambo leo ametengeneza vile kesho yuajenga mpaka wiki ijayo  mimi 
nasema kama Kiongozi wa Mtopanga haiwezekani hili jambo ni la dharura ndio nikalileta saa 
hii na mimi nataka kazi ifanyike sasa hivi. Ahsante.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Member. Y es Hon. Ahmed Salama?  
 
 Hon. Ahmed Salama: Bwana Spika hilo suala ni la kweli la Mheshimiwa Chireri 
lakini kusema ule ukweli leo na kesho ni ngumu  kwanza kule kwake angalia ile W odi vile 
ilivyo angalia yal e masaa saa hizi ni saa ngapi? K esho utajikukuta saa ngapi?  Saa ngapi ufike 
kule ili u pate kuleta jibu ambalo lina  uhakika? Lakini itabidi sisi kesho tulete maswali 
ambayo ni ya urongo hatuna uhakika halafu yataleta shida. Kwa hivyo mimi nilikuwa 
naomba kwamba te na twende kwa site visit  tukaan galie ili tukileta majibu tutajua twaleta 
majibu  namna gani.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon . Maimuna?  
 
 Hon. Maimuna Salim : Mheshimiwa Spika hili jambo ni dharura kwa hiyo kuna idara 
ambayo inahusika na Inspectorate  ambayo iko katika kitengo cha  Ardhi . Kwa hiyo si  lazima 
kwanza kikao; kwanza tunaenda tusimamishe pale tuchukue makaratasi ndipo tuje sasa 
tumshambue ikiwa tumeisimamisha ile kazi. Lakini tukisema mpaka tuchukue ripot i kwetu 
litakuwa hilo jambo ni kinyume na ule ukuta utaisha. Kwa hiyo ni dharura Mwenyekiti  
anatakikaniwa leo  ahakikishe ameenda kwa idara  atoe hiyo ripoti na asubuhi watu waende 
wasimamishe hilo jambo linaloendelea hapo Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Y es Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I also happen to agree with the 
Hon. Me mbers. Mr. Speaker what is the C ommittee going to sit and discuss and yet you have 
no clue over the issue. The first thing the C ommittee should have done is to plan on how to 
have a  site visit then you come discuss what y ou have already known, so  as a House Mr. 
Speaker I think i t will be of more help for the C ommittee to have a site visit tomorrow then 
come back on Thursday with the responses. Thank you . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Renson Thoya . 
 
February 26 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 3  Hon. Thoya:  Ahsante Bwana Spika mimi nikiwa M wanachama wa Kamati hiyo 
nataka kuchukua nafasi hii kusema  mazishi huwa ni  mazishi na ukisema utaenda siku 
nyengine sisi jamii wa Kiislamu utakuta mtu amezikwa . Kwa hivyo jambo ka ma hili 
linatakikana lichukue mw elekeo huo; k una yale maswala ambayo utayaekea siku na tarehe  na 
kuna yale ambayo saa hii Bwana Spika kungekuwa hata kuna gari saa hii hii unasema Kamati 
hiyo tokeni ingieni kwa hiyo gari nendeni kiwanjani…  
 
(Applaus e) 
 
 Kwa hivyo nafikiri kuna mipango mizuri ambayo nasikia kuna gari inanunuliwa  
wakati huu  Jumba hili lionekane linachapa kazi na ukweli tumeanza kuonekana kuna (??) 
tunaenda na kama kuna shida  mimi ni mmoja wa hiyo Kamati lakini maoni yangu ni kwamba 
kama kuna ungua twendeni tukazime ndio turudi tuanze kujipanga tusingoje, tutakuwa 
tunaenda kufanya nini?  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. Mwamwiri?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spi ka iko bayana ya kwamba 
kunazo K anuni katika serikali yetu Gatuz i ya ujenzi na umiliki wa rasil mali. Katika hili 
linalojadiliwa ama ambalo Mheshimiwa limemkabili haina sababu ya Kamati  kukaa muda 
mrefu ; jambo la kwanza ni  kutaka kufahamu kutoka kwa idara husika kama wao ndio walio  
muidhi nisha m husika yule ama muekezaji yule kujenga kuta lile na kufunga njia! Na 
tunavyojua Mheshimiwa maswala ya a rdhi hairuhusiwi kujenga au kuigawanya ardhi pasi 
kuweka njia kwa wan anchi, y eye asingefika pale alipofika ku weka ukuta na kuziba njia. 
Amepata nj ia kutoka kwa ardhi za wengine . Kwa hivyo tujue shida iko wapi kwa yule 
muekezaji ama idara yenyewe ya ardhi ndio ilioidhinisha utepetevu huu na dhulma hii kwa 
wananchi wa Mtopanga kufungiwa njia na kujengwa kuta lile. Kwa hivyo pa  kuanzia ni kwa 
idara wap ate kujua kama wameidhinisha na kama hawajaidhinisha haiwezekani kwamba kuta 
lijengwe siku nzima na wasiwe na taarifa. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Mwamwiri. Y es Hon. Bernard Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii . Mheshimiwa 
Spika jambo hili lisipochukuliwa na uzito nafikiri wale watu wa Mtopanga watapata t abu 
sana na itaenda  kwa kumbukumbu ya kwamba W aheshimiwa wa Mombasa hawafanyi kazi . 
Leo tukiongea iko kat ika vyombo vya habari  ya kwamba sisi W aheshimiwa wa Mombasa 
hatufanyi kazi , hivyo tunataka leo ikiwezekana baada ya Bunge  timu iende kule ifanye ile 
kazi yao ili na sisi pia ijulikane kwamba tunafanya kazi yetu ya oversight . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Ye s Hon. Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
 Hon.  Omondi : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nami pia nikiongezea sau ti yangu 
ningependa kusema hivi;  kusema ukweli jambo  hili linafaa lichuku liwe kwa uzito sana,  sana,  
sana! N ikinukuliwa Mhe shimiwa Spika na ningelipenda utoe idhini kwa ile Kamati husika 
leo, mimi mwenyewe nimejitolea. Mimi siko katika hiyo Kamati Mheshimiwa Spika lakini 
nitaongoza kwenda kule kusimamisha …! 
February 26 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 4 (Applause)  
 
 Kusimamisha sasa hivi tukitoka kwenye Bunge hili Mheshimiwa Spika twa taka idhini 
kutoka kwako peke ya ke. Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fatma Kushe or Fatma Swaleh Mote?  
 
(Loud consultation)  
 
 Hon. Fatuma Swaleh : Ahsante s ana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kuweza kunipa fursa 
hii. Mheshimiwa S pika mimi pia nimesimama kidete mimi pia ni mmoja wa wale ambao niko 
katika Kamati ya Wizara ya Ardhi . Mheshimiwa Spika nakuhakikishia sisi tukitoka hapa 
pamoja na Mwenyekiti tutakwenda moja kwa moja…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Mpaka katika Wizara ya Ardhi tukitoka hapo Mheshimiwa Spika maana yake 
tulichaguliwa na wananchi kwa hivyo lazima kazi tuifanye hatulali leo mpaka tuende 
Mtopanga tukahakikishe kuna shida gani. Kwa hivyo nawaomba Wabunge  wenzangu m tuwie 
radhi jibu muafaka li tapatikana kesho saa nane, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you.  Yes Hon. Lei la you wanted to say 
something?  
 
 Hon. Nyache:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika , yaani Mheshimiwa Fatma Swaleh 
(Kushe) ni kama alijua nataka kuongea jambo kama hilo.  Mimi pia naunga mkono nasema 
tupewe nafasi leo tuende tukaonane na Wizara ya Ardhi halafu tutaleta majibu In Shaa Allah . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you. Yes Hon . Kombe Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa Spika ninasimama hapa 
nikisikitika na Mheshimiwa mwenzangu wa Mtopanga kwa kuzibiwa hiyo njia lakini nataka 
niseme hivi ; ule unaitwa Mto wa panga ! Kule ninakotoka kunaitwa Ka dzandani , hivyo ni 
kusema kwamba mambo yake hayalali hata nashindwa kwa nini Mheshimiwa mwenzangu 
amechelea kuubwaga huo ukuta ndio akaja sema yangekuwa mambo hayo ni Ka dzandani 
tungekuwa twaongea mengine . Mheshimiwa Spika hivyo mimi sioni haja ya ukuta huo 
uendele e kukaa hapo ningekua mimi hapa hapa ningepiga simu na kazi ikafanywa huo wakati 
wa kuchezeana ushapita , mwaka huu ni kazi tu. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Kombe Nzai kutoka 
Kadzandani. Yes Hon. Milka?  
 
 Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to also 
contribute. I am in agree ment with my fellow Honourable M embers that this is a matter that it 
should be given priority . 
February 26 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 5  As our Hon. Speaker you give an order or you give us permission we match there 
just as the other Honourable M embers have said to go and ensure that the wall building has 
stopped because denying wana nchi a road or passage to their residen ces is wrong and it is 
against the Constitution. Desperate measure s, the Englishmen say call  for desperate 
measures, this is a desperate situation and it needs a desperate measure like the one of going , 
we do not want to continue being called rubber stamp MCA’s , we are t ired of such kind. 
Thank you so  much.  
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Abrari Mohamed?  
 
 Hon. Abrari:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi kama Naibu Mwenyekiti wa 
Kamati ya Ardhi nasema ninamuunga mkono sana Mheshimiwa Lucy nikisema kuwa sisi 
tutaenda kufanya matembezi en eo hilo na tukipata kuwa kuna m husika yeyote upande wa  
Executive  alipitisha lile jengo likajengwa…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Basi ni yeye aliyepitisha hilo jengo lijengwe au huo ukuta ujengwe basi yeye ndio 
tutaanza nae, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. .. 
 
(Applause)  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Members. Honourable M ember s as 
far as I am concerned the S tatement is brought by Hon. Lucy Chi reri and the Committee shall 
sit down and tell us the truth of the matter because up to now it is a hearsay we have not seen 
any document so there no is way here we can say Hon. Lucy she is right but what she is 
saying because even her I am sure she does  not have the document . So let the Committee do 
its work , get all the documents and the Committee if you have a problem of a car you can use 
my car I  have no problem….  
 
(Applause)  
 
 It is available anytime you are ready you want to go to Mtopanga or you want to go 
anywhere in Mombasa you can use my car for now and go with it for the site visit and Hon. 
Ahmed Salama as the Chairman I see you have seen t he mood of the M embers they want to 
know the answer at least by tomorrow so please make sure by tomorrow afternoon we have 
the reply please…  
 
(Applause)  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
PROCEDURAL MOTION  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY CALEN DAR REGULAR SESSION , 2019  
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Leader of Majority ? 
 
February 26 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 6  The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker 
Sir I beg to move the following M otion;  
 
THAT pursuant to Standing Order 24(1) and 25(1) this House RESOLVES to 
adopt the County Assembly Calendar  Regular Session – 2019 as per the schedule 
below.  
 
 Mr. Speaker we have three  periods ; the F irst Part S itting will be Tuesday, 12th 
February up to Thursday, 28th March  then we proceed to the short recess commencing on 
Friday 29th March up to 8th Monday of April then we  will have our sitting days of Tuesday 9th 
April to 9th May then we proceed on long recess from Friday 10th May to 17th Monday June . 
 Mr. Speaker S ir, Second P art we shall be having our sitting days Tuesday 18th June 
to Thursday 8th August , long recess from Friday 9th August to 9th Monday September , the 
sitting days Tuesday will be 10th September Thursday  17th October , 2019 . 
 The T hird Part Mr. Speaker will be a short recess from 18th Friday October to 
Monday 28th October , 2019 sitt ing days will be Tuesday 29th  October to Thursday 5th 
December now we proceed to long process we should commence from 6th December , 2019 
Monday to 10th February , 2020 . 
 Mr. Speaker I would like to move and also to urge that we pass it with  amendment s 
if they will come to arise on the time of the matters of the process . 
 Thank you Mr. Speaker and I will req uest Hon. Kitula to second the M otion.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you so  much  Hon. Musa Mwidani , you were 
saying we pass it with amendment i f we do  not have the amendment how do we pass it with 
amendment .  
 
 The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani) : Mr. Speaker I think I arise if they may 
appear on the  (??).  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Bwire.  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you.  Hon. Speaker I understand this is a Procedural M otion that 
needs no discussion , neither debate but I just  have a concern and as per the M ajority Leader 
has said they would have come with that amendment because the initial schedule we had the 
long recess was to start on 2 0th December , 2019 to 10th February , 2020 and we have 
consulted . I understa nd what made this schedule to co me as it is but of c ourse those 
amendments that the M ajority was talking about would have been here in written form so that 
if we pass the amendment it must be something th at has already appeared in the H ouse, thank 
you. 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Hon. Bwire as you said yourself this is a 
Procedural M otion so we cannot start talking about this calendar so all we have to do i am 
going to put a question for now and if you have any amendment it comes with the time the 
Hon. Member of M ajority will bring those amendment and then we will debate the 
amendment that time . So Hon orable M embers I now put the question that this House adopt 
the Motion  on the County Assembly Calendar Regular S ession,  2019 in the same term s as 
moved?  
 
(Question put and agreed to ) 
February 26 , 2019                    COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                        9 
 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor 
Page 7  Yes C lerk? 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members  this H ouse stands adjourned until Wednesday 27th February , 2019 at 
9:00a.m. 
 
The House rose at 3:13p.m.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 