March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 1 REPUBLIC OF KENYA  
     THE COUNTY  ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
  
OFFICIAL REPORT  
Wednesday , 7th March , 2018  
The House met at 2 :35p.m. 
(The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ) in the Chair ) 
 
PRAYERS   
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Have your seats. Yes Clerk.  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Hon.  Members, I wish to bring to the attention of this Honorable  House that we have visitors 
from Light Academy School  from Mombasa County  and I recognize the presence of the 
delegation. I f you hear your name stand  and bow , the delegation consists of ; 
 
1. Slim Swaleh Slim  
2. Henry Mtsami Tsangari  
3. Ahmed Khalid Ahmed  
4. Zainab Yunis Ahmed  
5. Samantha Fernandes  
6. Abeer Jamal Salim  
7. Laura Nyadzua Tungu  
8. Said Shaban Mayora  
9. Asma Abubakar  
10. Joseph Ayieko  
11. Muad Salim  
12. Rugeya Omar  
13. Bance Wakio  
14. Masha Hennin  
15. Betsy Madaraka  
16. Margarita Obaga  
17. Ricky Kilburn  
18. Caren Boyani Sobukwe  
19. James Omondi  
 
TEACHERS  
 
1. Nilhat Arslan  
2. Evans Musembi  
3. Victor Otieno  
4. Mui Barasa  
 
(The students and teachers each stood and bowed ) 
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 2 You are much welcome to the C ounty  Assembly  of Mombasa. N ext Order . 
 
STATEME NT 
 
Yes Hon.  Shebe Athuman , Chairperson of C omm ittee on Environment and Waste 
Management ? 
Hon.  (Ms.)  Mbura:  Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa niaba ya M wenyekiti  wangu 
ningeomba tulete ripoti yetu wiki ijayo kwa sababu kuna sehemu ambazo lazima tukamilish e 
ndio tulete . Ahsanteni sana . 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Amur.  
Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker sir, we cannot be taken for granted , the issue pertaining to 
garbage collection in Mombasa town ha s become worse and we need an u rgent report in this 
Assembly  because we cannot take it … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
As you go round Mombasa today Mr. Speaker  on the main road s the garbage is piled  up,  
we cannot say that the C ommittee needs more time we need action to be taken but not time Mr. 
Speaker . We want to be given a report that is  comprehensive so that the people we are 
representing in this Assembly can feel that they are well represented .  Mr. Speaker the garbage is 
piling up we  cannot  grant the C ommittee another time this is an urgent issue we need to be given  
the report . Thank y ou. 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Thoya.  
Hon.  Thoya : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I stand here to support Hon.  Amur and I think 
procedural ly we have only 14 days if I recount myself this statement w hen it was brought before 
this H ouse is over either one mont h or two by now and as for the Committee to tell this H ouse 
that they need more time truly the situation is pathetic . As you go by Makupa Causeway  it is 
getting out of hand; the order that was brought now that all the dumping sites were closed down 
now the smal l boys are being given small amount s of token  money and  they throw the garbage 
littering everywhere . I think the y should  not be given more time Mr. Speaker , crack your w hip 
come up help the people of Mombasa , help as the sanitation situation is getting out  of hand and 
we think there is no more time for this statement because there has been ample time for them to 
bring this statement . Thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Bwire Raphael.  
Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker , we understand the garbage issue is very serious but 
as much we need a very comprehensive statement as Hon.  Amur has put it and rushing into 
coming up with the statement may not solve the situation . So I would wish to urge the Hon.  
House  as requested by the Hon.  Member let us give them time come next week they come up 
with a very comprehensive statement that this House  will have to adopt , thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Ogutu.  
Hon.  Ogutu : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker first of all I want to acknowledge the 
presence  of pupils from  Light Academy who have come for a learning  experience in this Hon.  
Hous e; two I think the time g iven to the department and the C ommittee to bring the report has 
elapsed and it’s high time this Honorable H ouse should not be taken for a ride . Mr. Speaker I 
think its high time you crack  the whip because the consequences that we face from the pile  up of  
garbage  is immense . Thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Hamida.  
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 3 Hon.  (Ms.) Hamida Noor : Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity . The 
waste management in  Mombasa has become pathetic ; we have a lot of was te even in our houses , 
outside our  gates. We urge the C ommit tee to take charge so that we see at l east that this waste 
has been taken  out of the street s, even in front  of our gates so that at leas t the environment can be 
better please we urge you thank you.  
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi.  
Hon.  Omondi:  Mr. Speaker sir first of all I want to take this humble opportunity to thank 
you for giving me this go lden chance . Mr. Speaker S ir I term it this golden chance because  the 
statement that has bee n that is yet to be read  on rubbish and garbage collection  is very important 
as far as our locality or as far as our County or as far as the public is concern ed. Mr. Speaker Sir 
and as you know the voters whom I can call them the voiceless, the people who gave us the 
wings to fly to come to this House, they gave us the power to fulfill  their dreams, these voiceless;  
the voters, the electorates also gave us the strength to walk the rough terrain . The same voters 
also gave us the bravery to challenge the dreaded power laws and the authority to speak your 
mind to the forces of creation.  We have to walk the walk and talk the talk and we must call a 
spade a spade . Mr. Speaker Sir as the Hon.  Member of Chan gamwe has said the time has come 
because we shall be coming here day in day o ut and Members are just dodging;  the concern is 
people are just dodging they don't want to come  to the wrath in  this particular House. Mr. 
Speaker Sir it is very regrettable , very much regrettable and we are not going to allow am saying 
that and t his one is coming from my heart. .. 
 
(Applause ) 
 
This is the time when we have very many water  and air borne diseases spreading and 
affecting our people on the gr ound;  the voiceless includi ng me, the Hon.  Member, the Chairman 
of Education Mombasa County , the MCA Airport Ward having suffered from Chikungunya … 
 
(Applause ) 
 
Mr. Speaker sir it is very sad , I she d my tears before this Ho use we have given these 
people the mandate to carry out thei r responsibility but it is like we are playing around , 
somebody somewhere  said that the mourner cannot pretend to go in a grieved homestead and 
pretend to well louder than the grieved . Mr. Speaker  we are the one that grieve , we know where 
it pains, we repr esent people on the ground and the situation on the ground is worse, terrible, and 
pathetic  and the state is outdated . Mr. Speaker Sir am crying for your help, I want you to walk to 
Airport Ward if your tears will not come out ; the garbage is all over, the  situation is worse, the 
situation is bad . Look at Kibarani, look at the smell that you experience I think it has come a 
time when we have to stand firm and tell the responsible people to take their responsibility with 
seriousness and if not this time the whip will work. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Kibwana, I think Hon.  Amur and Hon.  Thoya you have 
already raised your concern s unless you have got burning issue s. Hon.  Kibwana , proceed?  
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  Thank you Hon. Speaker mine is just to add on what other 
colleagues have put across but I think we should give the Chair who is the Member of Jomvu 
Kuu W ard who is not around time...  
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 4  
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  But the Committee Member s are around?  
 
(Interru ption ) 
 
Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker it doesn't mean if the Chair is not in the House t hat Committee 
does not function;  he should not tell us because the C ommittee consists of Deputy Chair and 
Members so the issue of telling us the Chairman is not in does not ar ise. This is a very sensitive 
issue we need to be told the truth Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Thank yo u, Hon.  Kibwana is on the floor.  
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  I think Hon.  Speaker you should protect me because I was about 
to expres s my views and I had given them time to vent out their issues so I think it is my time 
also to be given that time so I seek your protection.  Hon.  Speaker I think the Members are 
seeking for a report from the Department and what we know the procedure is tha t the Committee 
only rely on the report from the Department and if the report they have discussed is not full then 
they have to be given time. S o I think it is upon us as Members to give them time , the last chance 
so that they can go out to their Departmen t and give that time to give a full report , so I think 
rather than roasting them at this moment we should allow the Committee and give them ample 
time to give us a comprehensive report.  
The Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Ibrahim (Bomoa) are you up on a P oint of orde r or what?  
Hon.  Omondi:  Am standing on a P oint of Information sir. I just want to pass this 
information that I think when we were in this House , this Honorable  House you did give a 
direction and we did agree the very Chairman was in that House, the very As sistant Chairman 
purported to be Assistant Chairman for Environment  was in this House, the entire C ommittee in 
that respective was in this House and we gave a time  frame and they agreed on that time  frame . 
Mr. Speaker I don't think at that particular time they were out of their mind s, I think they were 
sober when they told us they will give us their statement today. Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  Hon.  Speaker...  
The Deputy  Speaker:  Are you up on a point of order or?  
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  I was still talking when Hon.  Bomoa...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  No you had finish ed Hon.  Kibwana...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon.  Kibwana Swaleh:  No I think Hon.  Speaker...  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Leila Nyache ? 
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 5 Hon.  (Ms.)  Nyache:  Ahsant e sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa h ii kuweza 
kuchangia, ningeomba W aheshimiwa wenzangu katika Bunge hili tuweze kuwa na subra ya hiyo 
ripoti iliotolewa na Naibu Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Mazingira . Tafadhalini, tusubiri ripoti na 
kama haitatufurahisha  ndio tuanze sasa kutoa tofauti zetu lakini tunaomba Mungu ripoti itakuja 
nzuri kutoka kwa Mwenyekiti wa Kamati ya Mazingira. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.   
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Faith ? 
Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker I think here there 's a play of hide a nd seek 
because when it comes  to  matters of environment we don't want people to joke with it ; they 
have been given quite some time, almost one month now and they said to be given more time . I 
don't understand what they are doing as the  Committee and they have the mandate to summon 
the Chief Officer and the County Executive Committee of the Environment. Another thing Mr. 
Speaker right now it is a rainy season , what do we expect to do, they want us to give the 
Chairman of Health a burden to bring the report about another disease,  so they should act 
immediately and I could request this House  to be adjourned for  that C ommittee to go out  and 
bring a report right now. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
The Deputy  Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Bwire before we conclud e. 
Hon.  Bwire: Thank you Mr. Speaker for a second chance. T he garb age issue is a very 
big problem; in fact in my W ard I don't sleep just because of it, and I would also wish to inform 
my fellow Hon.  Members that we don't have a department on garbage collec tion, we only have 
that one for environment but as the M ember and I seconded we said ea rlier that we kindly give 
more time to this C ommittee because the leadership of almost the entire C ommittee is not within, 
now we just give them time next week they repo rt, they may not have an excuse next week to 
give us but to table the report, please thank you.  
 
(Applause ) 
(The Deputy Speaker on his feet)  
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Members,  Hon.  Thoya, when the S peaker is on his feet you 
are supposed to sit. Hon.  Member s now that we have fully deliberated on the issue of garbage 
collection and the Committee o n Environment with their own eyes they have seen what has 
transpired and how the debate was very hot and in fact we had given you a lot of time. So 
Members this wi ll be the last chance from the C hair we shall give you until next week Tuesday, 
failure to which we are going to appoint an ad hoc  Committee to work on the same issue, so next 
week Tuesday we would like to see the report on the table of the House, Clerk.  
 
STATUS OF BURSARY  WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 
Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi.  
Hon.  Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir once again, at this time am rising to give a 
comprehensive statement on the status of the bursary as requested by this Honorable  House, the 
response to this statement . Mr. Speaker  sir I wish to give the following statement ; response on 
the status of bursary within the C ounty . Mr. Speaker sir due to recent situ ations regarding 
bursaries the D epartment of Education, Information Technology and MV 2035 has prepare d new 
bursary forms with various changes based on last year’s  practice .... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 6 Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker point of clarification.  We are not talking about forms for 
bursaries, what is coming for 2018 the issue is about 2016/2017 not about new form s for 
2018/2019 ; the issue of bursary report is 2016/2017, the amount was allocated the university 
student s and colleges were never granted their bursaries , that is the question in this House.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
It is not about the forms, whether they modified t hem today or tomorrow it is not the 
concern of this Assembly , the issue is the Ksh.18, 899,000 Million that was intended for our 
university and colleges which has not been disbursed and yet it was in the budget of 2016 / 2017.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy  Speake r: Yes Hon.  Ibrahim Omondi go as per the request of the statement 
given in this Honorable  House.  
Hon.  Omondi: Yes that is what I want to clarify. Mr. S peaker  Sir I want to first of all 
inform the M ember who was just on the floor trying to argue about my st atement my duty and i 
want to inform the Hon.  Member to get this very clearly, my duty in this particular House as the 
Chair of E ducation is to give the statement sir and remember when in this  House the very 
Members requested for a statement . Mr. S peaker i t will mature....  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  There is a Hon. M ember standing, give Hon.  Raphael a chance to 
speak, but let the Hon.  Member first present his statement.  
Hon.  Bwire:  Mr. Spea ker we do not have much time to give Hon.  Bomoa  time to te ll us 
on what he should do; he is a C hairman on the same department he should not be reading 
statements that is not justifiable by his C ommittee, he should be telling us you  see the Hon.  
Member is telling us that his mandate is to read the statement, how d are you read a statement you 
have not justified? We need a justifiable statement from the Committee Mr. S peaker under his 
leadership, so he should be giving us fact ual information  not statements he does not believe in. 
Thank you. 
The Deputy  Speaker:  So let  Hon.  Ibrahim present his views uninterrupted first then 
Hon.  Members  I will give you a chance.  
Hon.  Omondi: Yes, thank you for that protection and it is very important when we are in 
this Honorable  House we are suppo sed to use S tanding orders ; because her e I was requested to 
give  a statement I was not told to come justify, am not here to justify am only here to read the 
statement. I need your protection Mr. Speaker ... 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker,  he is the Chairman of E ducation ... 
 
(Interrupti on) 
 
The Deputy  Speaker:  Hon.  Amur just let the Hon.  Member first present his statement he 
is responding to a statement so let him present.  
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 7 Hon.  Amur what you are holding ha s not been tabled in this House, s o we cannot talk 
about that document of which ha s not been tabled in this House so let the Hon.  Member  proceed.  
Hon.  Omondi: Yes, thank you Mr. S peaker sir and thank you for the protection, and I 
want to urge my neighbor  Hon.  Member to follow the S tanding order strictly in this House, okay 
am reading th e statement, due to the recent situation regarding bursaries the Department of 
Education, Information T echnology and MV 20 35 has prepared new bursary forms with various 
changes based on last year's practice to improve the situation and bett er target the be neficiaries. 
The aforementioned Count y Department has requested the entire bursary amount of Kshs.300  
Million  from the Department of Finance and is waiting for the money to be sent to the Elimu 
Fund Account. Furthermore the same Department explain ed that t he Sub County Financial Aid 
Committee Chairs met recently and their teams have started meeting and interviewing potential 
beneficiaries.  Finally, Mr. Speaker Sir, the Committee would like to assure M embers that the 
County Government is aware of concerns ex pressed by the MCA’s and public at large and 
currently is undertaking necessary measures to ensure that this problem is addressed.  Thank you 
Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 The Deputy Speaker: Yes Hon.  Ogutu . 
 Hon.  Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir. Mr. Speaker Sir first  of all the statement we 
are getting from the Chair of Education is not comprehensive … 
(Applause ) 
 Mr. Speaker he would have started by telling us whereabouts of the last year’s 
allocation before he tells us about the Kshs 300M illion  which is set for the f inancial  year 
2017 /2018. Mr. Speaker I want to believe that the essence of this bursary fund was to give a 
fountain of hope to the needy children. Mr. Speaker there are a number of these needy and bright 
students who applied in the last financial year and they did not get this money up to date. Mr. 
Speaker man y of them have been forced to de fer because they could not pay the school fee in 
time.  Mr. Speaker it is quite pathetic and the sit uation outside there is wanting;  we want to know 
the whereabouts of t his money which was allocated for the colleges and universities in the last 
financial year and I would urge you Mr. Speaker to give that Committee another chance to go 
and bring a comprehensive statement to this Honorable  House. Thank you.  
(Applause ) 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Yes, Hon.  Amur . 
 Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker it is very sad for us to be told lies, day  time lies. The amount 
that was allocated for the bursary 2016/2017 was there in its full amount, what was disbursed 
was for the secondary schools and special  schools need only. For the colleges and universities to -
date we are in 2018 today is 7th March , 2018, we are talking about the bursaries for 2016/2017 
financial year. The amount that was allocated had already been budgeted yet 7 ,423 students have 
not rece ived their bursaries and yet the money was allocated to that Department of Education. 
Where is the money Mr. Speaker?  We want to be told where is Kshs 6,051,000 is lying because 
it was in the last financial year and 7 ,000 students did not get these bursar ies. A re we being fa ir 
here today saying that 7 ,000 students missed their bursaries because of somebody’s negligence? 
It is not fair Mr. Speaker and that money was allocated. Mr. Speaker they are telling us about 
Kshs 300 Million  again this year, what will  happen to this Kshs 300 Million  again?  
(Interruptio n) 
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 8  The Deputy Speaker:  Use the microp hone  for the H ansard records . 
 Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker if we talk about the Kshs 300 Million  they are looking for 
this year, if the Kshs 64M illion  has been responded to, are we fools to go and grant that Kshs 
300 Million  as an Assembly? Unless we are told where is the Kshs 64M illion  Mr. Speaker first 
for the financial of 2016 /2017. Mr. Speaker it is sad for some students who missed their exams 
because of these bursarie s... 
(Applause ) 
 They have deferred  to go back to the same class because somebody was suppose d to 
pay maybe Kshs.20,000 , a needy student and he did not get that Kshs.18,000.00 o r 
Kshs.15,000.00 Mr. Speaker. There are some students; I will show you a studen t that has  just 
been sen t home from the University because of Kshs.6, 000  and he is one of the beneficiar ies. 
Mr. Speaker as we speak today here Kshs 6, 150  and a student ha s been sent home because 
bursary was not granted and he had applied....  
(Interruptio n) 
 The Deputy Speaker:  Hon.  Ibrahim we will give you time to respond . 
 Hon.  Amur:  This is one of the students  who has been sent home Mr. Speaker because 
of only Kshs.6 , 150.00  that is the balance, he has been sent home yet he had applied...  
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker: Yes Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy?  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker Standing Order No.43, I think we are misusing 
the time given, you are not suppose d to be speaking more than three  minutes and I see my friend 
here you have given him almost six, seven  minutes. So Mr. Speaker can you please stop him. 
Thank you.  
 The Deputy Speaker: Ok, Hon.  Amur proceed and mind you have got only one 
minute.  
 Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker I know why the Chairman from Finance is trying to stop me 
to bring this issue bec ause it concerns Finance and the Committee is one of the Committee s that 
has the mandate of  finance. Mr. Speaker I rest my case but the reality we want to know where is 
the Kshs.64M illion  for those students 7 ,423 before any bursaries are issued we should b e told 
whether these 7 ,423 students will get their bursaries before we go to 2017/ 2018. Thank you.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mr. Speaker it is not fair...  
(Interruption ) 
 The Deputy Speaker: Members  there is a M ember on the floor.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:   Becaus e we are out of the agenda Mr. Speaker, the question 
is we want to know the status of bursary and not about money. So I think it is not fair Mr. 
Speaker.  
 The Deputy Speaker: Yes Hon.  Raph ael.  
 Hon.  Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. O ne; we cannot allocate re sources for 2018 /2019 
bursaries and yet the allocation of 2016/2017 was not well utilized. Mr. Speaker with that we 
have to be very much careful that is one, two...  
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor   Page 9 (Laughter ) 
 Mr. Speaker I need Chairman in the House...I need the Chairman in the House , thank 
you. We therefore need if there is any Committee now that needs Ad-hoc Committee is this 
Committee of Education because you cannot bring to us the statements on 2018/2019 and we 
still have questions on 2016/ 2017 financial year; money that was allocated  for education and was 
not well utilized. And another thing Mr. Speaker is that bursaries involves cash, I just want to 
inform Hon.  Hatimy that bursaries involves cash, s o when you talk of bursary simply we talk of 
cash t hat was allocated for the same b ecause you cannot bring us the statement of 2018/2019 and 
we still have questi ons on 2016/2017 financial year. We therefore need response from the Hon.  
Member and we need not to give you more time for the same. We just need answers within this 
Assembly just n ow on how that money was utilized and how are you going to make sure that the 
rest of the Kshs  300 million that you have asked for will be proper ly used or utilized? Thank you 
Mr. Speaker  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Thoya ? 
Hon.  Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speake r, I think as time goes by we are turning this 
Honorable  House to a House of grammar only whereby we need to define bursary , the word 
comprehensive and I think as Hon.  Members we need to get more serious. The only issue here 
we need  to understand let the C hairman  since  he has the opportunity to call  the CEC in charge of 
Education, m ay be this whole House does not have that opportunity. Let him tell this House 
where is the money that was supposed  to fund  the college and university student s because  we 
don’t h ave the opportunity to call the CEC in this House . Let him call him and  if he has not done 
that let him do it; a gain we need to understand there was th is statement called Sub County 
Financial A id Committee. We need to understand what this is actually becau se I think if this one 
is in the Sub County the MCAs are within the Sub County we must be aware. Sad enough we are 
not in picture of all this because if this is happening w ithin the Ward and I think the h eadquarter s 
Mikindani; a Ward that I represent at le ast I could have a picture of those people being vetted.  
Recently I am hearing a lot of … I think we are missing the point and this Honorable  
House must go in history about education and garbage but because we are missing it I think we 
are not anywhere to be counted at large. Let us get it right in terms of education and let  us 
prioritize education these people when January, February that is the right time for these student s 
to get the aid. Why are we talking this aid to the month of July, August and up to the moment we 
are still saying go and investigate and tell us? Kindly let us prioritize education and let us get this 
aid at the required necessary time . I think if any assistance it should come at the required 
moment not the time that either you been defe rred you have lost your semester whatsoever and 
then the assistance come s. It is time wasted Hon.  Speaker , thank you very much and it is high 
time because…  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Your time is up! Yes Hon.  Feddis .  
Hon.  (Ms.)  Mbura:  Ahsante sa na Mheshimiwa Spika. Sisi kama Wajumbe  tulikuwa 
twatazamia  Mheshimiwa atatuletea ripoti kwamba ni lini basari zitatolewa  kwa sababu watoto 
wengi wako nje. Watoto hawakufanya mitihani na mwaka wa Kaunti saa hii waendelea 
kumalizika ni mwezi wa sita. Kwa hi vyo tulikuwa twatazamia ata tulete a ripoti sasa yale 
anayozungumza sisi hatujamuelewa.  
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 10 Hivyo basi  tungemuomba atafute hiyo ripoti atuletee ili tujue hawa watoto watarudi lin i 
shule? Basari zitatolewa lini, n a wakati wa kutolewa pia sisi kama MCA tuhusishwe  ili tuweze 
kujua … 
 
(Interruption ) 
(Applause ) 
 
Nini inaendelea katika Kaunti! Ahsante sana.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes Hon.  Faith ?  
Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface : Thank you Mr. Speaker. I guess again we have taken for granted 
because education is not somet hing to joke with as a H ouse, we have to prioritize the education 
thing b ecause according to the last page of the report which we are having on the table they are 
saying the interviews are already been conducted … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon.  Faith there is  no report. It … 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface:  But we had the copies!  
The Deputy Speaker:  The Chairman was responding on a statement there is no report 
that has been tabled in this House.  
Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface : My request, thank you Mr. Speaker my req uest is for this House to 
suspend the bursaries of this year so that we may know 2016/2017 allocation where it is . Thank 
you Mr. Speaker . 
 
(Applause ) 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  So Hon.  Members I think the Chairman for Education has 
discharged his functions and h e has responded to the statem ent on bursaries but I can see 
Members are raising issues on the disbursement of the monies for the financial year 2016/2017 
for colleges and universities. So I take this opportunity to ask the Committee and the Chairman 
to wor k on the same for the next 14 days , the Members need know when is the department 
disbursing the bursaries, the new bursaries and in the last financial year pending bursaries for 
colleges and university. So let the … 
 
(Interruption ) 
(Applause ) 
 
Let the Commi ttee concerned and mind you we shall not take tha t report for granted work 
on it, w e have given you ample  time. The time is enough for you to work and the Hon.  Members 
will be waiting for the report and now it is not a respon se to a statement but it is a r eport which is 
going to be debated in this Honorable  House. As you have seen it was a hot  issue , somehow a 
hot deb ate but when you bring it as a Motion  I am sure, be prepared to face whatever that you are 
going to face in this House. Next Order . 
 
March 7, 2018                             COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                          9 
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified versi on of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 11 BILLS  
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon.  Amur:  Mr. Speaker,  I have a burning issue or a statement. A burning statement 
please if you will allow me.  
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon.  Amur it has been passed by event s. 
Hon.  Amur:  (Off microphone)  ...If you always be (??) with that Mr. Spe aker sir. Mr. 
Speaker communicating to that.. . 
The Deputy Speaker:  Yes but it has been passed by event s Hon.  Amur . 
 
(Interruption ) 
 
Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker I kindly request . 
The Deputy Speaker:  Hon.  Amur we are guided by  the S tanding orders. You are 
suppose d to at least al ert the Speaker 30 minutes or by 3 :00p.m  you are supposed to alert the 
Speaker that you have a statement.  
Hon.  Amur : I have alerted you that I have a statement. Thank you . 
The Deputy Speaker:  No Hon.  Amur the Statement that you told was on garbage and I 
think the issue on garbage has been deliberated in the House.  
 
(Applause ) 
 
Thank you.  Yes Clerk , continue . 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Yes Hon.  Members there being no other Business the House stands adjou rned until 
tomorrow Thursday at 2: 30p.m. 
The House rose at 3:22 p.m. 