Februa ry 21, 202 3                         COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                                         9 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version of the Official Hansar d Report is for information 
purpo ses on ly. A certified version of this Repor t can be obtained fr om the Hansard Editor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 21st February , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Ninth  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 10:25a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAY ERS  
The Speaker (Hon.  Khatri ): Honourable  Members , you may be seated.   
 
[Silence ] 
[Lack of quorum]  
 
Sergeant -At-Arms, please ring the bell  for the quorum  under  Standing  Order 31(2). 
Pleas e ring the bell for ten minutes . 
 
[Quorum Bell rung] 
 
Sergeant , please ring the bell again under Standing O rder 31(2) for another five minutes.  
 
[Quorum  Bell rung] 
 
Good morning  Honourable  Members . Honourable  Members , under Standing Order 31; a 
quorum at commencement of the County Assembly , sub section one says, a quorum of the 
County Assembly or of a C ommittee of the whole County Assembly shall be a third of its 
Members , whereby  we need to have fourte en Members. As I can see we  have  only eleven 
Members with us. So, Hon ourable  Members under Standing O rder 31(2)  it is saying, if there is  
not a quorum present when the C hair is taken , at the time  appointed for a m eeting of the County 
Assembly , immediately a fter the say ing of the prayer, t he Speaker shall order the bell to be rung 
for ten minutes , which I did , and if no quorum is present at the expiration of ten minutes, the 
Speaker may direct the bell to be rung for a further five minutes , which I did , and if there  is still 
no quorum present, t he Speaker shall adjourn the County Assembly forthwith  to the next sitting.  
Honourable  Members , this County A ssembly is adjourned till 21st of February at 
2:30p.m. 
 
The House rose at 11 :40a.m. 