January 22 , 202 1                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                   Special Sitting                                       
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
SPECIAL SITTING  
 
Friday, 22nd January, 2021  
The House met at 11:50a.m. 
 
[The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim  Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Honourable  Membe rs, you may be seat ed. Y es Clerk?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
 Thank you . Good morning , once again Hon. Members.  Honourable Members, I take this 
opportunity to welcome you to this Special Sitting of the County Assembly. I hope you all had 
happy holidays. I hope that it is  not too late for me to wish you all a Happy New Year.  As you 
are all aware, this House commenced the long recess on Thursday, 3rd December , 2020. The 
recess will end on Monday 8th February , 2021 . 
 The Corona pandemic which occ urred in 2020 adversely affec ted normal operations of 
almost all institutuions , including the County Assembly. We th us did not conduct our regular 
sittings as per the appr oved calenda r for the year , 2020. This year has started on a positive note 
as children have gone back to school an d businesses which had closed are now reopening. We 
thank the Almighty God for enabling us to see this New Year and my prayer is that it will be a 
better year than 2020 and that COVID -19 will either be totally eradicated or a way shall be found 
to contain it so that normalcy resumes.  
Before we proceed ed for the long recess, The Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020 had 
undergone First reading on the 1st December , 2020 . Pursuant to Standing Order 121, it stood 
committed to the Committee on Finance, Budget and Ap propriations. The Committee was to 
conduct public participation as required by law and on the 8th January , 2021 an advertisement 
was made in the local dailies and other media platforms. I believe the r eport from the publi c 
participation is ready and hen ce this Special Sitting has been called to finalise the remaining 
processes of the Bill.  
Honourable Members , in accordance with Standing Order 26 of the Mombasa County 
Standing Orders, today’s Special Sitting is duly convened as it was published in the Kenya 
Gazette dated 22nd January 2021 vide Gazette Notice Number 496 which appeared on page 20. I 
hereby pro ceed to read the Gazette Notice;  

January 22 , 202 1                            COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                   Special Sitting                                       
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 Pursuant to Standing  Order 26 ( 1-4) of the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders, 
it is notified for the information of  the Members of the County Assembly of Mombasa and the 
general public that there shall be a Special Sitting on Friday, 22nd January , 2021 at the County 
Assembly Chambers, Mombasa County As sembly Buildings, Mombasa at 11: 00a.m. for the 
purpose of considerat ion and approval of the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020 MR/1729290 . 
Hon. Mem bers, Standing Order 26(4) specifies that on the day of the Special Sitting, the 
business specified in the notice shall be the only business before the County Assembly. We will 
therefore only transact business in relation to processing of the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 
2020.  Honourable Members, thank you for availing yourself today to transact this important and 
urgent business that will see the County effectively deliver servic es to its residents.  Thank you.  
 
[Applause]  
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPERS  
MOMBASA COUNTY FINANCE BILL , 2020  
 
 Yes Honourable  Hamis i Musa M widani, Leader of M ajority party.  
 
 The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker Sir 
indeed this m eeting is properly convened and  we we re to consider the  Mombasa  Finance Bill , 
2020.  Mr. Speaker , I wish to bring to your attention that an emergency has occurred which 
requires all MCAs attention,  I rise under S tanding order 28 and seek that this County  Assembly 
do now adjourn and we will convene at the earliest opportunity time . Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Fadhili , the Deputy Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I second.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Fadhili.  Honourable M embers , I now p ut a 
question that pursuant to Standing O rder 28  of the County Assembly ; that a Member may , at any 
time for reason stated seek leave to move that this County Assembly do now adjourn . 
 
[Question p ut and agree d to] 
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 Hon. Members incase of a Special S itting it will be communicated so this House stands 
adjourned until Tuesday 9th February , 2021 . 
 
The Hous e rose at 11: 58a.m. 
 
 
  