February 7 , 202 3                           COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 1  
 
        
   COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Tuesday , 7th February , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Second Session  
FIRST  SITTING  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  10:10a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
                            [The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Eb rahim Khatri ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAY ERS  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Yes, Clerk next order please.  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
OPENING REMARKS , SECOND SESSION  
 
Good m orning again Honourable  Mem bers. I take this opportunity to welcome you all 
back from the long recess. Today , Tuesd ay, 7th February, 2023 marks the first regular sitting of 
the Second Ses sion of the Third Assembly . I trust  you had a wonderful and fruitful  break 
togethe r with your fa milies  and electorates. It is good to see you back, invigor ated and ready to 
execute the  duties bestowed upon you under public trust.  Honourable Members,  for any new 
County  government; that is County Assembly and Executive, the law require s that certain offices 
must be put  in place for proper functioning of the  Government . During the Third Assembly First 
Session, the  House had  set the necessary structures for its operations by constituting House 
leadership and Committees. Howev er, the proce ss of filling the offices of External Members to 
serve in the County Ass embly Service Board is ongoing and will be concluded soon and 
approvals sought from this House.   On th e Executive arm of the County government , the process 
is still at the  formative st ages as Member ship of County Executive Committee, Chief Officers 
and Cou nty Attorney i s yet to be fully  constituted.  From our end, we would like to assure the 
Executive of ou r unwavering support as we move forward, cognizant of the principle o f 
separation of powers.   
Honourable Members , during  our long recess period that began  on 8th December, 2022 to 
6th February, 2023, we successfully held four Special sittings. During those  sittings, the County 
Assembly transacted important County business. For reference , the County A ssembly passed a 
Motion granting the County government app roval to borrow up to the limit  of the total County 
payroll, for the purpose of early payment of salar ies. The County Assembly also approved the 
nominations of Mr. Jeizan Faruk to the position of Co unty Secretary and Head of Public Service 
and Mr. Fadhil Maamuni  Ali for the position Secr etary/CEO County Public Service Board.  
Honourable M embers .  
February 7 , 202 3                           COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 2 Both Nominees were vet ted by the  Committee on Appointments  led by yours truly and  
Committ ee on Labour and Public Service Adminis tration  under the stewardship of Hon ourable  
Jacktone  Madialo respectively  on Thursda y, 19th January, 202 3. The House approved the 
Nominees on Thursday, 26th January , 2023. I want to appreciate the two Committees for 
conducting  themselves d iligently during the vett ing exercise.  
Honourable Members,  allow me to congratula te the Committee on F inance, Bu dget and 
Appropriations led by the Chairperson Hon ourable  Kibwana Sw aleh for t he commendable work 
done in processing of the Mombasa Cou nty Finance B ill, 2022  during the rece ss period . The 
Committee conducted  Public Participation me etings  on the B ill in all the  six Sub-Counties  from 
3rd to 5th January, 2023  to collect the view s of t he stakeholders . Among the ma jor highlights of 
the approv ed B ill inclu de granting 30  per cent  waiver of Single Business Permit s to P ersons 
Living with Di sabilities (PWDs) ; there was al so a reduction  of charges levied on busines ses such 
as market traders, tuk-tuks and Matatus that had been adversely affected by Co rona Virus 
pandemic  and the global ec onomic recession.  The introduction of a new tax referred t o as the 
Port Users I nfrastruct ure Support and Maintenance Fee  will go a long  way in increasin g own 
source revenue by the County government.  I, therefore  most si ncerely wish to relay my heartfelt 
gratitude to you all for honouring the invitation and availi ng yourselves for the  four spec ial 
sittings held during the recess period.  
Honourable Membe rs, as we commence this second session, a lot is expected from us i n 
terms of th e legislative agenda ahe ad. Among the urgent business we are required to discharge  is 
the Approval Hearin gs of Co unty Executive  Committee Members  that are  scheduled for  
Thursda y, 16th February to Monday, 20th February, 2023. Thereafter,  the ne cessary repor ts will 
be tabled before  this Honourable Assembly for Approval. We are also antic ipating recei pt of a 
Message from His Excellency  the Governor, Honourable Abdullswamad Sheriff  Nassir on the 
nominations of Chief Officers to serve in various County governme nt departments. The  Chie f 
Officers will  then be vetted by the County Assembly Sect oral Committees . I expec t that the 
relevant trainings that you have  undergone will enable you to handle  the vetting exercise as 
required by law.  
Honourable Mem bers,  one of the most important manda tes of the County Assembly is 
budget making for the County  government . As per the bu dget timelines, the County Fiscal 
Strategy Paper  (CFSP)  is expected t o be laid  before the County Assembly by Tuesday, 28th 
February, 202 3 for conside ration ; thereafter, the  County Assembly is expected to pass the CFSP 
by Tuesday, 14th March, 2023. It is the refore important for Members to always remember the 
dates and importa nt event s that take place during the budget cycle.   
Honourable Memb ers, we must reckon that the respon sibility ahead of us is huge, but we 
are also up to the ta sk of delivering on our man dates of Representation, Legislation and 
Oversight. The legacy we sha ll leave  as Members of this Honourable House after serving our 
peop le for five y ears is depend ant on the quality of Motions and Bills  we bring to this Assembly.  
It is therefore our colle ctive  and individual responsibility to come up with businesses  that w ill 
have  a positive impact on the  day to day  lives  of our people .  
Honourable M embers,  as I end my rem arks, I wish to call upon us all to embrace the spirit 
of teamwork and consensus buil ding in our transactions, appreciate our diversity and work 
towards achievin g our common goal of serving the residents of Mombasa.  With those few b ut 
many remarks, I wish  you all a fr uitful  and productive session.  May God bless  you all. Thank 
you.’ 
 
[Appla use] 
 
February 7 , 202 3                           COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 3 NOTICE OF MOTION  
APPROVAL OF MEMBERS TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY BUSINESS COMMITTEE  
 
Yes, Honourable  Rama Mwamwiri , Leader of Majority  party . Please give the notice of 
Motion.   
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika . Naomba kutoa 
ilani ya hoja if uatayo ; Kwa  mujib u wa Kanuni za Kudumu ibara 15 1(d) za Bunge  letu tukufu , 
naomb a Bunge  hili kuidhinisha uwana c hama wa teule wa vyama tanz u katika Bunge  hili ili 
waweze kuhudumu katika Kamati ya biashara za Bunge  kama if uatavyo;  
1. Mheshimiwa Aharub Ebrahim Khatri -Mwenyekiti  
2. Mheshimiwa Athman Rama Mwam wiri-Naibu Mwenyekiti  
3. Mhes himiwa  Prisch illah Mema Mumba  
4. Mheshi miwa  Morgan Matsaki  
5. Mheshimiwa  Hamida Noor Sheikh  
6. Mheshimiwa Abdirahman Abdulkadir  
7. Mheshimiwa Frankline Makanga  
8. Mheshimiwa Hawa Abdulrahman  
9. Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Oyug i Omondi  
10. Mheshimiwa Kibwan a Swaleh Baya  
11. Mhes himiwa  Amriya  Boy Juma  
12. Mheshimiwa Naeem Shafiq Mo hamed  
13.       Mheshimiwa  Mwinyi Mtoto Khamis  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Yes, Clerk next order please.  
 
MOTION  
 APPROVAL  OF MEMBERS TO THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY BUSINESS COMMITTEE  
 
Yes, again  Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri . Please  move the Motion.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, Naomba 
kuwakilisha hoja if uatayo ; 
Kwa mujibu wa Kanuni za k udumu i bara 15 1(d) za Bunge  letu tukufu naomba Bunge  hili 
kuweza  kuidhinis ha uwana cham a wa teule wa vyama tanzu  katika Bunge  hili ili waweze 
kuhudumu katika kamati ya biashara za Bunge  kama if uatavyo;  
 
1. Mheshimiwa Aharub Ebrahim Khatri -Mwenyekiti  
2. Mhes himiwa Athman Ram a Mwam wiri-Naibu Mwenyekiti  
3. Mheshimiwa  Prischi llah Mema Mumba  
4. Mheshim iwa Morgan Matsaki  
5. Mheshimiwa  Hamida Noor Sheikh  
6. Mheshimiw a Abdirahman Abdulkadir  
7. Mheshimiwa Frankline Makanga  
8. Mheshimiwa Hawa Abdulrahman  
9. Mheshimiwa Ibrahim Oyugi Omond i 
10. Mhesh imiwa Kibw ana Swaleh Baya  
11. Mhes himiwa  Amriya Boy Juma  
February 7 , 202 3                           COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 4 12. Mhes himiwa Naeem Shafiq Moh amed  
13. Mheshimiwa  Mwinyi Mtoto Khamis  
Nimuombe Mheshimiwa Juma Mwalimu Kambi kuweza kuafiki hoja hii . Ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika. 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Nimeafiki hoja il ioletwa na Mh eshimiwa A thman Mwamwiri 
Kiongozi wa Wengi Bungeni . 
 [Question Proposed ] 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri): Thank you Hon ourable  Juma  Mwalimu . Honourable  
Members , I now propose a q uestion that the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Mw amwiri Leader 
of Majority party o n approval of Members to the County Assembly Business Committee  be 
considered by this Hon ourable  House in t he same terms as  moved . 
[Question put  and agreed  to] 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri , please  make your contributions.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsante Mheshi miwa Spika . Kama ilivyo  
desturi na Kanun i za Bunge  hili Mheshimiwa Spika, tunapo toka katika l ikizo ama mwanzoni 
mwa hatamu ya Bunge  hili lazima shughuli ya kwanza iwe uwanachama wa Kamat i ya Biashara 
za Bunge  ambayo ndio ita pangilia ratiba zitakazof uata. Kwa hivyo Mheshimiwa Spika ni wajibu 
wetu kama Bunge  kuweza kuafiki na kupitisha orodha hii kw a sababu asilimia mia ya 
uwanachama hawa ni wale waliotaj wa awamu ya kw anza ya Bunge  la tatu kama wanachama wa 
shughuli za biashara za Bunge  na k uwa pamoja  na us hirikiano na Waheshimiwa  shughuli 
ziliweza kuendeshwa barabara na ni imani  kuu ya  kwamba Waheshimiwa  hawa ambao 
wamepata nafasi ya kuwakil ishwa katika Kamati hii wataweza kutekeleza majukumu yao 
inavyostahiki kama ilivy okuwa awali ili Bunge  letu libakie kuw a kidedea katika utekelezaji na 
uendeshaji wa shu ghuli zake za kawai da na mipangi lio ya ratiba ya ki maendeleo kwa w ananchi 
wetu katika shu ghuli na biash ara ambazo wawakilishi wa Wadi tofauti wa takuwa wakifikisha  
katika Kamati . Kwa ha yo m engi ni waombee Waheshimiwa  tuweze kuafiki ili shughuli  ziweze 
kupangiliwa na biashara ku endelea kama inavyostahi ki. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Rama. Yes , Honourable  Jackton e 
Madialo p lease make your contrib ution s. 
Hon. Madialo : Mr. Speak er Sir, I rise to support as the Leader of Majority has correctly 
put it, this team led by yourself executed your work well and we wish to cont inue to  lend our 
support to this team, I support.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you Hon ourable  Jackton Madial o, Yes Hon ourable…? 
Hon. Salim Mbaya : Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spi ka kwa kunipa  fursa hii . Kwanza 
kabisa nimshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu ameweza kutujaalia tukawa tuko kwa likizo na akatujali a 
afya na furaha mpaka leo tumeweza kuk utana tena katika Nyumba hii kw a nia ya kuhudumia 
jamii mahali ambapo  tumetoka.  Mheshimiwa Spika  mimi nitaung a mkono jopo h ili liloteuliwa 
rasmi katika kuongoza shu ghuli zetu za Nyumba hii ; nitaliunga mkono mia kwa mia likiwa 
linaongozwa na viongozi ambao wameweza ku bobea katik a uongo zi akiwemo Spika wetu  
Aharub , Kiongozi wa Wengi  Athman Rama Mwamwiri napenda kuliu nga mkono jopo hili rasmi , 
nikiona mafanikio na huduma za Nnyumba hi i zitakwenda ipasavyo . 
February 7 , 202 3                           COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 5 Vilevile tukiwa na matumaini , tukiwa tunaongoza ama tumechaguliwa kama kule  mahali 
amba po nimetoka kwenye kata nd ogo ambayo ni ku bwa kwa mipaka na jamii n ikiwa na 
matumaini wataweza kupat a huduma bora inayostahili na hiyo ndio lengo kubwa la ile jamii 
mahali ambapo tumetoka . Kwa hivyo jop o hili naliunga mkono mia kwa mia bila ya kurudi 
nyuma  wala kuangalia ubavu wa k ulia wala kushoto . Ahsante . 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri): Thank you very mu ch. Yes, Honourable  Matsaki. 
The Leader of Minority (Hon. Matsaki): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza nashukuru 
Mungu kwa wakati h uu kuweza kunifikisha hapa Bunge  hili, pia ponge zi sana k wa 
Waheshimiwa  wenza waliow eza kufika Bunge  hili leo. Mim i kwanza nape ana pongezi sana 
katika hi i Kamati na nashukuru sana kwa uteuzi huu ; naona kupitia Bunge  hili la tatu liko na 
Waheshimiwa  kutoka v yama tofauti ukiangalia kwan za napongeza Kiongozi wa Wengi  yuko 
hapa na Kiongozi wa Wachache  ambae anat oka cham a cha U DA yuko hapa . Pia napongeza 
Mheshimiwa Mw inyi Mtoto amba ye ametoka cham a cha Wiper, napongeza pia Mheshimiwa 
Naeem Shafiq  amba ye pia n i UDA, Mheshimiwa  Frankline Makanga  yeye ni  Independent . 
Ninazidi kupongeza uteuzi hu u kwa sababu imeweza kuc hanganya wajumbe  wote ambao 
wametoka vyama mbalimbali . Kwa hivyo mimi nashukuru sana kwa uteuzi huu Mungu 
awabariki sana wale walio  chuku a nafasi hii ya kuteua hi i Kamati . Ahsante sana.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri): Thank you very much . Yes, Honourable  Manuari . Please  
make yo ur contributi on. 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mhes himiwa Spika . Kwanza nimshukuru Mwenyezi 
Mungu kwa kutuwezesh a kuanzisha muhula wetu huu na pili nimuunge mkono ndugu yangu 
Mheshimiwa Mw amwi ri kwa ku leta hii hoja ya j opo hili la kutengeza biashara ya Bunge . Mimi 
nimesima ma tu kuiunga mkono na kusema kuw a wakati umefika kuwa tufanyie kazi wananchi 
wetu ; kwa hayo men gi ma chache naunga mkono . Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khat ri): Than k you very much  Honourable  Manua ri. Yes, Honourable  
Arwa . 
Hon. Ojala : Thank yo u Mr. Speaker for giving me this op portu nity to contribute . I rise to 
support the Majority leader because when you look  at the names given here  you tr ied as much to 
consider th e respect ive part ies to  be in this team  led by you  and I congratula te you becaus e as we 
are aware that we have the compe tent Speaker and who is reliable and who is ready to d eliver 
where it is necessary , so I stand to support.  
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khat ri): Thank you very much . Yes, Honourable  Athman Rama , 
please reply to the  Motion.  
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri ): Ahsa nte Mheshimiwa Spika . Niwashukuru 
Waheshimiwa  wenza licha ya kwamba ni siku ya kwanza  lakini ukakamavu na uchangam fu 
walio nao ni b ayana ya kwamba l ikizo Mwenyezi Mungu alituli nda na wote tumerudi t ukiwa 
salama.  Pili pia niwashukuru ya kwamba wameweza kuchangia hoja hii na kwa wingi 
wameweza kuiunga mkono ya kwamba wanaipa baraka zao tuweze kutekeleza majukumu  ya 
kupangilia biashara  za Bunge  hili ili huduma kwa wananchi wetu  nyanj ani ziweze kufika .  
Nitoe tu wito  wangu kwa Waheshimiwa  ya kwamba ni wajib u wetu kama wa wakilishi 
kuhakikisha kwa mda ambao tumekuwa likizo tumeweza kujenga wingi w a biashara zinazohusu 
wananchi wetu na kuanzia sasa tunatarajia biashara hizo  kuweza kuf ika katika Kamati 
inayosta hiki.  
February 7 , 202 3                           COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                                         1 
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Official Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A certified v ersion of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansa rd Editor   Page 6 Hii ni muhimu  ili ziwe ze kup angiwa wasaa maa lum wa kuweza jadil iwa katika Bunge  hili 
na hud uma kuweza kufika kule nyanjani. Kwa hivyo niwa shukuru na kwa pamoja  tuzidi 
kushikana kwa sababu umoja ni ng uvu na utengano n i udhaifu, Ahsanteni na ahsante 
Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Thank you Honourable  Rama. Hon ourable  Members , I now 
put a question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Rama Mwamwiri , Leader o f Majority 
Party on approval of the Members to  the County Assemb ly Business Committee , be approved by 
this Hon ourable  House in the s ame terms as moved  
[Question put and agreed  to] 
Yes Clerk . 
ADJOURNMENT  
Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 7th February , 2023 at 
2:30p.m. 
The House rose at 10 :37a.m. 
 
 
 