January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 1  
 
           
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
THE HANSARD  
         FOURTH  SPECIAL SITTING   
 
Thursday , 26th January , 202 3 
Third Assemb ly  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 11:00a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Speaker (Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatr i) in th e Chair] 
 
PRAY ERS  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Honourable  Members , we may be seated.  Yes, Clerk next 
Order please?  
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
 
Good morning again Hon ourable  Members . Honourable  Members , I take this opportunity 
to welcome you to this Special Sitting of the County Assembly. Hon ourable  Members , in 
accordance with Standing Order 26 (3) of the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders 
Today Special Sitting i s duly convened as it was published in the Kenya Gazette, Gazette Notice  
No. 655 dated 25th January, 2023 . I hereby proceed to read the Gazette Notice Vol.CXXV -No.19 
Gazette Notice No. 655 . 
  
   THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA  
THE COUNTY GOVERNMENTS ACT , 2012  
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA STANDING ORDER  
SPECIAL SITTING OF THE COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
 
PURSUANT to S tanding Order 26 (1 -4) of the Mombasa County Assembly Standing 
Orders, it is notified for the information of Members of the County Assembly of Mombasa 
and the general publ ic that, I have appointed Thursday, 26th January, 2023, to be a day for 
a Special Sit ting at the County Assembly Chambers, Mombasa County Assembly Buildings, 
Mombasa, at 11:00 a.m. for the purpose of; - 
 
(a) Communication of Nominees for the position of County Ex ecutive Committee 
Members; and ; 
 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 2 (b) Adoption of Reports on Approval Hearings for Nomin ees for the position of 
County Secretary, Jeizan Faruk and Secretariat/CEO Public Service Board of Mombasa, 
Fadhili Maamuni . 
Dated the 19th January, 2023.   
  
Honourable  Members , Standing Order 26 (4) specifies that on the day of the Special Sitting 
the Bu siness specified on the Notice shall be the only Business before the County Assembly , we 
will therefore transact Business in accordance with the Notice. Thank you. Yes, C lerk next Order 
please?  
 
MESSAGE  
NOMINATION OF COUNTY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEMBERS IN T HE COUNTY GOVERNMENT OF 
MOMBASA  
 
Honourable  Members , Pursuant to Section 27 (1) of the Public Appointments  County 
Assembly Approval Acts No. 5 of 2017 , I hereby read the Notification from the Coun ty 
Government of Mombasa, Office of the Governor:  Ref: Msa  CG/App/CECM/1/VOL.II/165, 
Dated 16th January, 2023, received on the 18th January, 2023 by the County Assembly  Clerks’ 
office .  
Reference;  Nomination of County Executive Committee Members in the County 
government of Mombasa .  
In accordance with the powers co nferred upon me by the County Government Act , 2012 
Section 35, I do hereby forward the following Nominees for vettin g, approval and subsequent 
appointment as County Executive Committee Members as follows: - 
1. The Department of Environment and Solid Waste Man agement, Mr. Francis Foleni 
Thoya  
2. The Department of Education and Digital Transformation, Dr. Mbwarali Kame 
Mboramad   
3. The Department of Finance and Economic Planning, Mr. Evans Oanda  
4. The Department of Healt h, Dr. Swabah Ahmed Omar  
5. The Department of Transpo rt and Infrastructure, Mr. Daniel Otieno Manyalla  
6. The Department of Water, Natural Resources and Climate Change Resil ience, Ms. Emily 
Achieng Okello  
7. The Department of Lands, Urban and Housing, Mr. Mohamed H ussein Mohamed  
8. The Department of Public Service Ad ministration, Youth, Gender, Social Services and 
Sports, Mr. Kenneth Muigai  
9. The Department of Blue Economy, Agricultu re and Livestock, Ms. Kibibi Abdalla Khamis  
10. The Department of Tourism, Culture and Trade,  Mr. Mohamed Osman  
 
Please expedite the process . Yours faithfully,  Signed by H is Excellency  Abdul lswamad 
Shariff, Governor of Mombasa County.  
 
Honourable  Members , the notification stand s committed to the Committee on 
Appointment s Pursuant to Section 9 of the Public Appointments County of the Assemblies 
Approval Act  No. 5 of 2017 .  
The Committee shall consider the nominations and table its report in the Cou nty Assembly 
for debate and decisions within 21 sitting days from the date on which the Committee first sits to 
consider the no mination. Yes, Clerk next Order please?  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 3 PAPER S 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF  NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF COUNTY 
SECRETARY AND HEAD OF PUBLIC SERVICE MR . JEIZAN FARUK  
 
[Laying of Paper ] 
 
Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri, Vice -Chairperson, Committee on 
Appointments, please lay the Paper.  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF COUNTY SECRETARY AND HEAD OF 
PUBLIC SERVICE MR . JEIZAN F ARUK  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . I wish to lay the 
Paper . 
  
[Paper Laid ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Athman Mwa mwiri. Yes, Clerk next 
Order please?  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF SECRETARY /CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
OFFICER  (CEO) PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD OF MOMBASA , MR. FADHILI MAAMUNI ALI  
 
[Laying of Paper ] 
 
Than k you, Clerk. Yes , Honourable  Jacktone Madialo, Chairperson Committee on Labour 
and Public Service Administration please lay the Paper.  
 
REPORT ON THE VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF SECRETARY /CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
(CEO)  COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOAR D OF MOMBASA , MR. FADHILI MAAMUNI  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I wish to lay the Paper.  
  
[Paper Laid ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honourable  Jacktone Madialo for laying down 
the Paper. Yes, Clerk next Order please?  
 
NOTICE S OF MOTION 
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF COUNTY 
SECRETARY AND HEAD OF PUBLIC SERVICE MR . JEIZAN FARUK  
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri, Vice -Chairperson Committee on Appointments, 
please give the Notice of Mo tion. 
 
 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 4 ADOPTION OF R EPORT ON THE VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF COUNTY SECRETARY AND 
HEAD OF PUBLIC SERVICE  
 
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Mr. Speaker Sir, 
I beg to give notice of the following;  
 
THAT,  this County Assembly adopts t he Report on the Vetting of Nominee for the position 
of County Secretary and Head of Public Service , Mr. Jeizan Faruk as laid on the Table on 
Thursday, 26th January, 2023.  
 
Thank you.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you H onourable  Mwamwiri. Yes, Clerk n ext Order 
please?  
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF THE NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF 
SECRETARY /CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER (CEO) COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD OF MOMBASA 
MR. FADHILI MAAMUNI ALI  
 
Yes, Honourable  Jacktone Madialo , Chairperson Committee on Labou r and Public 
Administration please give the Notice of M otion . 
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POS ITION OF SECRETARY /CHIEF 
EXECUTIVE OFFICER (CEO) COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD OF MOMBASA  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg t o give notice of the following;  
 
THAT,  this County Assemb ly adopt s the Report on the Vetting of Nominee for the position 
of Secretary/CEO of County Public Service Board of Mombasa Mr. Fadhili as laid on the 
Table on Thursday, 26th January, 2023. Thank you.  
  
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Jacktone Madi alo. Yes, Clerk next 
Order please?  
 
MOTION S 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON THE VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF COUNTY 
SECRETARY AND HEAD OF PUBLIC SERVICE MR . JEIZAN FARUK  
 
Yes, again Ho nourabl e Athman Rama Mwamwiri please move the Motion?  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Thank you. Mr. Speaker Sir , I beg to  move 
the following Motion:  
 
THAT,  this County Assembly adopts the Report on the Vetting of Nominee for the position 
of County Secret ary and Head of Public Service Mr. Jeizan Faruk as laid on the Table on 
Thursday, 26th January, 2023.  
 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 5 Thank you. I ask Hon ourable  Prischillah Mumba, Majority Chief Whip to second the 
Motion.  
 
The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba) : I second . 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Mwamwiri and Hon ourable  
Prischillah. Hon ourable  Members , I now propose a questi on that the Motion by Hon ourable  
Athman Mwamwiri on Adoption of Report on the Vetting of Nominee for the position of County 
Secretary and Head  of Public Service Mr. Jeizan Faruk be considered in this Hon ourable  House 
as moved .  
 
[Question proposed and agree d to] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Athman Mwamwiri , Vice Chairperson Committee on Appointments 
please make your contribution to the Motion.  
 
The Leader of  Majority  (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Pursuant to Section 
44 (2d) of the County G overnments Act, 2012 and sec tion 6(1)  of the Public  Appointments 
(County Assemblies Approval) Act No.5 of 2017 ; His Excellency the Governor,  Honourable  
Abdul lswama d Sheriff Nassir nominated Mr. Jeizan Faruk for appointment as County  Secretary. 
The nomination was conveyed to the Speaker thro ugh letter Ref No.  Msa CG/APP/CECM/II/100  
dated  29th December , 2022. The  nominee’s  Curriculum  Vitae and testimonials  were  enclos ed in 
the letter.   
Pursuant to Section 7(1) of the Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval) Act 
No.5 of  2017, a Special Sitting was duly convened on Thursday, 5th January , 2023 at 11: 00a.m  
where the  Speaker of the County Assembly read the Message to the House, communicating th e 
name of the  Nominee, Mr. Jeizan Faruk for the position of County Secretary. The name of the 
Nominee w as then referred to the  Committee  on Appointments  for vetting  and reporting  to the 
House  within  twenty -one sitting  days in accordance with Section 9 of the Public Appointments 
(County Assemblies Approval) Act No. 5 of 2017.   
Consequently,  and in accordance  with section  7(5) of the Public  Appointments (County  
Assemblies  Approval) Act No.5 of 2017, the Clerk of the County Assemb ly placed an 
advertisement in the  print  media  on Wednesday,  11th January , 2023  inviting  members  of the 
public  to submit  memoranda by w ay of written statements on oath (Affidavit) on suitability or 
otherwise of the  Nominee  in accordance  with the Public  Appo intments  (County  Assemblies  
Approval)  Act No.5  of 2017 .  The advertisement indicated that the submissions were to be 
received by Wedne sday, 18th January , 2023  at 4:30p.m. By close  of the submission  deadline,  the 
Committee  had not received  any           mem oranda  touching  on the suitability of  the Nominee  for 
appointment.   
Further in fulfillment of Article 196 (1) b of the Constitution of Kenya , 2010,  section 7(5) 
of the  Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval) Act No.5 of 2017  and Standing 
Order 178  (1), the Clerk  of the County  Assembly  in the above -mentioned  advertisement  had 
notified  members of the public that the Committee on Appointments wo uld be conducting an 
Approval  Hearing on the Nominee on Thursday, 19th January , 2023 at 10: 00a.m  in the Cou nty 
Assembly of  Mombasa  Committee  Room  1. The Nominee appeared before the Commit tee on 
Thursday, 19th January , 2023 at 10:00a.m  for Approval  Hearing  in accordance  with the 
provisions  of The County  Government  Act, 2012,  The Public  Appointments (County  Assem blies 
Approval)  Act No.5  of 2017  and the Mombasa  County             Assembly  Standing Orders.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 6 Pursuant to section 7 (8) of the Public Appointments (County Assembli es Approval) Act 
No.5 of  2017,  the Committee  observed  that the Nominee  met the integrity  thres hold, 
demonstrated   knowledge  of topical,  administrative  and technical  issues  touching  on the office  
he was nominated  to. He also has the requisite abilities, acad emic qualifications and 
professional experience to be  approved  for appointment.   
Having condu cted the Approval Hearing for the Nominee in accordance with t he 
relevant laws  including  the Mombasa  County  Assembly  Standing  Order  184(4)  the Committee  
recommends  that this House approves the nomination of  Mr. Jeizan Faruk for appointment as 
County Secret ary by His  Excellency  the Governor of Mombasa.   
I take this opportunity to thank the Members of the Committee and the Secretariat for a 
commendable job. Mr. Speaker Sir , going through the report it has been summarized on the 
establishment and mandate of th e Committee, this Committee is established under County 
Government Act, also the Committee Membership is stipulated in Our Standing Orders and its 
Secretariat.   
The background of the Office of the County Secretary Mr. Speaker is also indicated in 
Section 4 4 of the County Governments Act (No. 17 of 201 2) provides. The notification of 
nomination Mr. Speaker , all the statutory requirements were conducted through the off ice of 
the Speaker and the Clerk of the County government upon receiving the letter from His  
Excellency the Governor, the Members were noti fied as accordance in Article 196 (1) b of the 
Constitution of Kenya , 2010.  
Issues of considerations Mr. Speaker ; Secti on 7 (8) of the Public Appointments (County 
Assemblies Approval) Act No.5 of 2017  provide s that;  
“An Approval hearing shall focus on the can didates’ academic credentials, professional 
training and experience, personal integrity and background. The criteria specified in the 
First Schedule and the assessment form specified in the Second Schedul e shall be used by 
a Committee during an Approval Hearing for the purpose of vetting a candidate.”  
In addition, Section 8 of the Act provides that the issues for conside ration by the County 
Assembly in relation to nomination shall be;  
a) the procedure used  to arrive at the Nominee including the criteria for  the short 
listing of the Nominees,  
b) any constitutional or statutory requirements relating to the office in questio n; 
and; 
c) the suitability of the Nominee for the appointment proposed having regard to  
whether the Nominee’s abilities, experience and qua lities meet the needs of the body to which 
nomination is being made.  
While conducting the approval hearing , the Commit tee was guided by provisions of 
section 7 of the Public Appointments Approval (County Assemblies Approval) Act No.5 of 
2017.  The procedure of the nomination Mr. Speaker was clear, suitability of the Nominee for 
the proposed appointment having regard to his  abilities, experience and qualities meet the 
needs of the body to which the nominatio n is being made for, the Memoranda from members 
of th e public Mr. Speaker in respect of the Nominee as indicated  in the advertisement was 
done and no memoranda was received at the close of the intended time . Approval Hearing of 
the Nominee it was  establish ed that Mr. Faruk Jeizan was [??].  
He was a Kenyan citizen born in 1984, he holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Law from Moi 
University and is an advocate of the Hi gh Court of Kenya having been admitted to the Bar in 
January, 2011. He is also a Certifie d Public Secretary since 2019.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 7 Employment Record  
The Nominee has over 13 years’ experience of work in administration and management 
which has been earned both in priva te and public sectors as follows;  
(a) County Government of Mombasa – Chief Executive Offi cer/Secre tary and Legal 
Advisor County Public Serv ice Board acting capacity and confirmed (January , 2017 - Currently)  
(b) County Government of Mombasa – Deputy Director Board Management Services and 
Legal Advisor County Public Service Board (August , 2015 – December , 2016)  
(c) County Government of Mombasa – Legal Officer (February , 2014 - July, 2015)  
(d) Abdulswamad, Abeid Said & Co Advocates (March , 2012 – January , 2014)  
(e) Abdulrahman, Saad & Associates Advocate s (March , 2011 - February , 2012)  
(f)  Consorti um for the Empowerment  & Development  of Marginalized 
communities (July , 2010 – February , 2011) 
(g) The State Law Office (January , 2010 - July, 2010)  
(h) Children Legal Action Network  - CLAN (August , 2008 – August , 2009)  
Mr. Speaker , the Nominee also confir med his n et worth to be Kshs . Two million with 
sources of income being farming. He had also served as Chief Executive Officer/Secretary of 
the County Public Service Board of Mombasa.  
Prof essional Associations and Membership s 
 
Mr. Speaker , the Nominee is a Member of  the following bodies; - 
a. Law Society of Kenya – Membership no. P105/8358/11  
b. Institute of Certified Secretaries  - Membership No. 3496  
c. Devolution & Law Reforms Committee of t he Law Society of Kenya 2020 - 
Membe rship No. P105/8358/11  
d. Devol ution & Law Reforms Committee of the Mombasa Law Society of Kenya 2021 – 
Membership No. P105/8358/11  
e. East African Law Society – Membership No. P105/8358/11.  
Pro Bono /Charity Work  
Mr. Speaker, Legal Aid to various non -governmental Organizations on the r ights of 
children and the marginalized communities, e.g., Bakor Community Based Organization.  
Integrity  
The Nominee has neither been charged in a court of law nor mentioned in any 
invest igatory report of the County Assembl y or any Commission of enquiry for  the last  three 
years. He has also never been dismissed or otherwise removed from office for contravention of 
the provisions of Article 75 of the Constitution of Kenya , 2010.  The Genera l and Sector 
specific questions to M r. Jeizan Faruk Mr. Speaker has al so been t ouched for Members 
perusal.  
The Committee observation on suitability of the Nominee  
The Committee having considered the Nominee filled questionnaire Pursuant to Section 
7 (9) of  the Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval) Act, 2017, and his 
Curric ulum Vitae. 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 8 And having heard his oral submissions during the approval hearing, the Committee made 
the following observations on his suitability for appoin tment as the County Secretary;  
1. THAT, in ac cordance with Article 78(1) and (2) of the Constitution, the  
Nominee i s eligible for appointment to State Office since he is a Kenyan  citizen  born in 
Mombasa County  and does not hold dual  citizenship.  
2. THAT the Nominee has previously served as the CEO of th e Mombasa  County 
Public Service Board, Deputy Director Board  Managemen t Services  and Legal  advisor  County  
Public  Service  Board,  Legal  Officer  for more  than 10  years  cumulatively.  He has also served  as 
an Associate  Advocate  at Abdulswamad, Abeid Said & Co. Advocates as well as Abdulrahman, 
Saad  & Associates for thre e years cu mulatively. He holds a Bachelor of Laws  degree  from  Moi 
University.  His academic  credentials,  professional  trainings and experience co mply with section 
8 of the Public Appointments (Coun ty Assemblies Approval)  Act, 2017.  
3. THAT, the Nominee meets t he require ment of Chapter six of the Constitution  on 
leadership and integrity having obtained clearance from the following  statutory bodies; the  
Ethics and Anti -Corruption Commission (EACC), the  Kenya  Revenue  Authority  (KRA),  the 
Directorate  of Criminal  Investigatio n (DCI) and the Higher the Education Loans Board (HELB) 
and the Credit  Reference  Bureau (CRB).  
4. THAT, the Nominee has not been charged in a court of law in the past three  years.  
5. THAT,  the Nominee  has never  been  dismissed  from  office  under  Article  75(1) of the 
Constitution, Article 77 on restriction on activities of state officers and  Article  78(2)  of the 
Constitution  on dual citizenship.  
6. THAT, the Nominee demonstrated knowledge of topical,  administrative and  technical  
touching  on government  and has the requi site abilities,  qualifications  and experience to  serve as  
the County Secretary.  
Pursuant to Standing Order 179 (4) and (6) , the Committee adopted this report on 
Monday, 23rd January, 2023  as annextured.  
Recommendations  
Taking into consideration t he suitabil ity, capacity and integrity of the Nominee and 
Pursuant to Section 9 (2) of the Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval) Act, 2017, 
the Committee recommends that the County Assem bly approves:   
The Nomination of Mr. Jeizan Faruk for appoi ntment as t he County Secretary . 
 I, therefore urge all the Members going through the report an d see ing the credentials and 
potentials of the Nominee to adopt this report and have our County Secretary as the law 
requires. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speak er (Hon. K hatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Mwamwiri for your 
contribution. Yes , Honourable  Juma Mwalimu p lease give your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii . 
Nimesimama kuunga mkono uteuzi wa Bwana Je izan kama County Secreta ry na niko na 
sababu ; kwanza ni kijana ambaye yuko na experience  zaidi ya miaka 13 katika  kuwajibika kwa 
kazi zake katika Kaunti yetu ya Mombasa.  Pili, ni kijana ambaye yuko na elimu ambayo 
inatos ha; kwa hivyo naomba wenzangu tuunge  mkono ili tuweze kupata County Secretary  na 
kazi zetu za County  government  ziweze kwenda mbele. Ahsante sana Mhesh imiwa Spika.  
 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor   Page 9 [Applause ] 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Maimuna Salim please 
make your con tribution.  
 
 Hon. Maimuna Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Nasimama kuunga mkono 
uteuzi wa Jeizan kwa sababu ni kijana mtenda kazi, ni kijana ambaye ni msomi na ni kijana 
ambaye amefanya kazi kwa serikali ya Kaunti  ya Mombasa. Sisi ambao tumekuwa hapa tu na 
imani naye kwa sabab u ni kija na mtiifu na anajua njia zake za kazi na ni kijana nina imani ya 
kwamba sisi kama watu wa Mombasa tunaonekaniwa ya kwamba tumechukua kijana mdogo 
tukampatia  nafasi  kubwa lakini ni kwa sababu ya utenda kazi wake na usomi wa ke. Kwa hiyo 
mimi nimesim ama am a kuunga mkono na nina imani k uu ya kwamba kazi ya Jeizan itaonekana 
ndani ya Mombasa Kaunti nzima kwa sababu amekuwa kwa Bodi  na tuliona kazi yake hakuna 
mahali aliteteleka. Kwa hiyo nina imani ya kwamba tumepata County Sec retary  ambaye ni 
mtenda  kazi na n i kijana wetu na ni kijana amb aye ni mtanashati na ni kijana ambaye amesoma. 
Kwa hiyo mimi nimesimama kuunga mkono uteuzi wa Jeizan.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Maimuna. Yes , 
Honourable  Hamisi Salim Mbaya , please make  your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Hamisi Mbaya:  Ahsante sana  Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii . 
Kwanza kabisa kabla ya kuendelea niweze kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mungu ambaye ametupatia 
fursa hii kuweza kukutana leo tena ili kuweza kukagua na kupeana sap oti ama kutopeana 
kutokana na nd ugu zetu ambayo majina yao tuk o nayo hapa.  Mimi nimesimama rasmi kuunga 
mkono uteuzi wa ndugu yetu Faruk Jeizan hasa kutokana na vipengele vingi ambavyo 
vimeweza kutambulika na kutajwa kuonyesha ya kwamba anastahili kuteuliw a kwa ku wa 
County  Secretary . Kwa hiyo naunga mkono 70 kwa 100.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Mbaya. Yes , Honourable  Juma 
Manuari please make your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Juma Manuari:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii ili k uelekeza 
msimamo wangu pale ulipo. Kwanza , niweze kumshukuru Mwenyezi Mu ngu aliyetupa nafasi 
ya leo tukifika pahali hapa kama ndugu, kama marafiki ili tuhakikishe masuala yetu ya Kaunti 
yanasonga mbele . Tumesimama kwa muda mwingi saa hii imefikia ni wakati  wa kuwa 
tusongeni mbele ; mimi naunga mkon o ndugu yangu Faruk Jeizan , kwanza ni kijana 
mwenzangu, pili sijakaa naye karibu lakini kwa sifa ambazo nazipata kutokana na watangulizi 
wangu katika Nyumba hii inamaanisha huyu kijana anatosha na anazo kila sababu  za kuwa 
tufanye naye kazi. Kwa hayo mengi machache Mheshimiwa Spika namu unga mkono kuwa 
katika kazi. Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Juma Manuari.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 10 Yes, Honourable  Kai, please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Kai:  Ahsante  Mheshimiwa Spika . Kwanza niweze kuchukua fursa hii kumshukuru 
Mwenyezi Mungu kw a kutupa uhai ambao ametupatia siku baada ya nyengine, kisha niseme ya 
kwamba mimi ninaunga mkono uteuzi wa Faruk Jeizan kwa sababu pia mimi nimesikia sifa za 
utendaji ka zi wake na tuna imani ya  kwamba ataendelea kushirikiana na Bunge hili kuhakikisha 
ya k wamba yale yangeweza kusimama basi kupitia uongozi wake yataweza kuenda . Kwa 
haraka namtakia kila la kheri katika majukumu yake mapya. Shukran.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Than k you very much Hon ourable  Silvester Kai. Yes , 
Honourable  Ahmed Khamis please make your contri bution.  
 
Hon. Ahmed Khamis:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi bila kupoteza wakati 
naunga mkono mia fil mia ; ndugu yangu Bwana Mbaya amesoma 70 kwa 100, mimi na unga 
mia kwa mia kwa sababu ni ki jana ambaye ni mkarimu na mtenda kazi na tuliwahi kufanya 
naye  kazi na nina imani ya kwamba ataipeleka Mombasa mbele. Ahsante sana.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Ahmed Khamis. Yes , Honourable  
Samuel Mwaur a please make your con tribution.  
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa sababu ya kunipa fur sa niweze 
kuchangia katika Hoja hii. Kwanza niseme nashukuru Kamati  iliochukua muda na kuweza 
kutuletea ripoti iliyo ndefu kiasi hiki na niseme kwamba nami  pia naungan a nao kuunga mkono 
Hoja hii ya kumteua Bwana Jeizan Faruk . Ni kwa sababu  si ya kumfaham u sana lakini ni kwa 
sababu ya sifa ninazo  zisikia ama nilizo  ziona zikiwa zimenakiliwa katika nakala hii na pia 
imani yangu kubwa kwa Kamati  ambayo imefanya  kazi hii nd io sababu ninasema hata nami 
naungana nao kusema ya kwamba tuendeleze Mombasa tuweke w atenda kazi ambao 
wanaielewa kazi. Ahsante ninamtakia kila la kheri katika shughuli zake na katika kazi zake. 
Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Kha tri): Thank you Hon ourable  Mwaura. Yes , Honourable  Jacktone 
Madialo please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Madialo:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa fursa hii . Pia mimi ningependa kuungana 
na wenzangu kumuunga mkono Jeizan ; sifa moja ambayo nimeiona kwake ni kwa mba Jeizan ni 
mtu ambaye hana madharau , sijakutana na e kwa muda mwingi lakini kuna siku moja ambayo 
nilikuwa na fursa na nikamuona kuwa ni mtu ambaye ni msikivu na pia ni mnyenyekevu . 
Naamini ya kwamba atapeleka Kaunti hii mbele Mungu akimjaalia. Ahsanteni . 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon . Khatri) : Thank you ver y much Hon ourable  Jacktone. Yes , 
Honourable  Arwa , please make your contribut ion. 
 
 Hon. Ojala : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir for giving me this opportunity to contribute .  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 11 First before I proceed, I want to congratula te the Chairman Hon ourable  Madialo fo r the 
good work because I can remember that day I was invited as a friend of the Commi ttee in that 
vetting. If I proceed, I want to say I have been keenly going through the education wise of Mr. 
Jeizan  and I came up wit h a result that is a competent person and  as an Honourable  Member 
there are some of things we must consider before we support anybody in each position.  Now on 
Jeizan emphasized comp liance to  rules and law and upholding standards of professional ethic s. 
Again, he mentioned modelling positive work ethic s for the County workers, again  effective 
communication between his office, Cabinet , County de partments and County Assembly . I think 
us the Hon ourable  Members those are the key things we normally consider befor e we say we 
support any Nominee  in this House, the relation s between his office and t he County Assembly I 
support that ; again,  as we see his backgr ound anybody who has idea in law  and in County 
government there are some of laws that requires people with th e knowledge to ensure that our 
County get what is right  for the people of Mombasa . So, with those few remarks Mr. Speaker, I 
stand to support Mr. Jeizan  for his position of County Secretary of Mombasa. Thank you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very  much Hon ourable  Arwa Ojala. Yes , 
Honourable  Abdikadir please make your contribu tion. 
 
 Hon. Abdirahman A bdikadir:  Thank you so much Mr. Speaker for giving me the 
oppo rtunity to contribute. From the onset I would like to apologize for coming late, accordin g 
to the matter on hand Mr. Speaker I would like to first of all pass my regards and 
congratulations to t he Committee on Appointments as well as the secretariat for th e job well 
done.  Mr. Speaker , when I look at this report, I can attest that  it is a very detailed report, a very 
extensive one that touches on all aspects. Mr. Speaker , being a friend of the Committe e and I 
was present during this grilling session I can confirm  that the Nominee showed prowess and he 
tackled most of the questions very well and I take this opportunity to sa nction  the adoption of 
this report. Thank you so much.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Abdirahman 
Abdikadir. Yes Hon ourable  Nusur a Mwinyi , please make your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Nusura Mwinyi: Ahsante  sana Mheshimiwa Spika . Hata mimi pia nimeiangalia 
ripoti nikaona kijana anaweza , ana kila aina ya sif a, amemiminiwa sifa nyingi  sana hapa 
japokuwa labda hatujakutana naye tukaongea naye man eno mawili , matatu ama tukab adilishana 
mawazo lakini sifa zote zim emuendea kijana Jeizan. Kwa hivyo ni haki yake kupata nafasi hii  
na nimesimama kumuunga mkono na namtakia ki la la kheri katika utendaj i kazi wake ndani ya 
Jumba hili la Mombasa Kaunti Assembli.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Joshu a, please make your 
contribution.  
 
 Hon. Ong’ao : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . Let me also take this opportunity to  
congratulate the Committe e on Appointments for a very detailed report given unto us.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 12 Having go ne through the report , the appointee ’s academic qualifications, work experience 
are all tallying for the job . So, I have to take this opportunity to wish him well in  his new 
appointment. Than k you.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you again Hon ourable  Joshua . Yes , Honourable  
Prischillah Mumba , please make your contribution.  
 The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika hata mimi kwa 
kunikumbuka niweze  kuchangia kuhusu Jeizan n a nikiangalia hapa kwa kirefu nimeona Bwana 
Jeizan tajriba zak e za kikazi, vyeo vyake vya elimu, nimejaribu ku soma kwa kina kwa sababu 
mimi nimemjua Bwana Jeizan nikiwa nimefanya nae kazi hapa miaka mitano iliyopita akiwa ni 
mtu m uadilifu. Lakini leo nimeo ngeza kujua ujuzi alio nao zaidi na kusema kweli nimepata 
pointi moja ambayo ni muhimu sana kuna mambo mengine  huwa saa nyengine hatuyaoni wala 
hatujui mpaka tuletewe tuone, tusome, ndio tuamini tajriba ya elimu ya mtu kwa sababu sana 
tunajua kuwa tunaambi wa wa pwani mbona muko nyuma? Lakini hapa nimeona viwango tofa uti 
tofauti vya kusoma, vyeo, elimu, sheria na k azi ambayo ameitenda katika Kaunti hii ambayo 
hatuna shaka nayo sisi ambao tumekaa hapa, ambao ni wakongwe tumeona kazi ya Jeizan na 
tunajua Jeiza n ni mtenda kazi na Jeizan ana sikio la kusikiza. Kwa sababu u naweza kupatia mtu 
kazi na awe hana sikio la kut usikiza. Leo hapa sisi tunampitisha Jeizan tukiwa tuna uhakika, 
maana ile kazi Jeizan ambao leo tunampa ni kazi ya kutuw ekea sisi waheshimiwa siki o; maana 
ni kazi ambayo itabidi tumfuate saa zote tukiweza kum uuliza masuala kadha wa kadha kulingana 
na wizar a tofauti tofauti na kulingana na kazi za mawaziri. Sasa ukiangalia kama ni mtu 
angekuwa hatutegei sikio, sisi ndio tun gekuwa wa kwanza wa kusema  hapa Jeizan hafai kwa 
sababu hatatuwekea sikio. Lakini kwa sa babu tunamjua, anajua kusikiza na anajua kutenda kazi 
yake, Waheshimiwa wenzangu ambao tuko katika Jumba hili na ninajua sijaona mtu yeyote 
akisema kuwa ameona tatizo l a Jeizan, ninaona kuwa muk o na imani nae na tuna imani nae 
yakuwa Jeizan katika waadhifa  huu mpya ambao atakaoingia kufanya, atafanya kaz i yake bila 
kupendelea, atafanya kazi yake kwa kuangalia hata hizi wizara maana tunajua kuna wizara huwa 
saa nyengine z ina zembea, tunapitisha Mawaziri  hapa na wakifika kule, wakiwa hawana 
msimamizi wa kisaw a sawa wa kuweza kuangalia zile wizara, basi sasa  kazi ndio inaanza 
kuharibika.  
Kwa hivyo tunamuombea Jeizan kwa sababu unaambiwa mgema akisifiwa tembo hulitia 
maji, asije akalitia hili tembo maji, kwa sababu sifa zimekuwa kemkem kwake tunamuombea 
azidi k uwa mfano mwema katika Kaunti hii yetu ya Mombasa  maana yake hii ni afisi ya umma 
na atahitajika bado kufanya kazi ya umma na kusikiza sikio la watu na kilio cha watu katika 
Mombasa maana hapo ni kama uti wa mgongo wa Mombasa. Tukitekeleka katika County  
Secretary , katika Wizara basi hata sisi huko mbelen i tutakuwa hatarini. Lakini ikiwa ataendelea 
kufanya kazi vile tunavyomjua, basi tuna imani kuwa Jeizan atatupeleka mb ele bila matatizo na 
usima mizi wake na kazi yake. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Prischillah Mumba. Yes , 
Honourable  Shafiq Mohamed please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Shafiq:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir,  first I would like to apo logize for being late and 
secondly, I would like to congratulate the C ommittee on Appointment for the job that t hey hav e 
done. And thirdly, I stand to support Mr. Jeizan. Thank you, Sir . 
 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 13 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you  Honourable  Naeem Shafiq  for yo ur contribution. 
Yes, Honourable  Samir please make your contribution.  
 
Hon.  Bhaloo:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika. Na taka k uunga wenzangu mkono kwa uteuzi 
wa Faruk Jeizan. Ni kijana mdogo ambae tumeona utenda kazi wake, nauunga mkono n a nataka 
wenzangu tuunge m kono kwa ndugu yetu. Ahsanteni.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank yo u. Yes , Honourable  Abdalla Shuhudia please make 
your con tribution.  
 
Hon. Shuhudia Abdallah:  Ahsante sana Bwana Spika kwa kunipa fursa hii pia mimi 
nataka kuungana na wenzangu kuunga mkono kwa ut euzi wa Bwana Jeizan. Nimesikia 
amemiminiwa sifa nyingi sana sijawahi  kukutana naye wala simjui lakini pi a mimi nauung a 
mkono namuombea katika majukumu ya ke na kazi zake. Ahsante.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Shuhudia. Yes , Honourable  Matsaki 
please  make your contribution.  
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki ): Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. k wanza samahani 
kwa kufika kuchelewa nilikuwa na mkutano  na Bwana Deputy County Commissioner (DCC). 
Mimi napeana kwanza shukurani kwa Waheshimiwa wenza waliof ika, Mungu awabariki sana. 
Pili, nasema ya kwamba Jeizan kwangu kwa u fupi si mgeni, nishawahi kupit ia afisi yake wakati 
aliku wa akifanya kazi; kwa uteuzi mimi ni mmoja wa wana Kamati hio ni mara ya pili kukutana 
na yeye tena. Kwa ufupi mimi nasema Jeizan n i kijana shupavu na ninamuona ana ukakamavu, 
kwa ufupi ni kusema kwam ba hakun a binadamu kamili. Lan gu mimi nam uombea kwanza ha swa, 
achape kazi, awe mtendaji kazi, awe muhaki na aangalie masilahi haswa ya Kaunti hii ili iweze 
kusonga mbele. Kwa hivyo mimi na zidi kuunga mkono aweze kuchukuwa nafasi hii na awe 
kielelezo kikubwa  cha Kau nti hii. Ahsante Bwan a Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Matsaki. Yes , Honourable  
Athman Rama Mwamwiri please reply to the Motion.  
 
The Leader of Majorit y (Hon. Mwamwiri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika, Mheshimiwa 
Spika nishuku ru Waheshimiwa Wenza kw a kuchangia ripoti hii kuhusu ute uzi wa ndugu yetu 
Jeizan. Mheshimiwa Spika uteuzi wa Jeizan una natija nyingi kwetu hususan katika dunia ya 
vijana Mheshimi wa Spika, Jeizan anakuwa kioo cha jamii akiwa na umri wa miaka 39 na nafasi 
aliyoipata ama atakayoip ata Mheshimiwa Spika amedhihiris ha kuwepo na uzoefu wa miaka 13 
kumaanisha aliaminiwa akiwa na umri wa miaka 26. Hii Mheshimiwa Spika inatupa nguvu sisi 
vijana na wale vijana wanaotufuata ya kwamba ile nadharia ya kwamba vijana ni v iongozi wa 
kesho waweze kuiweka katika kaburi la sahau n a kujitokeza kupigania nafasi tofauti kwa sababu 
fursa ipo. Mheshimiwa Spika nawashukuru Waheshimiwa na kuwahakikishia ya k wamba katika 
vikao tulivyo kaa nae Bwana Jeizan na kumuhoji uwezo wa nafasi hii, aliidhihirishia Kama ti hii 
ueledi na uzoefu mkuu ka tika majukumu haya na kuhakikishia ushirikiano mwema baina ya 
utawala na Bunge Mheshimiwa Spika ambayo hapo ndio chachu ya m aendeleo kwa wananchi 
wetu wa Mombasa. Hivyo basi Mheshimiwa Spika pia mimi  niwe miongoni mwa wale 
waheshimiwa kumtakia kila la her i ndugu yetu huyu katika uteuzi huu ambao kwa muda 
mchache, In Shaa Allah  Bunge litaafiki na kuweza kuitendea haki na kuweze sha ufanisi katika 
ruwaza ambayo Mstahiki Gavana yuko nayo kwa wananchi wa M ombasa.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 14 Ahsanteni Waheshi miwa kwa kuchangia kwenu, In Sh aa Allah  na Mwenyezi Mungu 
atubariki sote. Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Athma n Rama Mwamwiri. 
Honourable Members I now put the question that the Motion by  Honourable  Athman Mwamwi ri 
on Adoption of Report of the Vetting of Nominee for the position of County Secretary and Head 
of Public Service, Mr. Jeizan Faruk  be approved by this Honoura ble House in the same terms as 
moved . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
[Applause ] 
 
Honourable Me mbers, the Motion by Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri on Adoption  of 
Report on the Vetting of Nominee for the position of County S ecretary and Head of Public 
Service, Mr. Jeizan Faruk  is adopted by this Hous e. Yes , Clerk next Order please?  
 
ADOPTION OF REPORT ON TH E VETTING OF NOMINEE FOR THE POSITION OF SECRETARY /CHIEF 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE R (CEO), COUNTY PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD OF MOMBASA , MR. FADHILI MAAMUNI 
ALI 
 
Thank you. Yes , Honourable  Jackton Madialo, Chairperson Committee on Labour and 
Public Service Administration  please move the Motion . 
 
Hon. Madialo:  Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move the following Motion.  
  
THAT, this Co unty A ssembly adopts the Report on the Vetting of Nominee for the position 
of Secretary/Chief Executive Officer, CEO County Public Service Board of Mombasa as 
laid on the Table on  Thursday, 26th January , 2023.  
 
 I would like to ask my able Vice Chair to secon d. 
 
Hon. Nusura Mwinyi:  I stand to second the Motion.  
 
The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Madialo and Hon ourable  Mwinyi. 
Honourable Members , I now propose the question that  the Motion by Hon ourable  Jackton 
Madialo on Adoption of Report on the Vetting of Nominee for th e position of Secretary/Chief 
Executive Officer, CEO, Co unty Public Service Board of Mombas a, Mr. Fadhili Maamun Ali  be 
considered by this Honourable House in the sam e terms as moved.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
Yes, Honourable  Jackton Madialo , Chairperson Committee on Labour and Public Service 
Administration, please your contribution on the Motion.  
 
Hon. Madialo : Thank you Sir for the opportunity, we will go through this , the Committee 
mandate and scope, you can go through it.  
 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 15 Acknowledgements: The Committ ee registers its appreciation to the Office of the Speaker, 
Office of the County Assembly Clerk and Committe e Secretariat for the logistical support 
extended during the vetting process.   In addition, the C ommittee thanks the Nominee for his 
cooperation du ring the vetting process. The Com mittee also appreciates the Kenya Revenue 
Authority, the Ethics and Anti -Corruption Commission, Directorate of Criminal Investigations 
and Higher Education Loans Board for p roviding references and background checks relating  to 
the suitability of the Nomine e. We acknowledge and appreciate Members of the Committee for 
their pati ence,  sacrifice, dedication and input which enabled the Committee to complete the task 
within the required timelines.   
On behalf of the Committee o n Labour and Public Service Admin istration, it is my 
pleasant duty to present the Report on the vetting of M r. Fad hili Maamuni Ali, Nominee for the 
position of Chief Executive Officer, CEO/Secretary, Mombas a County Public Service Board for 
debate and adopt ion by the Assembly.  Foreword , you will go through it, also legal framework  it 
is there presented for you,  you can  go through it. Observations and Findings: The nomination 
was committed to the Committee  on Labour and Public Service Administration at a Special 
Sitting of the County Assembly on Thursday, 5th January , 2023.  Pursuant to section 7(5) of the 
Public Appointm ents (County Assemblies Appr oval) Act (No.5 of 2017), the vetting of the 
Nominee was ad vertised in the  Standard Newspaper and The Sta r Newspaper on 11th January , 
2023 and was conducted on Thursday, 19th January, 2023. Members of the public we re invited to 
submit sworn statements w ith supporting evidence on the suitability or otherwise of the Nominee 
and also attend the vetting meeting.  
The Committee sought clarification of the procedure used to arrive at the Nominee ; 
including the criteria fo r the shortlist ing of the Nominee pursuant to Section 8(a) the of the 
Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval) Act (No.5 of 2017) by writing  to the 
County Secretary on Tuesday,  10th January , 2023 vide our letter Ref.  CAM/CAC/CO -
CORR/VOL.V/89  then you  will go thro ugh it.  
No. 11,  Approval Hearing: The Committee conducted approval hearing/vetting for the 
Nominee on Thursday 18th January , 2023. In conducting the vetting exercise, the  Committee was 
guided by, among other documents ; the Constitution, the P ublic Appointm ents (County 
Assemblies’ Approval) Act , 2017, the County Governments Act, 2012 and th e County Assembly 
Standing Orders. The Committee c onducted the vetting in the Plenary Chamber, Mombasa 
County Assembly Buildings, Treasury Square, Mombasa fro m 10:00a.m  in the morning. 
Members of the public were allowed to attend and several attended and sat at the gallery to 
witness the proceedings.  The C ommittee examined the Nominee using the guidelines Public 
Appointments (County Assemblies’ Approval) Act, 20 17. The Comm ittee also considered the 
following in vetting the Nominees:  
 
(a) Academic qualifications  
(b) Employment record and experience  
(c) Professional as sociation  
(d) Potential conflict of int erest  
(e) Suitability to the position  
(f) Tax compliance  
(g) Vision and leadership  
(h) Integrity  
(i) Expectation and key priorities  
The Nominee was asked pertinent questions to measure his abilities and suitability for 
appointment to the p osition and he was given time and op portunity to reply appropriately.   
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 16 The Committee sought information and clarification s from the Nominee with regard to his 
suitability, integrity, abilities and qualifica tions and checked the replies provided by him in t he 
written questionnaire  provided un der the First Schedule, Section 7(9) of the Public Appointments 
(County Assemblies Ap proval) Act. (No.5 of 2017) and also checked his Curriculum Vitae and 
copies of suppo rting testimonials including his National Identity  Card, academic and other 
certificat es against the originals during the vetting meeting.  
So, some of the q uestions we as ked is like, the personal background and net worth: The 
Nominee was asked about his personal background which he fairly replied. He is  a male adult of 
Muslim religion bor n on 17th May, 1980 in Malindi, Kenya and is a citizen of the Republic of  
Kenya. He st ated that he had a personal network  of Kshs.11M illion.  We also asked about his 
educational  and professional, we also asked him to provide hi s educational and professional 
certificates, trainings and other certificates. Also,  we sought from him the c learanc e requirements 
and also professional and other affiliations and publications. We also so ught to get from him  his 
work experience and caree r progression of which the Nominee has worked both in the public and 
private sector in the following capaciti es: 
(a) Chief  Officer Finance, Lamu County government from September , 2021 to date.  
(b) CEO/Secretary, L amu County Public Se rvice Board from March , 2015 t o August , 2021  
(c) Accounts Manager, TSS Grain Millers from February , 2013 to February , 2015  
(d) Financial Controller, Afrisali  Air Cargo from June, 2008 to December , 2012  
(e) Financial Controller, Al -Kamar Trading Compan y from 2007 to 2008  
(f) Audit Senior, Abdul Wahid Aboo  & Co. from January , 2006 to January , 2007  
(g) Accounts Assistant Constitution of Kenya Review Commission from S eptember , 2005 to 
December , 2005.  
(h) Accounts Assistant, Awal Limited from January , 2003 to June , 2005.  
We also checked on  his integrity, the respons e is there . We also asked him about ghost 
workers ; whether and how he handled it in his previous station at the Lamu C ounty, we also 
asked him about balance between bloated workforce and need to employ more st aff to tackle 
unempl oyment. We also sought to k now if there are overlap of roles between Mombasa County 
Public Service Board and the County Department of Publi c Serv ice and Administration . In 
response to a question whether there was an overlap between the Mombasa County Publi c 
Service Board and the Cou nty Department of Public Service Administration, the Nominee 
clarif ied that there is no overlap of roles between t he two entities as they complimented each 
other in matters of human resource management.  
The role s of the Board are p rimarily and clearly spel t out in law and delegates some of her 
functions to the Department for implementation. We also asked on autonomy  of the County 
Public Service Board: As to whether the County Public Service Board is autonomous, semi -
autonomous or sub -servient to the County government, the Nominee replied that the Board was 
semi -autonomous and should work with consultation and in harm ony w ith the County 
government, the oversight Committee of the County Assembly and other stakehold ers. We also 
asked him on his achievements whe n he was the CEO Lamu County to which he gave the reply 
and it is here for you to go through and also the perso nal ac hievements. Lastly , we asked him 
notable changes in the County Public Service Board in the nex t five years if granted the 
opportunity.  
Finally, the Nominee was asked on the possible notable changes that were likely to be 
observed in the Mombasa County Pu blic Service Board after appointment in five years’ time , the 
Nominee in reply cited ; an organized Board , strategic plan in line with the Cou nty Integrated 
Development Plan and Governor’s manifesto, effective and efficient service delivery and a 
cohesive Bo ard working in good relationship with the Committee and the County Government.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 17 Conclusion:  The Committ ee on Labour and Public Service Admini stration having vetted 
Mr. Fadhili Maamuni Ali, Nominee for the position of CEO/Secretary, Mombasa County Public 
Service Board and having considered the procedure used to arrive at the Nominee ; including the 
criteria fo r the short listing of the candidates,  his credentials, experience, capacity, suitability, 
integrity and abilities and pursuant to Section 9(2) of the Pu blic Appointments (County 
Assemblies Approval) Act (No.5 of 2017) and being satisfied with his suitabil ity to be appointed 
to the position, a t its meeting on Monday, 23rd January , 2023 recommended to the County 
Assembly to approve his appointment by His Ex cellency the Governor to the position and for the 
adoption of the report on the vetting exercise.  
Recom mendations:  That, pursuant to Section 9(2) of the Public Appointments (County 
Assemblies Approval) Act (No.5 of 2017), the Committee on Labour and Public  Service 
Administration RESOLVES to recommend to the County Assembly to approve Mr. Fadhili 
Maamuni Ali , His Excellency the Governor’s Nomine e for the position of CEO/Secretary, 
Mombasa County Public Service Board in the County government of Mombasa to be appointed 
to the position.  That, Pursuant to Section 9(2) of the Public Appointments (County Assembli es 
Approval) Act (No.5 of 2017) and Sta nding Order 179 ; 
 
This County Assembly RESOLVES  to adopt the Report and the annexed minutes of the 
proceedings of th e Committee approving the Nominee and the Report.   
 
You can also go through the annexure. Thank you so m uch Mr. Speaker Sir.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The S peaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo for your 
contribution. Yes , Honourable  Mwalimu please  make your contrib ution. 
 
Hon. Juma Mwalimu:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia fursa hii. Kwanza 
nipongeze Kamati ya Uajiri ikiongozw a na ndugu yangu Mheshimiwa Jacktone Madialo kwa 
kazi yao nzuri walioifanya kwa kumteua ndugu yetu Bwana Fadhili Maamuni Ali katika  wadhifa 
wake wa CEO/Secretary, Mombasa County Public Service Board na tume ona ni mtu muadilifu 
aliye na kisomo chake na pia yuko na ujuzi wa kazi katika kazi za usekretari. Yangu tu kama 
kiongozi, namuombea kazi njema na aweze kupeleka M ombasa yetu mbel e katika maendeleo na 
mambo kochokocho. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Juma Kambi. Yes, Honourable  
Nusura Mwinyi , please make your contribution.  
 
 Hon. Nusura Mwinyi:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Mimi nataka pia tujipong eze 
kama Kamati ya Uajiri ; ni mmoja katika ile Kamati ambayo ilifanya uteuzi wa Bwana Fadhili 
Maamu ni. Kwa kweli huyu Bwana Fa dhili Maamuni tulimuangalia, tulimuhoji na tulimuona 
kwanza ni mtu mkarimu na tumemuona ana uzoefu wa kazi; amefanya makazi tofaut i tofauti na 
tuliangazia pia elimu yake pia tukaona inatosha na tulimuuliza maswali kadha wa kadha na 
alitujibu kwa njia inayotak ikana. Kwa kweli ni mtu amba e; kwanza yuko na familia na kwa 
kweli sana sana huwa watu ambao wak o na familia  sana huwa hawachezi na kazi na pia huwa 
wanafanya uadilifu katika kazi zao. Kwa hivyo nimesimama kumuung a mkono Bwana Fadhili 
Maamu ni katika nafasi hii ambayo alikuwa amekuja kuo mba. Namtakia kila heri kwa utendaji 
kazi wake. Ahsante sana Mhes himiwa Spika.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 18 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes, Honourable  Mwinyi Mtoto?  
 
Hon. Mwinyi Mtoto:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Nasimama hapa kuunga  mkono 
uteuzi wa Bwana Fadhili Maamuni. Kwanza kabisa naipa pongezi Kamati ambayo inaongozwa 
na Mheshimiwa  Pastor Jackton Madialo  na timu nzima ya Secretariat  kwa ile Ripoti wali o 
tuletea hapa kumuhusu Bwana Fadhili. Vile vi gezo vyote ambavyo vimeletwa hapa ndani ya hii 
Ripoti , ambayo ni pamoja na elimu na uzoefu wake wa kazi  inanionyesha ya kwamba, ama 
imeniamulia mi mi kuona ya kwamba Fadhili anaweza kazi ambayo iko na majukumu mbele 
yake. Kwa hivyo nimesimama hapa kumuunga m kono na pia kumuombea Bwana  Fadhili, 
Mwenyezi Mungu amuongoze ili aweze kushirikiana na Bunge hili na Kaunti yetu nzima ili 
iweze kwenda mbele. A hsante sana.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Hamisi Mtoto. Yes , 
Honourable  Salim Mbaya ple ase make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Khamis Mbaya:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa kunipatia fursa hii . Bado 
niendelee kurudisha shuk rani za ngu kwa Mwen yezi Mungu, ambaye amenipatia fursa tena 
kuweza kuchangia katika Bunge letu hapa Mombasa. Kwanza kabisa mimi nitapongeza Kam ati 
nzima ile ya Uajiri ikiongozwa na Mchungaji  Mheshimiwa J acktone Madialo pamoja na mdogo 
wake dadangu, mpenzi wangu M heshimiwa  Nusura Mwinyi na Kamati yote kwa jumla. Mimi 
namuunga mkono ndugu yetu Bwana Fadhili Maamuni kwa sababu ya sifa tele tele zi lizoweza 
kumwagika ambazo zinashinda kuzoleka kutokana na kuw a inasababisha kwamba yeye ni 
mtendaji kazi, ana huruma na pi a tutaku wa na fursa nzuri ya kuweza kuhudumia jamii kutokana 
na majukumu ambayo tumepewa haswa kama sisi am bao mmoja kama mimi ambaye nimetoka 
kwenye kata kubwa ya Timbwani ambayo ni kata ndogo l akini ni kubwa kwa mipaka vile vile ni 
kubwa kwa jamii. Namuu nga mkon o ndugu yangu Bwana Fadhili Maamuni , ahsanteni.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable Mbaya. Yes , Honourable  Juma 
Manuari , please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Juma Manuari:  Nato a shuk urani kwa Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipa nafasi hii ya 
kuchangia katika swala hili ya ndugu yetu Bwana Fadhili Maimuna . Bwana Fadhili Maamuni 
kama…  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
Kwanza ni wape pongezi Kamati iliyomd adisi na kumuangalia na kumnoa na kuchunguza 
kila kitu cha ku husiana na huyu Bwana Fadhili na kutuletea katika Nyum ba yetu hii. Mi mi sitaki 
kuwa mwingi wa maneno, isipokuwa kwa yale waliyo  yaona wao yamaanisha wameridhika kwa 
uteuzi wake na ikiwa kutakuwa k una lolote la zaidi; tutamuhoji Bwana Mwenyekiti, Ndugu 
yangu  Mheshimiwa Madialo atuambie kwa uzuri uliyotuambia n i yapi na haya a mbayo 
yaendelea ni yapi. Kwa hivyo kwa imani, sisi tuna imani kuwa uteuzi wao ama uchunguzi wao 
kupitia kwa huyu Ndugu yetu Bw ana Fadhili Ali, hili lingine huwa lanikoroga, kuwa wako sawa  
na wameridhika na yeye na sisi hatuna budi ila kuwas ikiza vile watak avyo  tuambia. Kwa hayo 
mengi machache, nauunga mkono uteuzi wa Ndugu yangu Ali.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 19 The Spe aker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Manuari. Yes, Majority Leader, Hon ourable  
Athman Rama please make your contribution.  
 
The Leader of Majority  (Hon. Mwam wiri) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika. Mheshimiwa 
Spika niipe kongole Kamati iliyofanya uteuzi wa Bwana h uyu F adhili. Mheshimiwa Spi ka 
Kamati hii ni Kamati changa ambayo wengi wa Waheshimiwa , hususan Mwenyekiti na Naibu 
wake ni mara yake ya kwanza kuteu liwa laki ni wamefanya zoezi gumu kwa ufanisi ! 
Mheshimiwa Spika hivyo basi nitakuwa mchache wa fadhila kama s itaregesha shukurani zangu 
kwao kwa jitihada hii…  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Pili, Mheshimiwa Spika  wanasema wavyele ya kwamba ; wali wa kujaa huonekana kwenye 
sahani, uteuzi wa ndugu Fadhili unaonyesha uzoefu wake wa kikazi kwa sababu t unaon a alianza 
majukumu ya kuajiriwa mwaka 2003, zama hizo wengine na wengi wetu tulikuwa tuko shule na 
pengine kunao baadhi ya Waheshimiwa  pia ilikuwa hawaj azaliwa . Mheshimiwa Spika  lakini leo 
amepata fursa hii na tuna matumaini kama Serikali nafasi yake h ii na uzoefu wake huu, utak uwa 
wa manufaa makubwa katika ufanisi wa Serikali yetu hususan tukizingatia ya kwamba sasa hivi 
kama Kaunti tunahitajia wafanyikaz i zaidi lakini pia tunac hanga moto ya msongamano wa 
wafanyi kazi na idadi kubwa ama asilimia kubwa ya ba jeti yetu kuishilia ka tika maswala ya 
mishahara. Kwa hivyo ana jukumu la kuweza kuingilia kati na kuweka usawa kati ya masuala 
haya na pia kuwa mbunifu  ili vijana wetu Mheshimi wa Spika ; hususan wenye tajriba mbali 
mbali mashinani wasiokuwa na ajira  tuweze kuwasaidia kama Serik ali na wao pia kuweza 
kupata ajira lakini pia kuweza kufanya usawa ya kwamba bajeti yetu haitaangazia pande moja 
lakini itakuwa na fursa ya kuweza kuendele za maendeleo kwa watu wetu wa Mombasa. Kwa 
hayo mengi Mhe shimiwa Spika, niungame na Waheshimiwa  wenza kuunga mkono uteuzi wa 
ndugu Fadhili. A hsante Mheshimiwa Spi ka. 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Athman Mwamwiri for your 
contribution. Ye s, Honourable  Matsaki , please make your contribution, Leader of M inority 
Party?  
 
The Leader of Minority (Hon. Matsaki) : Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi hata 
nitakuwa  mchache wa maneno ; kwanza kongole Mwenyekiti  Mheshi miwa Jackton Madialo na 
timu yako kwa ju mla kwa kuchagua uteuzi huu wa Mheshimiwa Fadhili. Mimi omb i langu 
kubwa ni kwamba la muhimu ni ushirikiano aweze kufanya kazi vyema Kaunti hii kwa sababu 
Mheshimi wa Gavana mbali wake ambao anaochuku a kupitia kwake ni kwamba amemuona yeye 
kwanza ni mchapa kazi na timu ambayo Kamati ikiwakilishwa na Mwenyekiti Mhe shimiwa 
Madialo pia wamemuo na kwamba yeye ni mkakamavu na kulingana na nafasi ile al ioweza 
kuifanya sehem u za Lamu, ni kwamba yeye ana uzoefu na hii kazi. Kwa  hivyo mimi pia nazidi 
kuunga mkono hili  jambo, kwake yeye aweze kufanya kazi vizuri Mombasa Kaunti  hii ili tuzidi 
kuiso ngeza m bele. A hsante Bwana Spika.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Matsaki, Minority Party Leader. Yes , 
Honourable  Prischillah Mu mba?  
 
The Majority Chief Whip  (Hon. Mumba) : Ahsante tena Mheshimiwa Spika na mimi 
nimesimama kuu nga mkono Ripoti  hii. 
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 20 Natoa kongole zangu kwa Mheshimiwa Madialo ambaye ni Mwenyekiti mpya wa Kamati 
ya Uajiri na dadangu Mheshimiwa Nusura ninakupa kongol e kwa kazi nzuri mukiwa na Kamati 
yenu ambayo mumetuletea Ripoti  ambayo tumeweza kuisoma na kui elewa . Si ndefu ya 
kutokuelewa, umejaribu kufupisha vizuri na tumeweza kuilewa na kuelewa huyu Bwana 
tunayemp a majukumu ni mtu wa aina gani, na nikiangalia inaone kana amebobea sana kwa kazi 
zake Bw ana Fadhili kwa kuwa amefanya sana kazi Lamu . Hapa Mombasa Kau nti changamoto tu 
nitasema kuwa pengine kutakuwa hapa huu mji ni mkubwa kwa hivyo majukumu nafikiri 
yatapanuka si kama kule alivyokuwa Lamu , tunajua ni kisiwa  kidogo na majukumu yake si kama 
ya Mombasa Kaunti. Mimi ninamuombea kila la heri kwa sababu ni mt u amefanya kazi za 
Kaunti k ulingana na vile nimeona na anajua majukumu ya Kaunti, kazi za Kaunti na yuko  tayari 
kuanza kazi na kuangalia kama Mombasa Kaunti itaweza kuwa na mabadiliko gani. Na p ia 
nimeona katika vipengele tofauti tofauti  akihojiwa kulinga na na kuwa ataangalia mambo  ya 
ghost workers  vipi, ataangalia ubunifu wa ajira vipi, na ameweza kujibu kwa kila kipengele 
kulingana na uwezo na uzoefu wake wa k ikazi. Kwa hivyo ninawapongeza sana  Kamati ya 
Uajiri, Mwenyezi Mungu awaongoze zaidi katika majukum u mengine tuweze kuifanya h ii kazi 
ya Mombasa Kaunti kama wananchi walivyotutarajia kwa sababu macho yot e saa hizi 
yanatuangalia sisi tukamilishe majukumu na  kazi iendelee katika Mombasa Kaunt i. Ahsante na 
Mungu awabariki.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon ourable  Prischillah. Yes , 
Honourable  Sylvester Kai please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Kai:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Mimi nasimama kuu nga mkono na nimtakie kila 
la heri kat ika majukumu yake mapya. Shukran.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much  Honourable  Sylvester. Yes , 
Honourable  Maimuna please make your contribution.  
 
Hon. Maimun a Salim:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika. Nimesimama ku unga mkono 
uteuzi wa Fadhili Ali  kwa sababu ni mtu ambaye amefanya katika Kaunti ya Lamu, kwa hivyo  
nina imani anajua ya kwamb a ni jinsi gani Waheshimiwa tukiwa katika presha nina imani ya 
kwamba tutashi rikiana na yeye. Na kulingana na uzoefu wake, sisi um uhimu ni watu wa 
Mombasa wafurah ie, kwa hivyo watu wa Mombasa wakifurahia hata sisi tutakuwa tunafu rahia . 
Kwa hivyo tunamuombe a kazi njema na sisi tuko pamoja na yeye mahali atakwazika aje tukae 
kama jam ii moja , ndugu moja tushirikiane na tuhakikishe watu w a Mombasa wamepata huduma 
bora.  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika, nauunga mkono uteule wake.  
 
The Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank yo u Hon ourable  Maimuna . Yes , Honourable  Mwaura , 
please make your contribution . 
 
Hon.  Mwaura:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa nafasi hi i ili na mimi niweze kuchangia 
katika swala hili . Niseme kwamba ninashukuru Kamati ambayo imefanya kazi hii y a 
kuchunguza na kutuletea m apendekezo haya , na mimi pia na ungana na wao kuunga mkono 
uteuzi wa Bwana Maamuni nikisema ya kwamba Kamati imezingatia m ambo mengi tu 
yakiwemo masomo, uzoefu wa kazi, maono pia nimeona pia yameorodheshwa kama mojawapo 
ya yale am bayo wamechunguza pamoja na  uwajibikaji na matarajio katika kazi, tunatarajia yapi 
kwake yeye. Ninatumai ya kwamba yale matarajio ambayo tuko nayo t utaweza kuyaona katika 
utendaji  kazi wake.  
January 26, 202 3                COUNT Y ASSEMBLY DE BATES                  Fourth  Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER : The electronic version o f the Offic ial Hansar d Report  is for information 
purpo ses only. A cert ified v ersion of this Report can be obtain ed from the H ansa rd Editor  Page 21 Kwa hivyo mimi sina mengi ila ni kumuunga mkono na kusema ya kwam ba tunaendelea 
kumuombea Mu ngu ili kazi yake iweze kuonekana . Yale ambayo yamenakiliwa hapa kes ho 
tusiulizane tukasema hayakuwa ya kweli , kwa hivyo  naunga mkono, ahsante.  
 
The Sp eaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon ourable  Mwaura. Yes , Honourable  Jacktone 
Madialo , please reply to the Motion . 
 
Hon. Madialo:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I know that I ha d already thanked you but I 
cannot thank you enough, still please allow me to continue  to thank you and your office and that 
of the Clerk, you granted us that op portunity and you facilitat ed us properly to enable us to 
accomplish the task that was ahead of  us. I would also want to thank my Committee, led by my 
very able Vice Chairlady, Hon ourable  Nusura and all the Committee Members; they were very 
cooperative and they made the work easier. We al so thank you especially from the Secretariat, 
led by the Senior Cler k, Mr. Abdallah Khamis, may God bless them so much. Thank you so 
much Members ; from your contributions I can deduce that you are positive and you agree with 
our Report. I met this Nominee  for the first time when he came for the vetting,  and from his 
demeanor he is a man that knows his work; he has experience an d I believe and I know t hat he 
will really be and he is a good pick  and we wish him all the best! I would not wa nt to take much 
of your tim e to just thank you and God bless you so much.  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much again Hon ourable  Jackton e Madialo, 
Chairperso n Committee on Labour and Public Service Administration. Honourable Members , I 
now put the ques tion that the  Motion by Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo on Adoption of the 
Report on the Vetting of Nominee for the position of Secretary/CEO County Pu blic Service 
Board of Mombasa, Mr. Maamuni Ali Fadhili  be approved by this Honourable House in the 
same terms as mo ved.     
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 So, the Motion by Hon ourable  Jacktone Madialo on Adoption of the Report of the 
Vetting of Nominee for the position  of Secretary/CEO County Public Service Board of 
Momba sa, Mr. Fadhili Ma amuni Ali  is adopted by this House. Yes, Clerk next order please?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , this House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 7th February , 2023 at 
10:00a.m. 
 
The Hous e rose at 12:30 p.m 
                    
                                                          
 
  