COUNT Y ASS EMBLY DEBATES                                             
DISCLAI MER: The electronic ver sion of the Officia l Hansard Report i s for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor Page 1 
 
        COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
THE HANSARD  
 
Monday , 24th October , 2022  
 
THIRD ASSEMB LY  
 
[The County Assembly  met at 1 1:15a.m. at the Cou nty Assembly Buildin gs] 
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub  Ebrahim Khatri) in the Chair ] 
 
NATIONAL ANTHEM  
EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY ANTHEM  
 
PRAYERS   
[By Muslim and Chri stian R eligious leaders ]  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Your Excel lency, Hon ourable  Members, 
Honourable  Memb ers of Parliament we may be seated . 
 
[Consultations ] 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
OFFICIAL  INAUGURATION  OF THE  THIRD ASSEMBLY  
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Your Excellency , the Governor of Mombasa County 
Honourable  Abdulswamad Shariff Nassir , Honourable  Members of Parliament , Hono urable  
Members of County  Assembly , distinguished guests . Standing Order 17 (1) of the County 
Assembly of Mombasa requires that the Governor to address the opening of each newly elected 
County Assembly. The Governor notifi ed the Speaker of  the County A ssembly of his intention to 
address the newly elected County Assembly on Monday, 24th October, 2022 in th is County 
Assembly Chamber, at 10:30 a.m. vide a letter referenced Msa  CG/Admin/4/Vol. 4/30 dated 18th 
October, 2022.  Accordingly, I gave Notice of thi s Sitting vide the Gazette Not ice No. 12777 
which was published in the Kenya Gazette on Friday, 21st October, 2022. Honourable Members, 
this Sitting is therefore properly convened.  Your Excellency,  I wish to recognize the pre sence of 
our Depu ty Governor , His Excel lency Francis Thoya … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
…our Senator  Honourable  Mohamed Faki Mwinyihaji,  
COUNT Y ASS EMBLY DEBATES                                             
DISCLAI MER: The electronic ver sion of the Officia l Hansard Report i s for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 [Applause ] 
 
Member of Parliament for Changamwe Constituency Hon ourable Shimbwa Omar 
Mwinyi,  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Member of Parliament for Jomvu Const ituency Ho nourab le Badi Twal ib,  
 
[Applaus e] 
 
and His Worship the former Mayor of Mombasa Hon ourable  Ahmed M ohdhar.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Your Excellency I also invited Hon ourable  Bedzimba Rashid Juma Member of 
Parliament for Kisauni Constituency, Hon ourable  Mbo ko Mishi Juma Khamisi Member of 
Parliament for Liko ni Constituen cy, Hon ourable  Masoud Machele Member of Parliament for 
Mvita, Hon ourable  Mohammed Ali Member of Parliament for Nyali  Constituency  and 
Honourable  Zamzam Chimba Mohamed our Woman Representative,  but they informed me of 
their unavailability due to  prior engagement s.  You are a ll welcomed to the County Assembly of 
Mombasa.  
Your Excellency,  I feel greatly honoured and privileged to stand before you as the 
Speaker of County Assembly of Mombasa to wel come you , our Governor and Honourable 
Members of the  County Assembly to this auspi cious occasion in which we are holding the 
inaugural sitting of t he County Assembly for purposes of the Governor’s Address.  It is now my 
great pleasure and privilege to invit e you H is Excellency the Governor to address the Co unty 
Assembly. Karibu. 
 
[Appla use] 
 
GOVERNOR ’S ADDRESS  
 [His Excellency Honourable Abdulswamad Shariff Nassir ] 
 
The Governor  (Hon. Nassir) : Assalaam  Aleikum War ahma tullahi Wabarakattuh u, God 
is good ! 
 
(Power o utage] 
Power is restored ] 
The Governor Honourab le Nassir  resumed his speech]  
 
Assa lam Aleikum War hamatullahi W abara kattuh u. God is good, all the time ! The 
Speaker, Hono urable Aharub Khatri, The Hono urable leadership of the County Assembly, 
Hono urable Member s of the County Assembly of Mombasa , my brothers Hon ourable  Members 
of the Parliament ,  our elder His Wors hip Mayor M ohdhar …Senator of Mombasa , my brother 
wakili Faki, the Viewers  who are  watching  us from the County of Mombasa and all over Kenya, 
ladies an d gentlemen, distinguished guests, hamja mbo tena!  
COUNT Y ASS EMBLY DEBATES                                             
DISCLAI MER: The electronic ver sion of the Officia l Hansard Report i s for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 Mr. Speaker Sir, I would like to begin my address  first and foremo st by congratulating 
the people of Mombasa for electing the leaders of their choice in the just concluded General 
Elections, and doi ng so in a peacefully  manner . In the last few weeks since the election, I ha ve 
engaged closely with both th e leadership of th is Assembly and the Members of th is Assembl y. I 
can confidently state here today, without any fear of contradiction, that these leade rs are ready to 
serve the people of Momb asa with commitment and dedication .  
  The opening of the County Assembly is truly an auspicious occasion with deep meaning 
for our democracy , and I am delighted to be here today in the company of the frontline of 
devolution in Kenya - our honorable M ember s of the County Assembly (MCAs) .   
Mr. Speaker  Sir, Article  176 of the Constit ution of Kenya , 2010 establishes the County 
Assembly as the legislative arm of the County government. Therefore, you - our Honourable  
Members of the County  Assembly (MCAs)  play a  critical role in the success of o ur County 
through the formulati on of County by -laws that govern the manner in which devolved functions 
are offered at the local level.  Furthermore, our Honourable M embers of the County Assembly 
(MCAs)  are the first line of oversight on the Executive arm of County governments. It can 
therefore not  be em phasized enough;  how fundamental your role is in the success of devolution 
here in  our County of  Mombasa.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, as a Coun try we have completed two cycles of devolved government. 
Pioneer Govern ors have since retired and ther e are new entrants  across various Counties in the 
nation including here in Mombasa where I succeed my friend and brother, the first Governor  of 
Mombasa, H assan  Ali Joho . Public expectat ion is higher than it has e ver bee n. The narrative of 
teething pr oblems as an excus e for below par performance will not be tolerated by the voter. We 
must get it right. This third cycle must be the cycle that validates the faith our people have in 
devolved  government. This is why  gather ings such as this are so import ant. Just as iron sharpens 
iron, the opening of the County Assembly gives us the unique opportunity to come together and 
share ideas on how to advance the sp irit of devolution and preserve th e promise of Maendeleo 
Mash inani  for our people.   
 Mr. Speaker  Sir, during the c ampaign period, I laid out my vision for Mombasa in the 
form of the , “Mwanzo  Mpya Manifesto ”. In this five-year plan, one of the key pillars  is my 
intention to entrench good governance in the Coun ty governmen t of Mombasa. In line with this , 
everything that we do as a government shall have proper foundation in the law and the 
Constitution priorities outlined in my manifesto, I shall be presenti ng to this Hono urable 
Assembly a se ries of Bills for your kind  consid eration.   
  Mr. Speaker  Sir, this Hono urable Hous e is aware that I put in place a Rapid Results 
Initiative (RRI ] as soon as I took office with the intention of delivering some quick wins  for the 
general public even as we work on  our medium term and long-term plans. I am pleased to report 
to this Hono urable Hous e that since taking office, just over a month ago, we have taken critical 
steps to jumpstart our County finances. I began by reorg anizing and revitalizing revenue 
collection  in the County of Mombasa . This pr ocess has led to the improvemen t in the collectio n 
of own source revenue by up to 70 per cent. If we continue with this trend, with the support of 
the residents of Mombasa, we wil l be able to deliver services more effi ciently and effectively.  
Toward s entrenching good governance a nd the sustainable  improvement of the financial 
performance of the Mombasa County government, I shall be presenting this Hono urable House 
with the Mombas a County Revenue Service s Bill. The pur pose of this Act , once pass ed shal l be 
to establish a framework f or revenue mobiliz ation, collection and receipt in order to:  
(a) ensure effectiveness and efficiency in revenue mobilization, collection and receipt;  
(b) facilitate transparency in revenue mobiliza tion, collection and receipt;  
COUNT Y ASS EMBLY DEBATES                                             
DISCLAI MER: The electronic ver sion of the Officia l Hansard Report i s for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor Page 4 (c) enhance County revenue;  
(d) optimizin g existing revenue  streams; and  
(e)  identify new streams of revenue.  
Kenyans are already struggling under the burden of heavy taxation. Our inten tion is t o 
widen the tax base by making it eas ier and more affordable for more r esidents to comply than by 
adding heavier burdens  to those already complying.  
  Mr. Speaker  Sir, Mombasa County is choking under the burden of a bloated wage bill 
that has  made it near  impossible to facilitate development . We have close to no fiscal space  to 
implement the promises we m ade to the people.  As a County government, we have to find 
innovative ways out of this quagmire we find ourselves in. The only way out is thr ough 
improved  own source revenue and to achieve th is, we must have the Mombasa Reven ue Service 
as a County institut ion in place.  
  Mr. Speaker  Sir, poverty is our common enemy. We want Mombasa to become a thriving 
hub for business and innovation. We w ant to see our yo ung men and women employed and 
meanin gfully engaged. The role of govern ment is not to provide all the answers but we are  here 
to facilitate the private sector to grow and as a result, we shall together develop Mombasa. In 
pursuit of this goal, I  have been working night and day over the pas t month to sharpen our 
Finance Bil l, 2022/2023 which we shall shor tly be presenting to this Hono urable House for 
approval. This Bill will completely revolutionize the business environment and tax regime in 
Mombasa . We will  become the most business friendly County and start -ups will flock to us 
because of our new proposed policies to zone l evies in Mombasa. We will bring down the cost of 
licensing for tuk-tuks, public service vehicles and start -ups while making the proc ess d igital, 
transparent and devoid of human interaction that may occasion corr upt practices.  
Mr. Speake r Sir, this Hono urable House has seen the efforts that have gone into cleaning 
up our environment. We have successfully cleaned and closed illegal dumpsites  in Manyimbo, 
VoK and Kadongo. And w e will not stop there. This work, led by my able Deputy, Francis 
Thoya shall contin ue until every illegal dumpsite in Mombasa i s gone. And the way we are 
saying , Magufuli is back … 
 
[Applause ] 
 
            …and he has my full support  to ensure that Mombasa is kept cle an. Illegal dumping and 
littering will be dealt with harshly. It wil l not matter wh o you  are, who you  know or how many 
phone calls you  will make. If we catch you, you will wear a yellow  overall and go and clean the 
city o f Mombasa .  
  
[Applause ] 
 
            Mr. Speake r Sir, it is now common knowledge that property developers in Mombasa  shall 
be able  to have their approval s done  with minimal human interaction as possible . Old 
applications ha ve been expedited and we expect a boom as the construction industry resumes 
operations. Mr. S peaker  Sir, our plea and request t o these developers is that they emp loy our 
local youth in their projects to create employment and spur the growth of Mombasa.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
COUNT Y ASS EMBLY DEBATES                                             
DISCLAI MER: The electronic ver sion of the Officia l Hansard Report i s for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor Page 5   Mr. Speaker  Sir, even as we take these initiatives to create a conducive and welc oming 
environment for property dev elopers, I shall be moving the Momb asa County Sec tional 
Properties Bill to this Hono urable House for approval. The purpose of this Act once passed shall 
be:  
(a) To c ontrol, manage, and administer common property and do all thi ngs reasonably 
necessary for the e nforcement of the county laws; and  
(b) do all things  reasonably necessary for the enforcement of any lease or license under 
which the lan d is held.  
Mr. Speaker, Si r, as a County government, we are not in the business of m aking money 
but we must be able to  deliver services to the general pu blic. Our peop le expect good roads, our 
people expect water connections to their homes  and our people expect  a functioning  water  
system,  a functioning sewer syste m, street lighting and ot her services. In order to meet th ese 
expectation s, we need everybody to p ay th eir fai r share. It is not proper that the obligations of a 
single dwelling household are the same as those of a skyscrap er. This Act, once passed, is not 
meant to be oppressive but  rather is designed to level the p laying field.  
Mr. Speaker  Sir, in addit ion to this, last week, my government kicked off the process of 
waiving accrued clamping fees and market license penalties  that had prevented our people from 
engaging in productive  economic activities. It is our ho pe that these measures will work towards 
encourag ing trade and investment in Mombasa. I wish to declare  today, to the big manufacturer 
as well as the small -scale  Mama Mboga , Mombasa is open for you; Mombasa is open for 
business!  
 
[Applause ] 
 
            Mr. Speaker, S ir, in addition to the above, each and eve ry city  County is thinking long 
and hard of additional initiatives t hat can help give a competitive edge and open up the local 
micro -economy. For us here in Mombasa, my government shall be presenting to this Hono urable 
House the Mombasa County Transport Bil l for y our wise consideration. The purpose of this Bill 
is to:  
(a) Prom ote more usage of non -motorized transpor t within Mombasa County   
(b) Reduce air pollution within Mombasa County   
(c) Reduce/control congestion within some parts of Mombasa.  
With functional and orderly  mass public transport in place, we will facilitat e the 
movement of goods and services into and out of as well as within the county of Mombasa.   
Mr. Speaker  Sir, it is hope d that through this effort, we wil l make Mombasa a better place to live 
for our res idents  and that tourists will once again floc k in numbers because of the pleasant 
standard of living an d environment on offer.  
It is my intention to further strengthen prog rams to improve life in Mombasa th rough the 
Mombasa County Climate Chang e Fund Bill . The purpose of th is Act, once passed, will b e to:  
(a) finance a climate change program  
(b) initiate and coor dinate climate change adaption and mitigation activities at communit y 
level.  
As a County, Mombasa mus t ready itself for the challenges of t he future. Climate change 
is a looming threat all over th e world and we must do our part, as the leaders of today to  
safeguard tomorrow for future generations.  
 
COUNT Y ASS EMBLY DEBATES                                             
DISCLAI MER: The electronic ver sion of the Officia l Hansard Report i s for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor Page 6             Mr. Speaker, Sir, our level-five hospital, the Coast Gen eral Teaching and Referral 
Hospital serves the en tire Coast province as well as parts of Ukambani  as the only public medical 
facility in the r egion offering super specialist services such as open -heart  surgery as well as a  
fully -fledged  cancer treatment ce nter; we see hundreds of t housands of patients a year from  all 
Counti es of the Coastal Region  and some even further.  Mombasa bears the unique burden of 
having to care for the advanced healthcare needs of an entire region w ithout the requisite 
financial bac king. Mr. Speaker  Sir, towards mitigating again st the  growing challenges in the 
operations of our level five hospital, my government shall put  forward the Coast General 
Teaching and Referral Hospital Corporation Bill for  approval by this Hono urable House.   
The purp ose of this Act, once passed, shall be:   
(a) to mobilize resources for smooth operations at the hospital  
(b) to facilitate better access to f inancial resources   
(c) to make the hospital more responsive to medical and publ ic health emergencies; and ,  
(d) delive ry of qual ity health services;  
  Mr. Speaker  Sir, as we march into the future, it is my hope and prayer that we can work 
on an improved framewor k for relations between the Executive and this Hono urable House with 
a focu s on service delivery. We must saf eguard the culture that Mombasa has always enjoye d of 
mutual respect between the Executive and the Assembly. In this cooperation between us, I, as the 
leader of the implementing arm of government shall respect the role tha t you play as duly elected 
represe ntative s of the people … 
[Applause ] 
 
            …and in turn, you as the voice of the people, shall play a supportive and oversight role to 
the Exec utive to ensure that we deliver on development programs. Mr. Speaker Sir, it is in l ight 
of th is, whatever am going to  say will bring some smiles ! But it is in light of t his importance of 
this relationship, that I have instructed the Office of the County A ttorney to explore a legal 
framework to set up the Mombasa County Ward Development Fund … 
  
[Applaus e] 
 
            Devolution  or ugatuzi  was meant to bring development to the lowest adm inistrative unit 
which is the Ward level. However, this noble intention h as been scuttled by court action after 
court action, all the way to the Supreme Court , an action that  has equally affected constituenci es. 
However, we will not be deterred and I want t o assure this Hono urable House that we are 
working to find a legal and a ppropriate way of making the Ward Development Fund a reality for 
our people …  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Mr. Spea ker Sir, in closing, it is my humb le submission that the next five years herald a 
fresh opportunity. We have opened a new page. It is a new dawn (Mwanzo Mpya) ; full of hope 
and promise  and we must seize the day !  Mr. Speaker  Sir, at this juncture, in l ine with the 
responsibility assign ed to me by the Constitution of Kenya and the Cou nty Government Act of 
2012, it is my distinct hono ur and p leasure to de clare this Honourable House officially opened !  
 
[Applause ] 
 
COUNT Y ASS EMBLY DEBATES                                             
DISCLAI MER: The electronic ver sion of the Officia l Hansard Report i s for infor mation 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obt ained from the Hansard Editor Page 7 God bless our  Speaker , God bless our Hono urable Members of the County Assembl y, God bless 
Mombasa, and God bless Kenya! Ame en! Ahsanteni  sana!  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): Your Excellency, t hank you  for your inaug ural address . 
Honourable  Members , pursuant  to Standing Order 20 (5) now that your Excellency, you have 
delivered your Address as soon as practicable , the Address will be laid on the Table of the 
County Assembly for Memb ers to debate on its contents.  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Your Excellency and Honourable Members, Standin g Order 17 (2) provides that at the 
conclusion of the Governor’s Addres s the Sitting shall stand suspended or adjourned as the 
Speaker may direct until such time or to such day as may be specifie d by the Speaker. I therefore 
wish to convey that ; this Hous e stands adjourned until Tuesday, 1st November, 2022 at 10:00 a.m. 
Thank  you. 
 
The House rose at 11 :58a.m. 
  
 
 
 
 