January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
 SPECIAL SITTING  
 
Tuesday, 26th January, 2021  
The House met at 3:15 p .m. 
 
[The Speaker (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair]  
 
PRAYERS  
 The Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri ): Honourable  Membe rs you may be seate d. Yes Clerk?  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
MOMBASA COUNTY FINANCE  BILL, 2020  
Thank you  Honourable  Members. Honourable Members, I take this opportunity to 
welcome you to this Special Sitting of the County Assembly , as you  are all a ware we have 
convened  our first Special Sitting on Friday 22nd January , 2021 to consider the Mombasa County 
Finance Bill, 2020 . But, due to unforeseen circumstance s we were unable to proceed  with the 
aforementione d Sitting. Hon. Members , I communicated tha t should there be a Special Sitting 
before we resume from the long recess , communication of the Special Si tting will be made to 
you and I trust you all received the communication hence your attendance. Hon. Members , in 
accordance with Standing Order 26 of the County Assembly of Mombasa, today’s Special Sitting 
is duly convened as it was published in the Kenya Gazette Special issue dated  26th January , 2021 
vide Gazette Notice Number 519 . I hereby pro ceed to read the Gazette Notice ;  
 
"The Kenya Gazette publi shed by the Authority of the Republic of Kenya registered as a 
Newspaper at the General Post Office (GPO) Nairobi, 26th January, 2021 ; Gazette Notice 
519, the Constitution of Kenya, the County Government Act , No.17 of 2012 , the 
Mombasa County Assembly Stan ding Order s Special Sitting  of the County Assembly , 
pursuant to Standing Order 26 (1 -4) of the Mombasa County Assembly Standing Orders, 
it is notified for the information of the Members of the County Assembly of Mombasa 
and the general public that there sh all be a Special Sitting on Tuesday, 26th January , 2021 
at the County Assembly Chambers, Mombasa County Ass embly Buildings at 2:00 p.m. 
for the purpose of consideration and approval of the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 
2020 ". 
 

January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 2 Honourable Mem bers, Standing Or der 26(4) specifies that on the day of the Special 
Sitting, the business specified in the notice shall be the only business before the County 
Assembly. We will therefore only transact business in relation to processing  of the Mombasa 
County Finance Bill, 2 020. Honourable Members, thank you for availing yourself today to 
transact this important and urgent business that will see the County effectively deliver services to 
its residents.  Thank you.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
PAPER  
REPORT ON PUBLIC PAR TICIPATION OF THE MO MBAS A COUNTY FINANCE BIL L, 2020    
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa, Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations?  
The Leader of Majority (Hon. Mwidani ): Thank you Hon. Speaker. Let me take this 
opportunity to lay the paper , Report on Public Participation of  the Mombasa County Finance 
Bill, 2020.  Thank you Sir.  
(Paper Laid ) 
The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani. Clerk , next Order?  
 
MOTION  
ADOPTION OF THE REPO RT ON PUBLIC PARTICI PATION OF THE MOMBAS A COUNTY BILL , 2020   
 
 Yes Hon. Hamis i Musa Mwidani , please move the M otion.  
 
The Chairperson , Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani) : Mr. Speak er Sir, let me move a  Motion ; 
 
 THAT, this County Assembly adopts the Report on Public participation of the Mombasa 
County Fi nance Bill, 2020 as laid on the T able today afternoon.  
 
Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker let me take this opportunity to now t o call Hon. 
Samba to second my M otion.  
 
Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speaker , I second.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you very much H onourable Members. Honourable  
Members , I now prop ose a question that the M otion b y Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani on , 
Adoption of the Report on Public P articipation of the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020  be 
considered by this Honourable  House  in the same terms  as moved.  
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to ] 
 
Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani, Chairperson, Committee on Finance, Budget and 
Appropriations , please make your contribution.  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 3 The Chairperson Committee of Finance, Budget and Appropriations  (Hon. 
Mwidani) : Mr. Sp eaker , first of all I hope all the Members have the copies, mine instead  of 
going to all the items it  is rather I just move to the observations and findings first.  
 
[The Chairperson Committee of Finance, Budget and Appropriations Hon. Mwidani read 
the Rep ort] 
 
OBSERVATION AND FINDINGS  
 
Mr. Speaker , the Finance Bill is an Annual piece of legislation provided for by Sections 
132 and 133 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 whereby the County Executive 
Committee Member for Finance is annually required to submit to the County Assembly the 
Finance Bill which set out the County Government’s revenue raising measures together with a 
policy statement expounding on those measures. A point to note is that the County Executive 
Member did not make the required pr onouncement on the revenue raising measures and did not 
submit a policy statement expounding on the same pursuant to Sections 132(1) and 132(2) of the 
Public Finance Management Act, 2012.  
Mr. Speaker , Section 120 of the County Government  Act, 2012 requires  a County 
Government providing public services to set tariffs and pricing  policy  and outlines certain 
parameters or guidelines in setting the tariffs and includes equity, proportionality, access, 
reason ableness and sustainability. The se needs to be conside red while making the revenue 
raising measures and approving the a nnual Finance Bill.  
Further, Section 120(5 ) of the County Governments Act , 2012 provides that , “A County 
government may make laws and regulations to give effect to the implementation and  
enforcement of tariff policies ”.  This points to the need for making specific legislation addressing 
issues of concern especially at Departmental level.  
 Public participation in policy -making and legislation particularly the Finance Bill is 
provided for vide A rticle 196(1)(b) of the Constitution of Kenya and Section 87 to 92 of the 
County Government Act, 2012. There are also National County Public Participation g uidelines 
and a local Act of the Assembly on Public Participation.  
 
General  
 
 Mr. Speaker , the publi c participation was advertised vide the Standard Newspaper of 8th 
January , 2021 and also through radio and other means for citizens to submit memoranda on the 
Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020 for consideration. However, only two memoranda were 
submitted ; one from Coast Business Coalition dated 8th September , 2020 and the other from 
Cereal Millers Association  dated 12th January , 2021 . Due to the limited input of the public, 
Members of the County Assembly were given an opportunity at a consultative meeting o n 23rd 
January , 2020 to make representations on their behalf since they were also conversant with 
issues on the ground concerning their c onstituents. The views and proposals submitted  by 
Members were taken up by the Committee and are contained in this Repo rt. 
Mr. Speaker, t he National g overnment through the Ministry of Health had also imposed 
too many restrictions on movement of persons and gatherings  due to the COVID  -19 pandemic. 
The County Assembly had also been adjourned indefinitely and closed for busi ness since March , 
2020 except for some brief periods. All these affected the ability of the County Assembly to 
process the Finance Bill , including conducting public participation within the required timelines.  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 4  Mr. Speaker, M embers  were conc erned that inst ead of the a nnual  Finance Bill being 
amend ed, legislation containing revenue raising measures of the County g overnment  had been 
turned into the principal piece of revenue raising legislation. Pursuant to Section 120(5) of the 
County Governments Act, 2012 , the County Assembly working with the County Executive 
should come up with Departmental specific legislation whereby Schedules to them contain fee s 
and charges thus leaving the a nnual Finance Bill with o nly changes to those schedules.    
 Mr. Speaker , a perennial issue of concern which should be immediately addressed by the 
County Treasury is the limi ted revenue  collected due to wea k enforcement measures, under -
assessment , under collection and collusion between some revenue collectors, enforcement 
officers an d tax payers. Due to the high fees charged, some tax -payers prefer to pay the low un -
official figures which are not col lected thus denying the County g overnment much needed 
revenue.  
Mr. Speaker, M embers  noted that there were several  increments in the tari ff contained in 
the schedule , some of which touched on basic commodities and services which would hurt 
traders and consumers. It was also overwhelming feeling that frequent raising of fees, charges 
and levies was counter -productive and resulted in high rat es of evasion and default which 
ultimately reduced revenue collected. Further, high taxation would make cost of doing business 
unmanageable and would make the County an unfavourable investment  and business destination.  
 
Views from Memoranda  
 
 The Coast Bus iness Coalition had sent their memorandum on 8th September , 2020 
containing a schedule of views. The Committee perused the same and gave views which 
generally clarified some of the concerns raised which most ly were advisory in nature and were 
not seeking a ny increments or reductions. However, there were two issues which moved the 
Committee to make recommendations in their favour. On their request  to review  charges for 
items 810 to 813 of the Bill for Single Business Permits  (SBP)  for transportation  companie s 
amountin g to (N o.810) Kshs.  90,000/=, (N o.811) Kshs.  45,000/=, (N o.812) Kshs.  15,000/= and 
(No.813) Kshs.7,500/= respectively, the request was acceded to.  The Committee therefore 
recommen ds that the fees and charges for  item N os.810 to 813 be revised dow n to (N o.810) 
Kshs.  70,000/=, (N o, 811) Kshs.35  ,000/=, (N o.812) Kshs.  10,000/= and (N o.813) Kshs.5  ,000/= 
respectively. The request for adjustment  was granted due to the adverse macro -economic 
environment occasioned by the COVID -19 pandemic and the negati ve impact on transportation 
of goods through the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) which had negatively impacted the sector.  
 With regard to  a request from the Cereal Millers Association vide their memorandum 
dated 12th January , 2021 for a reduction of fixed ce ss charges to 1  per cent  of the value of the 
products, the Committee instead recommends that fees a nd charges be revised down to (No.611) 
Kshs.32/=, (N o.612) Kshs.20/=, (N o.613) Kshs.16/= respectively. Due regard was put on the fact 
that setting cess fees too high for cereals would have negative multiplier effect which ultimately  
would be passed on to consumers making the cost of essential food to be very high.  
 
Proposals from Members of the County Assembly  
 
 Members proposed and the Committee acceded to recommend the deletion of item N o.94 
in the Schedule to the Bill becau se it was a repetition of item N o.105 in the same schedule 
labeled , “Public Service Vehicle Waste Control” . 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 5  Memb ers noted that Section 11 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , “Towing charg es” Item 
numbers 120 to 122 contained increments which would adversely affect motorists and therefore 
proposed and the Committee acceded  to the same and recommended that they be amended to 
reflect reduced amounts as contained in the Mombasa County Finance Act, 2018.  
 Members noted that Section 12 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , “Parking fees  
(Designated vehicles )” Item numbers 128 to 137 contained increments which would adversely 
affect motorists and therefore proposed and the Committee acceded  to the s ame and 
recommend ed that they be amended to reflect  reduced  amounts as contained in the M ombasa 
County Finance Act, 2018  
 Mr. Speaker Sir, Section 35 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , “Tuk Tuk and Boda Boda ” 
Item number 299 label led, “Tuk Tuk Stic ker per  month fo r Tuk Tuks over four years old since 
registration” , was identified for reduction from Kshs. 1500/= to Kshs. 1200/=.  Members were 
also of the view that Section 62 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , "Branded sales outlets " Item 
numbers 427 an d 430 contained increments  which would adversely affect concerned small -scale 
traders and therefore, proposed and the Committee acceded to the same and recommended that, 
they be amended to reflect reduced amounts as contained in the Mombasa County Finance Act, 
2018. 
 Mr. Speaker, Members proposed that Section 84 of the Schedule of the Bill titled 
"Transport/Storage and Communication" at Kisauni R etail Market proposed, that two items 
following immediately thereafter not numbered, be numbered accordingly and to red uce amounts 
to set for , "Large parking y ard - Kshs. 100,000/= to  Kshs. 80,000/= and for "Small parking y ard - 
Kshs. 60,000/= to Kshs. 50,000/= was acceded to by the Committee.   
 Mr. Speaker S ir, Section 86 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , "Professional  and Technical 
services " Item numbers 862 and 863 labeled , "Large M -Pesa Agent o utlets" and "Small M -Pesa 
Agent o utlets" - the Committee acceded to a proposal that they be reduced from Kshs. 20,000/ - 
to Kshs. 15,000/= and from Kshs. 10,500/= to Kshs. 5,000 /= respectively.  
 Mr. Speaker , Section 87 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , "Private Education, Health and 
Entertainment Services " Item numbers 886 labeled , "Video Shows" - the Committee acceded to a 
proposal, that they be reduced from Kshs. 100,000/ - to Kshs. 67,000/ - and from Kshs. 20,000/= 
to Kshs. 15,000/= respectively.  Yes, there is a correction for the video shows from Ksh. 20,000 /= 
to Ksh. 15,000 /= respectively.  
 Mr. Speaker , Section 95 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , "Hire of open grounds ", Item 
numbers 972 labeled , "For the religious gathering" – be reduced was accepted and the 
Committee recommended that, Kshs.25, 000/ - to Kshs. 10,000 /=.  
 A proposal that Section 97 of the Schedule of the Bill titled , "Hire of open grounds " Item 
number 977 la beled , "Hire of other social hall..." be reduced was accepted and the Committee 
recommended that, it be reduced from Kshs. 10,000/ - to Kshs. 5,000/=.  The Committee noted 
that, there was a proposed increment of land rates based on the new 2011 Valuation Rol l in the 
Schedule, to the Bill under Item N os. 1089 to 1092 which was a matter still under litigation at the 
High Cour t and it would be inappropriate  to allow the increments to proceed.  
 Further, M embers noted the adverse macro -economic environment occasi oned by the 
COVID -19 pandemic was not conducive for an increase in land rates based on the new valuation 
roll. The consequent ripple effects of such an increase would lead to a spike in rent, goods and 
services and lead to investors avoiding the C ounty. Th is matter needs sufficient consultations, 
public participation and study once the High Court has rendered its decision. The Committee 
therefore acceded to a request to reverse the amounts charged for the respective to those 
contained in the Mombasa County Finance Act, 2018.  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 6  Mr. Speaker the Committee agreed to grant a proposal that Section 107 of the Schedule 
of the Bill titled "S ubmission of development plan fees " Item numbers , 1118 to 1122 & 1130 
under the sub -heading , "Residential Developments" be amend ed to reflect reduced amounts as 
contained in the Mombasa County Finance Act, 2018.  
 Mr. Speaker , the Committee accepted a proposal that Section 127 of the Schedule of the 
Bill titled , "Estate Rental to the public " Item numbers 1258 to 1295  each and every Item amounts 
to revert back to those contained in the Mombasa County Finance Act, 2017. The Committee 
granted on the basis of the difficult macro -economic environment, the dilapidated and state of 
disrepair of the houses, pending litigation on the same and  the fact that some of the estates are 
due for demolition to pave way for new apartment blocks.  
 Last but not least , the Committee urges the County Treasury to use a variety of tools and 
methods to collect more revenue including tax discounts, waivers, am nesties and sensitization of 
the public on importance of tax compliance.  
 That is my report Mr. Speaker , I wish ... 
 
[Consultations]  
 
 Now Mr. Speaker let me now move to the conclusion.  The Committee having considered 
the macro -economic environment, the ap proved fiscal framework and other factors ; 
 
THAT  pursuant to S ection 132(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2012 and the 
memoranda submitted on the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020 and the views of 
Members of the County Assembly, the Committee at th eir meeting on Monday, 25th 
January , 2020 resolved to recommend the same to the report for adoption.   
 
Recommendations  
 
THAT , pursuant to Sections 132(3) and 133 of the Public Finance Management  Act, 
2012, the County Executive Committee Member for Finance should annually , in a timely 
manner make pronouncements on revenue raising measures and submit to the County 
Assembly the Finance Bill and the accompanying policy statement expounding on the 
revenue raising measures in a timely manner.  
 
 Mr. Speaker S ir; 
  
THAT,  pursuant to sections 132(3) and 133 of the Public Finance Management Act,  
2012, the County Assembly APPROVES the recommendations of the Committee on the 
proposed amendments to the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020 as contained in this 
report.  
 
THA T, pursuant Standing Orders 121(3) and 180 this County A ssembly RESOLVES to 
adopt this R eport and the annexed minutes of the proceedings of the Committee 
recommend ing the adoption of the R eport.T hank you Mr. Speaker.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani . Yes, Hon. 
Members you can make your contribution ; yes, Hon. Athman Mwamwiri? Please make your 
contribution . 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 7   `Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I arise to support the 
Report but the two observations that I have made  which were not captured and in my persona I 
raised them during the meetings;  one, is a concern on part four on S ection 12 of the Finance Bill. 
Maybe , the Chair will elaborate further after this which reads , “General offences and p enalties. 
Any pe rson who commits an offence under this Act, for which no penalty is provided, shall be 
liable of convicti on to a fine not exceeding Ksh. 200, 000 or to imprison for a term not exceeding 
one year on board”.   
 So my concern , maybe the Ch air will elaborate for  a person  who is not en lighte ned, in a 
position or such an offence has not been provided to this Finance Bill and if that person commits 
such an offence, the fine which has been stated, is it worthy for such a person? Who is not 
entitled to the mistakes ta ke the final not provided, that  is one.  Two, Mr. Speaker there we re 
issues which were raised on Section 79 but on the R eport are not, number 678 and  3682 , the cess 
charges for coral blocks per block , the charges for five block.  Mr. Speaker doing a simple 
mathematic s of the same, the blocks are retailed at Kshs. 17, and they are being bought at Kshs. 
12 at the qu arries , so there is a Ksh.5 on top of it. That Ksh.5 Mr. Speaker entails one;  to pay the 
driver of that lorry, two, the turn boy of that lorry, thre e, the owner of that lorry four, the County 
charges of the cess charges.  So charging Ksh.5 per block , Mr. Speaker is unworthy and the same 
issue has raised a lot of issues on the ground as we speak, the  quarry operators from Likoni Sub -
County did some nego tiations during last year Finance B ill and we  had a meeting with the 
former C hair, the Sub-County Administrator, the Sub -County R evenue officer and the same was 
confirmed from the office of the Governor and they were agreeing to pay a fixed charge of Ksh. 
300 per seven ton nes lorry. .. 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hamisi, are you on a point of information?  
 
 The Chairperson Committee of Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani) : Mheshimiwa  Spika lazima tuangalie pia taratibu za hali ya mikutano na nini , nafikiri 
nilikuwa katika Ripoti ya K amati na yale anayo  raise  Mheshimiwa  sio vibaya kuya  raise , lakini 
yana wakati wake ikifika naf ikiri ataweza ku  raise , kwa sababu hatujafika kwa Bill, mpaka sa a 
hii tuko kwa R ipoti Mhe shimiwa . Kwa hivyo  Mheshimiwa , tukijadili hii R ipoti hayo unayosema 
ya mawe, ya ma  lori, ya nini, yatafika yatakuja hapa tutayazungumzia kama zile charges  ziko 
juu, Waheshimiwa wakikubali kuteremsha, lakini sa a hii tuko kwenye Ripoti  ya hii ambayo 
nimeisoma. Hivy o basi  Bwana  Spika ningemuomba Mheshimiwa  kwanza angoje wakati utafika  
na ana haki ya kuuliza hayo yote . Ahsante sana.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Athman?  
 
 Hon. Athman Mwamwiri:  Mr. Speaker when we go to page five, there were proposals 
from  Memb ers of the County Assembly;  to my understanding I am one of those Mem bers of this 
County Assembly so  of course I  did my proposal in the same and I can see the fee of designated 
parking of the parking area, fees for tuktuk and boda boda, fees for branded sa les and outlets, the 
same thing was supposed to be captured under proposal for the fees charged for those people 
who are operating on lorries. So I do  not know if am not among the Members  of County 
Assembly who made the se proposals, for my proposal to be o mitted, and then I will un derstand 
the Chair that am not i n the light.  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 8  But, if the same was  captured , the proposal for Members and I , am one of the Members, 
why was it not captured to wait for it during the reading of the Bill , Mr. Speaker?   
 
 The Speake r (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Athman Mwamwiri for your contribution . 
Yes, Hon. Charles?  
 
 Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa  Spika . M imi nime simama kumfahamisha 
Mheshimiwa  Mwamwiri kwamba ; Kiongozi wa Walio Wengi Bungeni  yuko sawa kabis a, kwa 
sababu hii ni Ripoti ya K amat i lakini, hii R ipoti ya K amati kisheria inakuja Bunge, lakini sisi 
ndio tuna nguvu zaidi mapendekezi yake kati ya Kamati ya The Whole H ouse ikifika 
atapendekeza  tutayazingatia kama Bunge zima  tuweze kupitisha lakini sa a hii ni bora zaidi 
tuzingatie R ipoti ya ke, ikiwa mapendekezo yake hayakuwekwa katika kikao kilicho pita, basi ana 
nguvu wakati wa Kamati ya The Whole H ouse akipendekeza, kam a ana heri tutamuunga mkono 
Mheshimiwa  Spika . Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Samba?  
 
 Hon.  Samba:  Yes Hon. Speaker , on the same note , I think we were all aware that  the 
issue Hon. Mwamwiri raised  we never came to a conclusion  as there were some phone calls that 
were made. S o, I think t hat is why it was not captured i n the final report, but the issue brought 
some issues and there were some phone calls that were made to the Sub -County whatever, but 
we never came to a conclusion,  I think that  is why it has  not been captured. So , for now as Hon. 
Kitula has stated, now we have the op portune  time, we are going to sit on it, we are going to 
atleast de liberate on and come up with a  tangible conclusion. Thank  you Hon.  Speaker.   
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes, Hon. Member any contribution ? Yes, Hon. 
Nzai?  
 
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you very much Mr. S peaker to have given me this o pportunity to 
congratulate the R eport read by the Leader of Majority. Mr. Speaker, t he report  is fantastic, 
reliable, it  is also dependable in our County having deducted some of the effective areas where 
our trades are being t ouched on. I stand  to support the R eport and I think we can continue Mr. 
Speaker, thank you very much.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Nzai. Yes  Hon. Naliaka?  
 
 Hon. Naliaka:  Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. First and for emost , I congratula te the able 
Chairman  for F inance and the Report is really a good one  for some of us espe cially me who is a 
CRE student. I am here to advocate for people to change and  so when I see the proposal on 
Section 95 that says , ‘There is a  reduction in fee  payment  especially for open grounds, for those 
people who carry out crusades, am ver y happy because we are going now  to use this time to 
change many souls and in this I believe in the near future, so many people are going to go to 
heaven . Thank you Mr. Speaker S ir. 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Naliaka . Yes Hon. Lucy?  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 9  Hon. Chireri : Ahsante sana Mhe shimiwa  Spika. Mimi ninaunga mkono R ipoti 
iliyoletwa mbele  yetu na Mwenyekiti, na pia Mheshimiwa Spika ninapongeza K amati iliyokaa 
na kukagua  yale mapendekezo yet u ambayo tuko na dukuduku nayo. N aona yametekelezwa ha pa 
Mheshimiwa Spika na Ripoti hii imeangazia mambo yote ya Kaunti ya Mombas a kila sector , 
kila Wo di yaani imebeba mapendekezo ambayo ni ya kumsaidia mwananchi ambaye yuko ndani 
ya Kaunti ya Mombasa. Nam pongeza Mwenyekiti, nasema K amati ya fedha imefanya kazi nzuri . 
Ahsante.  
 
 The Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Lucy . Yes  Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani , 
you may reply to the M otion  so that we can move on because the time is moving.  
 
 The Chairperson, Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you 
Mr. Speaker.  Let me take this opportunity again to congratulate the Members for support ing the 
Report  on behalf of the people of Mombasa ... because this time we have really set up a 
precedence that even the Members have seen that we are now serious on the issue of the people . 
So Mr. Speaker , I would just say that I would like to give my support and the way the Members 
have supported me for this report and I hope that is...  it a very  good move of this House , so thank 
you Mr. Speaker and thank you Mem bers for supporting this M otion. T hank you . 
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you very much Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani for the 
reply. Hon. Members , I now put the q uestion that the M otion by  Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani on 
adoption of the report of public participation  on the Mombasa County Finance Bill , 2020 be 
considered by this  Honourable  House in the same term s as moved.  
 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
BILL  
THE MOMBASA COUNTY FINANCE BILL, 2020  
 
 Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani?  
 
 The Chairperson Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. Mwidani) : Thank you 
Hon. Speaker . Let me move the Motion on S econd reading of the Mombasa County Finance Bill , 
2020 be now read for a second time and  this time I would re quest Hon. Chizi to second the 
Motion.  
 
 Hon. Chi reri: Thank you Hon. Speaker. I second the M otion.  
 
 The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members . I now propose the q uestion that 
Mombasa County Finance Bill , 2020 be now read a se cond time.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
 Yes, Chairperson Committee on Finance and Budget please make your contribution…  
 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
10 [Consultation with Table Clerks]  
  
 Hon. Members I now put a q uestion that the Mombasa County Finance Bill , 2020 be read 
a seco nd time?  
[Question put and a greed to]  
 
SECOND READING  
 
 Yes Clerk , read the Bill.  
 
[The Clerk read the Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020 for the Second Time ] 
 
 Okay let  us rise and dissolve into the Committee of the W hole House to consider the 
clauses of t he Bill.  
 
[Plenary dissolved into the committee of the Whole House]  
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOL E HOUSE  
 
ORDER OF COMMITTEE R EAD 
[The Serjeant -At-Arms lowered the Mace]  
[The Speaker (Hon. Khatri) exited the Chair]  
 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
[The Deputy Speaker [Hon. Fadh ili Mwalimu] in the Chair]  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Welcome to the C ommittee of the W hole 
House and I will let the C lerk to  start by reading the required A rticle. Yes, Clerk.  
 
[The Clerk read  Part 2, the Mombasa Cou nty Finance Bill , 2020, Part 2 on  Taxes, Fees and 
charges payable a nd rates applicable; Clause 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. 
 
 Hon. Members I propose  that Clause 3,  4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
 Any input Hon. Members?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 Having no i nput Hon. Members, I now put a q uestion that Clause 3,  4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 
be part of the Bill?   
 
[Question put and agreed to]  
  
[The Clerk  read Part 3 payment Clause10,11]  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
11  I now propose that C lause 10 and 11 be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
 Hon. Members , any input on P art 3, payment ? 
 
[Silence ] 
 
 By the show of the House, it clearly shows that we are in co nsideration of these C lauses , 
so I propose  that C lause 10  and 11, I put a question that C lause 10 and 11 be part of the Bill.  
 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 
 Clause 10 and 11 are part of the Bill.  
 
[The Clerk  read Part 4 on o ffences and penalties in Clause 12, 13,14 15 and Clause16]  
 
 I now propose a question that C lause 12,  13, 14, 15 and 16 be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question propo sed and agreed to]  
 
 Yes Hon. Amr iya? 
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : [Inaudible].  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Amriya, are you talking on  his behalf 
or you are raising…  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : [Inaudible ]. 
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili  Mwalimu) : Okay , proceed.  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : [Inaudible].  
 
 The Chairman (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Amriya , before you proceed further as 
you know we are guided by our Standing Order, please a s per our Standing Order go to Standing 
Order 126, (2) and sh are with our Hon ourable  House so that we proceed with  the process of 
making our Bill. Can y ou read S tanding order 126, (2)?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  I do not have the Standing Order.  
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Okay , then i will let Gibson to read  126, (2).  
  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
12  [The Clerk  read Standing Order 126,(2)  that, 'No amendment shall be moved to any part 
of a Bill by any Member, other than the Member in charge of the Bill, unless written notification 
of the amendment shall have been given to the Clerk 24 hours before the commencement of the 
Sitting at which that part of the Bill is considered in Committee '] 
. 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Amriya ,  I think you have heard as 
per our S tanding O rder it is the mover who is supposed to bring the  amendment and the mover of 
this Bill is Hon. Hamisi Musa Mwidani and as far as am concerned and the House is concerned 
he has not m oved any amendment as up to now.  Hon. Amriya you are out of order! Yes Hon. 
Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu: What is the essenc e of us g oing through this Bill?  
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Ogutu , the S tanding order clearly says 
that, if there is any amendment  and you are not the M over, the amendment should be, i t is 
supposed to be before the T able of the Clerk 24  hours be fore the commencement of  this S itting , 
so if you have any amendment that you have given it to the Clerk 24  hours before  today 's Sitting 
Hon. Member , and i know you usually carry your Standing O rder whenever you go, I  know you 
are conversant with this Stan ding O rders . So, if there is any a mendment that you gave to the 
Clerk you can forward the amendment so that we can discuss them. Yes Hon. Amriya , what is it?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma : [Inaudible].  
 
 The Chair person  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Yes Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire: Thank you Chair. M ine is a concern ; I have heard the Clerk reading us the 
Standing order which we all agreed with but my concern is what happens to an item that was 
amended in a previous meeting when we were amending this Bill and it was not capture d and it 
has not been  read her e, what happens to such an item? I t was raised, it was amended but it was 
not captured, what happens to such an item? Thank you.  
 
 The Chair person  (Hon Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Member , I know you are not new with 
the p rocedures of the House. I f it co mes across that you had your amendments or you made your 
input in this R eport during the time you were debating the R eport, you were supposed also to put 
your input and have your written amendment with you so that when we s it in this Committee of 
the W hole House you have whatever that you want to be amended in written form so that 
Members can deliberate on it . And Hon. Members , as far as this Hon ourable  House is concerned 
whatever discussion that we had before were just consultative me etings and as far as this Hon. 
House is concerned those consultative meeting were not binding , that is why am insisting Hon. 
Members with any written amendments we are going to discuss if you have one. Hon. Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Chair , we will rather spend a night here but do the correct thing. Chair , i do 
not want to question your ruling but if you say the consultative meeting we had does not hold 
water here and the Report read by the Motion M over is from the same consultative meetings we 
had then does it m eans also this R eport does  not hold water here?  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
13  Mr. Chair, i  am just appealing to you that we do the right thing to the people we represent 
and let your conscious guide you and not anybody else . So, we are just raising the issue, i am 
asking the issue ra ised by the Hon. Member was raised here by Hon. Mwamwiri Athumani , that 
it was discussed in those consultative meeting s of which happened to be a meeting that was well 
recognized by this institution and we are here today because of that meeting . Mr. Chair , so the 
issue was raised by the Hon. Member and it was said during now this stage that is sue can be 
raised and discussed.  Kindly please, t hank you.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Samba.  
 
 Hon. Samba: Mine is also not different from the Memb er who just raised concern;  my 
concern is the same , we share the same concern. Hon. C hair, we had a thorough scru tiny of the 
document and some of us even spared our time of worshi pping, we suspended our going to 
Church t o just go sit for this document,  and as far as my memory serves me well maybe we are 
diverting from the dictates of norm . Hon. Chair , we took our time and we passed through every 
item one by one and as far as am concerned the Chairman of F inance C ommitte e also had on e 
time with his Commitee and they had some recommendations . My worry , Mr. Chairman is  that I 
do not know where we are going to place the recommendation of the Co mmit tee and the 
recommendation s of the Hon. Member ? Maybe , if you can elaborate for us whether the 
recom mendations that were captured ar e also going to reflect in the F inance Bill  in the final draft 
or we were just wasting time.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon.  Samba.  Hon. Members , as 
per the Standing O rder that was r ead in this House I do  not know i f you have consulted the 
Mover of this Bill if whatever we are raising the amendments that you made during your 
consultative meetin g of which the C ommit tee of the W hole House is not aware of, you can 
consult the M over of this B ill, maybe whatever that you are raising he has the amendments with 
him, if not then there is no way we are going to bring those amendments from the back door . So, 
please Hon. Members consult first the Chair maybe he has the amendment s so that we proceed 
with this S itting. Yes, Hon Am riya?  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  [Inaudible] . But, anyway my issue is when you look at Article 11 ... 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Amriya use your mic rophone  so that it 
can be captured.  
 
 Hon. Amriya Juma:  So, Chairman  i am trying  to draw your attention to the R eport made 
by the Chairperson on F inance , on S ection 11 ; it acknowledges this consultative meeting that 
was held on 23rd of January as an extention of the public  participation that was limited. S o this 
consult ative meeting h as locus Standi by virtue th at it has been captured by the R eports that h ave 
been raised by the Finance C hair.  
 Mr. Chairman , please be well advised that in some points where there are procedural 
technicalities , what we look at is the grand norm ; the Constitution prevails over all standing laws 
in this Country . 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
14  So, if the C onstitution provides that justice should prevail in instances where procedural 
technicalities a re hindra nces then I think we should pay much im portance to that C lause of the 
Constitutio n because any deviation , be it a Standing O rder or a law that deviates from that grand 
norm is invalid to the extent of its inconsistency . So, I think at this time the question is whether 
the amendments that are proposed are valid or not , and  if they are n ot then we move on but the 
question that we can not bring amendments where the law is clear that in Second R eading is when 
amendmen ts should come , whether in written form  or verbatim then I think that is a mis 
direction as m uch as we are appreciating our St anding O rders . So, I think the main issue is 
whether that proposal we are making is valid or not ; if it is not th en we move on, but if we say 
we Members  are going to go through this Bill and we are not in the room to make amends what 
we feel will not accor d justice to our people then this process is in  vain, which we rather just 
finish up and move to the next thing . So, that is my submission M r. Chairman.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Amriya . I have heard your 
conc ern Hon. Amriya but in the mean time or in th is Commitee of the W hole House we are 
discussing the F inance Bi ll and not the R eport from the Budget and F inance Commitee so Hon. 
Members. .. Yes Hon. Samba.  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Chairman the issue that was raised by Hon. Amriya I think the 
amendments that we are proposing or we suggested I think it will be prudent enough if we give 
the Chairman for F inance time when actually we will be reading item per item so maybe we are 
taking alot of time and maybe the chairman for finance capt ured the amendments, I think we can 
proceed then as per item we can know where we are heading. That is my contribution.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon. Samba for your 
contribution . Hon. Members , I now proceed to put a question that  Clause 14,  15 and 16 be part of 
the B ill? 
 
[Question p ut and agreed to ]  
 
 Yes, C lerk? 
 
[The Clerk  read the  Schedule to the Mombasa County F inance Bill , 2020,  (A) County Assembly ] 
 
 Hon. Members , I now propose that schedule section A of the Bill be part o f the B ill? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to] 
  
 Any input?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 I now proceed to put a question that Schedule, Section A be part of the B ill. 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
15  Yes Clerk?  
  
[The Clerk  read Schedule B, Department of Devolution and P ublic Service Administration ] 
 
 Hon. Members , I now propo se that S chedule B , Section  B be part of the B ill? 
 
[Question proposed and a greed  to]  
 
 Any input Hon. Members on this S chedule? Any input?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 No input?  I now proceed to put a question th at Schedule B , be part of the B ill? 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
  
 [The Clerk  read Section C , Department of Environme nt, Waste Management and Energy]  
 
 Hon. Members , I now propose that  Schedule C , be part of the B ill? 
 
[Question  proposed and agreed  to] 
  
 Any input?  Yes, Hon Bwire?  
 
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Chair . I do not know if I am left out or something , my concern is 
at which point will the amendments w hich were read in the previous R eport be captured  in this?  I 
have a right to ask, why a m I here?   
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Thank you Hon . Bwire. As it is we are also 
still learning , next time Hon. Members be well prepared with whatever amendments you will be 
having so that when we come to the Committee of the W hole House the re will be no 
techn icalities but in the meantime I heard that the C hair has got an amendment that was made 
during your consultat ive meeting.  Yes Hon . Hamis i Musa?  
 
 The Chairperson Committee of Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon 
Mwidani) :  Thank you M r. Chairman,  'That Schedule C be amended in row 94 by deleting the 
entire row '. 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ), Okay are you moving that amendment?  
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ):  Yes Mr. Chair , am moving that amendment to delete 94 in the entire row.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Okay , who is your seconder?  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
16  The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ):  Hon. Samba.  
 
 Hon. Samba: I second , Hon. Chair.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): I propose a question that S chedule C as 
amended , that S chedule C be amendend in row 94 by deleting the entire row.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed  to]   
 
 Any input , Hon. Members?  
  
[Silence ] 
 
 I now proceed to pu t a question that Schedule S ection C as amended be part of the B ill. 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
  
[The Clerk  read Schedule S ection D, Department of Transport and Infrastructure]  
 
 I now propose a question that  Schedule D , be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question  proposed and agreed to ]  
 
 Any input?  
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Mr. Chairman , I would like that S chedule D be amended in row 120 by deleting Ksh. 
6500 and substitute therefore w ith Ksh.3000.  I would  like Hono urable...Thank you Mr. 
Chairman to give me that time because we are now on D , then i move to S chedule D be amended 
in row 121 , by deleting 8750 and su bstitute it therefore with 4000.  Mr. Chair, that S chedule D be 
amended in row 122 by deleting 15 000 and  substitute therefore with 8000.  That S chedule D be 
amended in row 128 , by deleting 150 an d substitute therefore with 100. That S chedule D be 
amended in row 129 by deleting 3000 and  substitute therefore with 2200. S chedule D be 
amended in row 130 , by deleting 9000 and substitute therefore w ith 6600. That S chedule D be 
amended in row 131 , by deleting 18000 and substitute therefore with 13200.  
 Mr. Chairman , Schedule D be amended in row 132 by deleting 36000 and substitute 
therefore with 26400 . Mr. Cha irman , Schedule D be amended in row 133 by deleting 400 and 
subst itute therefore with 300 That S chedule D be amended in row 134 by deleting 8000 , and 
substitute therefore with 7000.  Schedule D be amended in row 135 by deleting 24000 , and 
substitute therefo re with 20000...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Mwidani , what is written here is 
20600.  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
17  The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ):... 20600. Mr. Chairman , that Schedule  D be amended in r ow 136 by deleting 48000 
and substitute therefore with 40600,  Schedule D be amended in row 137 by deleting 96000 , and 
substitute therefore with 80,400. That S chedule D be amended in row 299 by deleting 1500 , and 
substitute therefore with 1200 . Thank you , Mr. Chairman.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Who is your seconder?  
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Hon. Samba.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Tobias Samba . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  I second , Hon. Chair.  
 
 The Chairperson (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members , I now propose a question 
that S chedule D as amended be part of the Bill.  
 
[Question Proposed and agreed  to]  
 
 Any input on the amendments? Yes Hon. Samba . 
 
 Hon. Samba:  Mr. Chairman , we are so much grateful with the Mover of the B ill and 
since when we sat down as  Whole Hou se C ommit tee and as part of the Finance C ommit tee 
previously had sat down , we considered that due to the pandemic that hit us for the last one and a 
half years we though t it wise that atleast to reduce some of the costs in the rates so  as to enhance 
the business of Mombasa to pick up , since we know that any Country or C ounty that overtax es 
its citizens cannot prosper  in terms of economic  growth . So, I congratulate the Cha irman or 
Motion M over for the bold move we have taken , for once in the Assembly . Thank you Hon. 
Chair , that is my contribution.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu ): Hon. Members , I now put a question that 
Schedule E as amended be part of the Bill.  
 
[Question put and agreed  to]  
[Consul tations ] 
 
Hon. Members , we were on Sc hedule D so I  now put a question that Schedule D as 
amended be part of  the Bill . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. Hon. Members I now put a 
question that Schedule E a s amended be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
18 [The Clerk  read Department D ] 
[Consultations]  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members we were on Schedule D , so I 
now put S chedule D  as amended be part of the Bill.  
 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read Department E, Department of Trade, Tourism and Investment ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that Schedule E be 
part of the Bill.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
Any input on S chedule E?  
 
The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): The Schedule E Mr. Chairman , Schedule E be amended in the row after row 574 and 
before row 575 , the introduction S ection of paragraph 76 by deleting the  words , ‘and within ’ to 
read as follows (Payable at Cess Collection Points for all the goods offloaded within Mombasa 
County including private facilities or depots or warehouse) , Hon. Prischillah to second... O h let 
me move on before she seconds,  Schedule E be amended in row 611 by deleting 64 , and 
substituting therefore with 32. Schedule E be amended in row 612 by deleting 40 , and 
substituting therefore with 20. Schedule E be amended in row 613 by deleting 32 , and 
substituting therefore with Kshs.16. That Schedule E be amended in row 809 by deleting 30,000 , 
and substituting therefore with 15,000.  Schedule E be amended in row 810 by deleting 90,000 , 
and substituting therefore with 70,000.  Schedule E be amended in row 811 by deleting 45,000 , 
and substituting therefore with 35, 000. Schedule E be amended in row 812 by deleting 15,000 , 
and substituting therefore with 10,000.  Schedule E be amended in row 813 by deleting 7,500 , 
and substituting therefore with 5,000.  That Schedule E be amended in the row after 835 b y 
numbering chronologically and deleting 100,000 and substituting further by 80,000.  Schedule E 
be amended in the row before paragraph 85 by numbering it chronologically and deleting 60,000 , 
and substituting therefore with 50,000.  Schedule E be amended in row 862 by deleting 20,000 , 
and substituting therefore with 15,000.  Schedule E be amended in row 863 by deleting 10,500 , 
and substituting therefore with 5,000 . Schedule E be amended in row 886 by being numbered 
chronologically and substituting therefore wi th 15,000.  
Thank you Mr. Speaker , may I call Hon. Prischillah  to second, she is not in . Okay, yes 
Hon.  Ogutu to second.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  I second , Mr. Chair.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Member , I now propose a question that 
Schedule E as amen ded be part of the Bill. 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
19 [Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
 Any input Hon. Members? Yes Hon. Charles?  
 
Hon. Kitula:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, Mwenyekiti niko kwa Schedule D…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Schedule E . 
  
Hon. Kitula:  Tuko E sawa sawa , manake niko D ningependa taarifa  kutoka kwa 
Mwenyekiti ni vizuri ili tusiweze kuwa mambo ya kwenda kortini . Schedule D number 226 ... 
 
[Interruption]  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Schedule E, we are through with Schedule 
D. 
  
Hon. Kitula:  Naam, nasema ni muhimu sana kabla  ichapishwe nataka kupewa taarifa  
226 tuiangalie kwa upana , 226, naam  supply of water, industrial and commercial , is it per hour 
or per year, 10,000 is too much Mr. Chair . Supply of water is it supposed to  be per hour or per 
year? Kama iko sawa twaweza endelea tu Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti, masuala kama haya 
yakienda kortini itakuwa sio sawa kwa hio  itakuwa ni  kwa saa moja ama kwa mwaka ama kwa 
mwaka, kwa saa moja 10,000?  Ahsante.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you Hon. Charles for that concern 
even though we were through with Schedule D , but am sure the Majority Leader will consult 
further . So, Hon. Members I now put a question that Schedule E  as amended be part of the Bill.  
 
 [Question put and a greed to]  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read Department F]  
[Consultations]  
 
Department F, Department of Education, ICT and Mombasa County Vision , 2035 . 
  
I propose a question that Schedule F be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
Any input Hon.  Members? I now put a question that Schedule F be part of the Bill . 
 
 [Question put and agreed to]  
 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
20 Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read the  Department G, Youth, Gender and Sports ] 
 
I now propose a question that Schedule G be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question proposed a nd agreed to]  
 
Any input Hon. Members? Yes Hon. Hamisi Musa?  
 
The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Thank you Chairman , that Schedule G be amended in row 972 by deleting 25, 000 
and substituting therefore with 5,00 0. 
 
[Consultations]  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) :  Leader read as per what you have submitted 
to this Hon. House ? 
 
[Consultations]  
 
The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Mr. Chairman , that Schedule G be amended in row 972 by deleting 25, 000 , and 
substituting therefore with 5,000 instead of 10,000, it was a typing error. Mr. Chairman , 
Schedule G be amended in row 977 by deleting the words , "Hire of other social halls ", which is a 
repetition and 10,000 and  substituting therefore with 5,000. I think Mr. Chairman we have 
complete d Schedule G.   
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 
The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Hon Prischillah Mumba w ill second this . 
 
Hon. Mumba:  Thank you Mr. Chairman , I second . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that Schedule G as 
amended be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to]  
 
Any input Hon. Members? Yes Hon. Ogutu?  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Chair.  Mr. Chair , I want to thank the Motion Mover 
because most churches and religious organizations are non -profit making organizations so 
reducing the hire of the grounds from Ksh. 25,000 .  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
21 It would have been even free but reduci ng to Ksh. 5,000 we have also done something to 
them. Thank you.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you. I now put a question that 
Schedule G as amended be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read Schedule H,  Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose that Schedule H be part of the 
Bill. 
 
[Question  proposed and agreed to]  
 
Hon. Members , any input on Schedule H? There’s no input, I now put a question that 
Schedu le H be part of the Bill. 
 
[Question put and agreed to]  
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read the  Department I, Planning, Lands and Housing ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : I now propose a question that Schedule I be 
part of the Bill . 
[Question proposed an d agreed to]  
 
Any input Hon. Members?  
 
The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Mr. Chairman , that Schedule I be amended in row 1089 by deleting 0.6  per cent  of 
2011 USV and substituting therefore with 8  per cent  of 1991 USV.  Mr. Chairman , Schedule I be 
amended in row 1090 by deleting 0.8  per cent  of 2011 USV and substituting therefore with 14  
per cent  of 1991 USV.  Schedule I , be amended in row 1091 by deleting 0.8  per cent  of 2011 
USV and substituting therefore with 14 per cent  of 1991 USV.  Schedule I , be amended in row 
1092 by deleting 0.6  per cent  of 2011 USV and substituting therefore with 8  per cent of 1991 
USV.  Schedule I , be amended in row 1118 by deleting 0.8  per cent  of the total project and 
substituting there fore with 0.6  per cent  of the total project.   
Mr. Chairman , that Schedule I be amended in row 1119 by deleting 0.8  per cent  of the 
total project and substituting therefore with 0.6  per cent  of the total project.  Mr. Chairman , 
Schedule I be amended in row 1 120 by deleting 0.7  per cent  of the total project and substituting 
therefore with 0.5  per cent  of the total project.  Schedule I , be amended in row 1121 by deleting 
0.6 per cent  of the total project and substituting therefore with 0.4  per cent  of the total project.  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
22 Mr. Chairman , Schedule I be amended in row 1122 by deleting 0.5  per cent  of the total 
project and substituting therefore with 0.4  per cent  of the total project.  Mr. Chairman , that 
Schedule I be amended in row 1258 by deleting 5,895 and substitutin g therefore with 3,929. 
Schedule I be amended in row 1130 by deleting 0.3  per cent  of the total project and substituting 
therefore with 0.2  per cent  of the total project. Schedule I , be amended in row 1259 by deleting 
4,585 and substituting therefore with 3,055. That Schedule I be amended in row 1260 by deleting 
5,895 and substituting therefore with 3,929.  Schedule I be amended in row 1261 by deleting 
3,960 and subst ituting therefore with 2,640. That S chedule I, be amended in row 1262 by 
deleting 5,040 and substituting therefore with 3,360.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1263 
by deleting 6,670 and substituting therefore with 4,445.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 
1264 by deleting 1,200 and substituting therefore with 800.  That S chedule I, be amended i n row 
1265 by deleting 1,350 and substituting therefore with 900.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 
1,266 by deleting 1,240 and substituting therefore with 825.   
Mr. Chairman , that S chedule I  be amended in row 1267 by deleting 1,350 and 
substituting there fore with 895.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1268 by deleting 3,480 and 
substituting therefore with 2,320.  Mr. Chairman , that S chedule I, be amended in row 1269 by 
deleting 4,600 and substituting therefore with 3,065.  That S chedule I, be amended in ro w 1270 
by deleting 13,500 and substituting therefore with 9,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 
1271 by deleting 9,000 and substituting therefore with 6,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in 
row 1272 by deleting 9,000 and substituting therefore with 6,00 0. That S chedule I, be amended 
in row 1273 by deleting 1,500 and substituting therefore with 1,000.   
Mr. Chairman, t hat S chedule I, be amended in row 1274 by deleting 1,500 and 
substituting therefore with 1000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1275 by de leting 52,000 
and substituting therefore with 35,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1276 by deleting 
1,300 and substituting therefore with 865.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1277 by deleting 
1,245 and substituting therefore with 840.  That Schedul e I, be amended in row 1278 by deleting 
1,260 and substituting therefore with 840.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1279 by deleting 
2,520 and substituting therefore with only 1,680.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1280 by 
deleting 4,680 and substitut ing therefore with 3120.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1281 by 
deleting 6,495 and substituting therefore with 4330.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1282 by 
deleting 6,675 and substituting therefore with 4,450.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 128 3 
by deleting 6,000 and substituting therefore with 4,000.   
Mr. Chairman, t hat Schedule I, be amended in row 1284 by deleting 7,500 and 
substituting therefore with 5,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1285 by deleting 6,000 
and substituting therefore with 4,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1286 by deleting 
3,000 and substituting therefore with 2,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1287 by 
deleting 7,500 and substituting therefore with 5,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 1288 
by deletin g 6,000 and substituting therefore with 4,000.  That S chedule I, be amended in row 
1289 by deleting 1,500 and substituting therefore with 1,000.  That Schedule I, be amended in 
row 1290 by deleting 9,000 and substituting therefore with 6,000.  That S chedule I , be amended 
in row 1291 by deleting 6,750 and substituting therefore with 4,500.  That S chedule I, be 
amended in row 1292 by deleting 3,450 and substituting therefore with 2,300.  That S chedule I, 
be amended in row 1293 by deleting 3,000 and substituting th erefore with 2000.  That S chedule I, 
be amended in row 1294 by deleting 3,750 and substituting therefore with 2,500.  Lastly , that 
Schedule I, be amended in row 1295 by deleting 12,750 and substituting therefore with 8,500.  
 Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
23 [Applause ] 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Who is your seconder?  
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): May I request Hon. Ogutu to second.  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Hon. Chair , I second . 
 
 The Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwal imu) : Hon. Members , I now propose the question 
that Schedule I as amended be part of the Bill. 
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to ] 
 
 Any input? Y es Hon. Ogutu?  
 
 Hon. Ogutu:  Mr. Chairman , I want to congratulate once again the M over for considering 
the peop le living in these houses. Mr. Speaker , these houses are so dila pidated in such a way that 
the C ounty government would have just given them for free but for the purpose of r aising 
revenue reduc ing the prices is good for them. Two , Mr. Speaker there is this  project of urban 
renewal so they can be brought down anytime saying it would have been well  to allow them to 
stay for free, thank you . 
 
 Hon. Chair person (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Thank you M embers . I now proceed to p ut 
a question that S chedule I as amended  be part of the Bill. 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read Clause two , Interpretation ] 
 
 I propose that C lause two be part of the Bill. 
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to ] 
  
 I now put a question that C lause two be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read Clause one  - The Short Title and C ommencement , that the Act may be cited as 
Mombasa County F inance Act , 2020 and shall come into operation upon on  the publication i n 
the Gazette]  
 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
24  Hon. Members , I now propose that Clause one be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question proposed  and agreed to ] 
  
 Any input? There being no i nput I now put a question that C lause one be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read the  Long title  - The Mombasa County Finance Bill, 2020, a Bill for an Act of the 
County Assembly of Mombasa to impose fees charges levies taxes an d penalties enforceable by 
the C ounty governme nt of Mombasa to amend various C ounty legislations related thereof and 
for matter s incidental th ereto] 
 
 I now propose that the Long T itle be part of the Bill. 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
 Any input?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 I now put a question that  the Long Title be part of the Bill.  
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
 Yes C hairman , Finance  Budge t and Appropriation s Committee , please move the M otion . 
  
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Mr. Chairman , now I will seek to move or seek leave so that we go back to plenary 
session. Thank you Mr. Chairm an. 
 
 The Chairperson (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Hamisi Musa , you were supposed to 
propose a M otion and not to seek leave . So, propose a Motion for the H ouse to revert back to the 
plenary.  
  
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriation s (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Thank you for reminding me . I would like to move a M otion so that we can move to 
the plenary session and I  would like H on. Kitula to second the M otion.  
 
[Hon. Kitula bow ed] 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members , I now put  the question that 
the H ouse return to the reporting time . 
  
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
25 [Question put and agreed to ] 
 
PLENARY RESUMED  
[The Serjeant -At-Arms raised the Mace]  
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) in the Chair]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadh ili Mwalimu) : Have you r seats.  Yes, Chairman report 
back to the House.  
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Mheshimiwa Spika , nashukuru nachukua hii fursa kwa kushukuru Wanachama  
tulivyochangia tukiwa kwenye kikao cha Kamati ya Nyumb a yote  na Mheshimiwa S pika 
natumai tumeshukuru kwamba R ipoti imeweza kukubalika na  pia ya le marekebisho y ote amb ayo 
yametajwa yamepita na ya meandikwa. Kwa  hivyo Bwana Spika naweza pia kuwashukuru 
Wanachama  kuchukua muda wote kwa kuweza kuipitisha sheria ye tu hii ya fedha . Kwa hivyo 
ninashukuru na  nasema kwamba tuwe na moyo huo na  tuzidi kuendelea ili tuweze kufanya 
mambo yetu ya K aunti yasonge mbele kwa sababu hii ndio  sheria  ambayo inaweza kutuwezesha 
kukusanya pesa kuwezesha kufanya maendeleo yetu katika mitaa. Hivyo basi Bwana S pika 
ninawashukuru Wanachama  wote na In Shaa Allah Mwenyezi  Mungu atatuwezesha tuweze  
kutekeleza mambo ya wananchi wetu  kwa haki. A hsante sana.  
 
[Applause]  
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members , Order! Hon. Pri scilla 
Mumba order! You are out of Order!  
 
[Silence ] 
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ): Mr. Speaker , let me now move a M otion that I move , 
 
Pursuant to S ection of Standing O rder 121 (1) move a M otion that the County Assembly 
do agree with the Committee of the Whole H ouse in the said report.  
 
[The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations  (Hon. Mwidani ) 
moved the Motion]  
 
  I woul d like Hon. Samba to second my M otion .  
 
 Hon. Samba:  Hon. Speake r, I stand to second . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu) : Hon. Members , I stand to put a question 
that the Motion moved by the Leader of M ajority be approved into this Honourable  House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to ] 
 
January 26 , 202 1                   COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES                           Special Sitting  
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor Page 
26  Yes Clerk?  
 
THE MOMBASA COUNT Y FINANCE BILL, 2020  
THIRD READING  
 
[Loud consultations ] 
 
 The Chairperson Committee on Finance, Budget and Appropriations (Hon. 
Mwidani ):  Mr. Speaker I beg to move a Motion ; 
 
That the Mombasa County F inance Bill , 2020 be read for the T hird Time. 
 
 I woul d like Hon. Ramla to second the M otion .  
 
 Hon. Ramla Said:  Hon. Speaker , I second . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili Mwalim u): Hon. Members , I now p ut a question that 
the Mombasa County F inance Bill , 2020 be read a Third T ime. 
 
[Question put and agreed t o] 
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
[The Clerk  read The Mombasa County F inance Bill , 2020  for the Third Time]  
 
 Yes, Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
 The H ouse stands adjourn ed until Tuesday the February , 2021 at 10: 00a.m.  
 
The House r ose at 5 :19p.m. 
 
  
                               