November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 1 MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY  
HANSARD REPORT  
Thursday , 9th November, 2017  
The House met at 2:52p.m. 
(Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri ) in the Chair)  
PRAYERS  
 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon.  Khatri) :  Members  you may be seated, yes Clerk?  
(Silence ) 
 Hon.  Members , I hav e communication which I take this opportunity to welcome you to 
this special sitting of the County Assembly. As you are all aware, on the 19th October 2017, we 
started a short recess which is due to end on 13th November , 2017. We will then commence our 
normal sittings on Tuesday, 14th November , 2017.  Before we proceeded for the short recess, His 
Excellency the Governor, Hon. Hassan Ali Joho had officially communicated the nomination of 
7 CEC Members  vide letter dated 22nd September , 2017. I made the communi cation on the 18th 
October , 2017 during the 16th sitting to this Hon.  Assembly. There was also an official 
communication of nomination of County Attorney vide a letter dated 14th October , 2017.  
Hon.  Members , I did commit the notifications to  the Committee on Appointments/Rules and 
Procedures and Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs on the 18th October 2017.  The 
Committees embarked on vetting exercise as required by law. I can report to this County 
Assembly that the vetting exercise was successfully comple ted. Due to the statutory timelines of 
21 days within which the County Assembly must finalize with the nominees, it was necessary for 
a special sitting to be convened today.  
 In accordance with Standing Order 26 of the Standing Orders, today’s special sitt ing is 
duly convened as it was published in the Kenya Gazette dated the 8th November , vide gazette 
notice number 10942. I hereby proceed to read the gazette notice .   
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri)  read the gazette notice)  
 Standing Order 26(4) specifies that on the day of the special sitting, the business 
specified in the notice shall be the only business before the County Assembly. We will therefore 
only transact busin ess in relation to adoption of Motions on R eports of the 7 nominees for the 
CEC positions an d County Attorney.  
 Hon.  Members , thank you for availing yourself today to transact this important and 
urgent business that will see the County effectively deliver services to its residents. Thank you. 
Yes Clerk?  
PAPERS  
 Yes Hon.  Aran?  
 Hon. Oindo : Thank y ou Mr . Speaker  Sir. Mr. Speaker  Sir pursuant to Standing order 44 
I would love to bring a Notice of Motion to this Hon.  House  in regards to  people’s Assembly be 
formed to discuss and determine the affairs of the County and recommend a pathway towards for 
the achie vement of the promise , aspirations ...  
(Interruption)  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon.  Aran I think you are out of order . 
 Hon. Oindo : Objectives rights and freedom as provided by the C onstitution of Kenya 
2010.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Ara n I think you are out of order,  if you read properly 
Order number 26 subsection 4 you will find and I just read it  so I think you are out of order , you 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 2 know the procedure of bringing a Motio n to the House so you should fo llow the right procedu re. 
Yes Hon.  Bwire . 
 Hon.  Bwire : Thank you Mr.  Speaker  I just want to second what the Hon.  Member Aran 
has just said;  what he is  raising is a matter of urgency,  even thou gh the law restricts that we 
should not discuss anything out of the agenda but Mr. Speaker  it’s a m atter of urgency . We had a 
directive from the party leader ; the people's P resident   the right Hon.  Prime M inister Raila 
Amolo Odinga  and it was confirmed that the c o-Princip als of Nasa Coalition just so me few days  
that we the NASA affiliated Counties we s hould pass this Motion , the people’s  Assembly so that 
we give the people  chance to discuss the problems . Mr. Speaker  the Government we have today 
is not addressing the people ’s issues and that’s why we have gone out of way.  Mr. Speaker  I 
need your attentio n please. ... 
(Interruption)  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Bwire please again  I think I just told you,  you guys are 
Hon.  Members  you know very well what are the procedures when you want to bring a Motion to 
the House,  you know so you should follow the pr ocedures Hon.  Bwire this is not the right 
procedure you know.  I agree with what you are saying but you should follow the right procedure 
Members  and I just read for you just now Standing order number 26 subsection 4 can I read for 
you again ? Let me read fo r you again I think all of you Members  have the S tanding order ; if you 
look at S tanding order 26 subsection 4 its saying very clear ;  
(Mr. Speaker (Hon. Khatri)  read the Standing Order)  
 Whenever the County Assembly meets for a Special sitting under paragr aph 1,  the 
Speaker  shall specify the Business  to be transacted  on the day or days appointed and the 
Business so specified shall be the only Business before the County Assembly during the Special 
sitting , following which the County Assembly shall stand adjo urned  until the day appointed at 
the County Assembly calendar.  So Members  I know what you are trying to say and I can feel 
what you guys are trying to say but please let 's use the right procedure Hon.  Members . Yes Hon. 
Amur?   
 Hon. Amur : Mr. Speaker  Thank  you since it’s a burning issue the directive that you h ave 
given is just to guide the M ember so that next week he can bring that Motion maybe he wanted 
your acceptance so that he can bring next week when w e are resuming maybe he  needs guidance 
so that thi s House can accept his  inten tion of bringing the Motion  next week , that is the idea Mr . 
Speaker . 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon.  Amur the matter of me accepting or not 
accepting there is nothing which am going to say that am accepting or not , there are always 
procedures to follow and I think if we follow the proper procedures why would someone reject 
something important like that , just follow the proper procedures and then we implement that .... 
(Applause)  
 Thank you , Hon.  Member’s . Yes Hon. Bwire  again.   
 Hon. Bwire : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  I have ..., as I have stated earlier the 
issue is very urgent and through your own wisdom am now appealing to this House we a djourn 
for five minutes we follow the procedure,  let us suspend any Busines s that we had earlier and 
discuss people’s Assembly today.  Thank you , Mr. Speaker .  
 (Applause)  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you for that wise thinking but for now I think I have 
stated very clear ly in my communication that even whatever we are doing is important so for 
now we are going to continue with what we are supposed to do thank you. Yes Clerk?  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 3 PAPERS  
 Yes Hon. Mohamed Hatimy?  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank you Mr. Speaker . Mr. Speaker  Sir I wish to lay on the 
Table of the County Assembly today 9th October , 2017 the following P apers ; Report of 
appointment C ommittee on vetting Mr. Speaker . 
 1. Report  on vetting of Mr.  Tawfiq Balala –Nominee for the position of CEC Member 
Transport.  
 2. Report on v etting of Mr.  Kevin Munyoki Kyalo  - Nominee for the p osition of CEC 
Member Youth, Gender a nd Sports and Cultural Affairs.  
 3. Report on v etting of Dr.  Godfrey Nyongesa Nato – Nominee for the position of CEC 
Member Environment, Waste  Management and Energy.  
 4. Report on v etting of Mr.  Edward  Dzilla Nyale – Nominee for the position of CEC 
Member Lands,  Planning and Housing.  
 5. Report on v etting of Ms.  Hazel Koitaba – Nominee for the position of CEC Member 
Health.  
 6. Report on Vetting of Ms.  Fatma Awale  - Nominee for the position of CEC Member 
Water, Sanitatio n and Natural Resources.  
 7. Report on Vetting of Ms.  Maryam Abdillahi  - Nominee for the position of CEC 
Member Finance and Economy Planning.  
 Thank you Mr. Speaker . 
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy laid the Papers)  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Hatimy. Y es Clerk?  
PAPER  
 Yes Hon.  Amriya? Yes Hon. Amriya the Chairperson Committee on Justice and Legal 
Affairs.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr.  Speaker , and with the leave of the County 
Assembly I wish to lay the Paper on this date Thursday 9th November , 2017 ; Report of  vetting of  
Mr. Joseph M Mtalaki , Nominee for the position of County Attorney.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you. Yes Clerk?   
MOTION  
 Yes Hon.  Hatimy would you please move the Motion?   
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy : Thank yo u Mr.  Speaker . Mr. Speaker  I request my fellow 
Member to read the report to move the Motion. Thank you. 
 Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker  on behalf of Committee on Appointments/House 
Rules and Procedures I would like to table a Motion that this County Assembly adopts the 
Report on Vetting of Mr. Tawfiq Balal a –Nominee for the position of CEC Member Transport, 
Infrastructure and Public Works laid on the table on 9th November , 2017, b y Hon.  Mohamed 
Hatimy on behalf of Vice Chair, Hon.  Hamisi Mwidani Mr.  Speaker . Thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
Mr. Speaker  I request my colleague Hon. Kibwana Swaleh to second before I read the Report 
Mr. Speaker  Sir. 
 Hon.  Kibwana Swale h: Thank you I do s upport, I do second.  
(Hon. Amur read the vetting report)  
Mr. Speaker sir, report on the Nominee for Coun ty Executive Committee M ember of 
Transport , Infrastructure and Public work s. The C ommittee consists of the fol lowing M ember s 
Mr. Speaker sir . 
 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 4 MEMBERS:   
1. Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri  - Chairperson/Mr. Speaker  
2. Hon. Hamisi Mwidani    - Vice Chairperson/Leader of Majority  
3. Hon. Murfad Amur    - Member  
4. Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu   - Member  
5. Hon. Kibwana Swaleh   - Member  
6. Hon. Mohamed Hatimy   - Member  
7. Hon. (Ms.) Amriya Juma   - Member  
 
COMMITTEE STAFF MEMBERS  
 Ms. Dorothy Auma    - Director Legislative Procedural and Committ ee Services  
 Mr. Abdallah Khamis   - Senior Committee Assistant  
 Ms. Salma Maro    - Principal Hansard Editor  
 
Mr. Speaker Sir the Committee met and vetted Hon . Tawfiq  Balala, Mr. Speaker sir .  
 As provided for in Standing Order 185(4) the mandate of the Committee in this regard is to  
consider,  for approval  by the County  Assembly,  appointments under  Articles  179(2)  (Members  of 
County  Executive  Committees ).  
 
1.0 Introduction  
Mr. Speaker Sir, and the Hon. Members of the County Assembly, it is with great pl easure 
to presen t the report on the vetting of N ominee for the position of County Executive Committee 
Member – Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works,  Mr. Tawfiq Balala. Mr. Speaker Sir, 
pursuant  to Section 35 of the County Governments Act, His Excell ency the Governor nominated 
Mr. Tawfiq Balala for the position of County Executive Member for Transport, Infrastructure 
and Public Works in the County government of Mombasa vide a letter addressed to the County 
Assembly Clerk dated 22nd September, 2017 ref erence number Msa CG/APP/CECM/1/117.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, the notification of nomination was communicated to the Assembly by 
Hon Speaker on the 18th October , 2017 at 2 :30p.m. during the 16th Sitting. The Speaker then 
committed the notification from His Excell ency the Governor to the Committee on 
Appointments for approval hearing in accordance with section 7(1) of the Public Appointments 
(County Assemblies Approval) Act 2017  and Standing Orders 42 (2).  
Mr. Speaker Sir, in accordance with section 7(2) of the Pu blic Appointments (County 
Assemblies Approval) Act , 2017 and Standing Order 42(3), the Committee through a press 
advertisement appearing on Thursday 25th October , 2017 in the Star and Standard Newspapers, 
the Nominee and the public were informed of the app roval hearing and the public was invited to 
send written memoranda to the Clerk on the suitability of the nominee.  
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon .? 
Hon. Mwamwiri : Mr. Speaker Sir there is a Hon . Member who is chewing.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Mwamwiri  can you just tell me under 
which S tanding order is that, if you don’t mind.  
Hon. Mwamwiri : General Standing Order.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry?  
(Laughter ) 
Hon. Mwamwiri : General Standing Order . 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 5 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri ): What general S tanding order? You know when you stand 
you have to tell me under which S tanding order. Thank you , yes Hon. Amur.  
(Hon. Amur resumed  to read the report ) 
Thank you Mr. Speaker , in accordance with section seven,  Mr. Speaker Sir, in 
accordance  with section 7(2) of the Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval) Act 
2017 and Standing Order 42(3), the Committee through a press advertisement appearing on 
Thursday 25th October , 2017 in the Sta r and Standard Newspapers, the N ominee and the publ ic 
were informed of the approval hearing and the public was invited to send written memoranda to 
the C lerk on the suitability of the N ominee.  
Mr. Speaker sir, the vetting  exercise was conducted by the C ommittee on Thursday 2nd 
November , 2017 from 9: 00a.m at Royal Court Hotel.  Mr. Speaker Sir, let me now present the 
Committee on Appointment report for consideration by the House.  
2.0 Observations and Findings  
Mr. Speaker sir, the observations and the findings are as follows:  
2.1 The advertisement which appeared  in the aforementioned  print media required that any 
member of the public to submit memoranda on the s uitability or otherwise of the N ominee 
for position of CEC Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works. No memoranda was 
received by the Clerk for submissi on to the Committee.  
2.2 The N ominee Mr. Tawfiq  Salim Mohamed Balala, has exemplary educational achievements. 
He holds a Bachelors of Science from the United States International University. He thus 
meets the educational threshold as provided in section 35(3)  b of the County Government 
Act. He presented the following certificates/testimonials to the Committee:  
Educational Background:   
       Bsc. (International Business Administration)  United States Intern . Univ ., Nairobi
 2009  
1. Diploma (Sales and Marketing)
 KMT C 1993  
2. Braeburn High School  1986  
3. Upper Hill Sec. School  1985  
4. Kilimani Primary School  1977  
5. Mombasa Primary School  1978  
6. Kilimani Primary School  1977  
 
Other Courses:  
1. Strategic Management and Strategic Planning  
2. Drafting of Performance Contract  
3. Board Functions  
2.3 The N ominee has wide knowledge and experience of transport and infrastructure as he has 
held the portfolio and has exhibited exemplary performance. In his tenure, he has been able 
to oversee the construction of 50km of roads, installation of 4,000 street l ights, building of 
storm water drainage within the CBD to alleviate flooding during rainy seasons, Cabro  
paving at Jomo Kenyatta Public Beach amongst other achievements.  
2.4 The N ominee confirmed that he has not been adversely mentioned in matters of corruptio n 
and henc e he meets the requirements of C hapter six of the Constitution. He presented a 
certificate from the Ethics and Anti -Corruption Commission.  Other relevant documents 
submitted are Mr.  Speaker;  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 6  Identity Card  
 Curriculum Vitae/ Personal credentials/ Academic certificates  
 Compliance Certificate from Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA)  
 Clearance Certificate from the Higher Education Loans Board (HELB)  
 Certificate of Good Conduct from Criminal Investigation Department (CID)  
3.0 Conclusion  
The Committee conducted the vetting exercise and was satisfied with the knowledge, 
experience and capacity of Mr. Tawfiq Salim Mohamed Balala, to handle the position of County 
Executive Member for Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works in the County government of 
Mombasa and therefore suitable for appointment to the position. The Committee held a meeting 
on the 8th November , 2017 and adopted this report.  
4.0 Recommendations  
Mr. Speaker sir , that this report containing the Committee’s observations, findings, 
conclusions and rec ommendations on the vetting o f Tawfiq Salim Mohamed Balala, N ominee 
for the position of County Executive Member for Transport, Infrastructure and Public Works in 
the County government of Mombasa be adopted  by this H onorable Assembly.  
Mr. Speak er Sir, I be g to move that the H on. Members of this Assembly do adopt this 
report. Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  
(Hon. Amur tabled)  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur, Hon . Members I  now propose the 
question, the M otion on adoption of report on the vetting of  CEC Transport, I nfrastructure and 
Public Works N ominee Mr. Tawfiq Mohamed  Balala be debated?  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
…yes Hon . Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Than k you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I think Balala this is not 
his first time to be in th e docket so I think without any problem I support , thank you.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon. M ember Aran, anything to contribute 
on that.  
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker sir I would also want to second that because Mr. Balala with 
the vast knowledg e he has and having served for the past fi ve years I know this Honorable H ouse 
knows him well and believes in him and we know he will take the docket that is to be given to 
another level , so Mr. Speaker sir I do second and support the report.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you . Yes Hon . Abrari.  
Hon. Abrari:  I support because I know Mr. Balala has been in this field for a very long 
time and I know him personally and I have worked with him personally and I support him.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you H on. Abrari. Honorable M embers I now call 
upon the mover who is Hon. Amur to reply.  
Hon. Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker sir.  Mr. Speaker sir as the Honorable Members 
have clearly stated when he cam e in Mr. Balala this C ounty had only about maybe ten kilometers  
of roads that were done but in his tenure we have seen over 50 kilometers of road has been done, 
Cabro  paving of the feeder roads has been done. Mr. Speaker all those originated from his vision 
so I believe if he’s give n another chance to serve this Count y Mr. Speaker this C ounty will be 
heading somewhere to international stadiums maybe . I want to thank M embers for c ontributing 
and supporting the C ommittee for adopting the report so that he can officially be sworn in and 
that Mombasa can start working agai n thank you , Mr. Speaker . 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 7 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur, I now put the question that this 
house adopts the report on the vetting of CEC Transport;  Infrastructure and Public Work s 
Nominee Mr. Tawfiq Mohamed  Balala is debated …  
(Question put  and agreed ) 
Yes Clerk.  
MOTION  
Yes again Hon . Amur.  
Hon. Amur:  Mr. Spea ker sir again I want to move a M otion for the purpose of reportin g 
back to the County A ssembly on the vetting o f one Kevin Munyoki Kyalo as a Member of 
Youth, Gender , Sports and Cultura l Affairs . Mr. Speaker sir, I ask my brother Hon. Hatimy to 
second Mr. Speaker.  
(Hon. Mohamed Hatimy bowed)  
Hon. Amur:  Mr. Speaker sir I want to st art by saying that M embers should not get tired 
of hearin g my voice because some of the Committee M embers hav e travelled on other issue to  
Nairobi so some of the M embers who are back maybe to read two or three reports so that we can 
clear them . So Mr. Speaker again I have been given the privilege to re ad the report on behalf of 
the Committee for the Nominee M ember Mr. Kevin Munyoki Kyalo.  
Mr. Speaker sir I mentioned in the earlier report as provided for in Standing Order 185(4) 
the mandate of the Committee in this regard is to  consider,  for approval  by the County  Assembly,  
appointments under  Articles  179(2)  (Memb ers of County  Executive  Committees ).  
1.0 Introduction  
Mr. Speaker Sir, and the Hon. Members of the County Assembly, it is with great pleasure 
to presen t the report on the vetting of N ominee for the position of County Executive Committee 
Member – Youth, S ports, Gender and Cultural Affairs, Mr. Kevin Munyoki Kyalo.  
Pursuant to Section 35 of the County Governments Act, His Excellency the Governor 
nominated Mr. Kevin Munyoki Kyalo for the position of County Executive Member for Youth, 
Sports, Gender and Cult ural Affairs in the County government Mombasa vide a letter addressed 
to the County Assembly Clerk dated 22nd September, 2017 reference number Msa 
CG/APP/CECM/1/117.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, the notification of nomination was communicated to the Assembly by 
Hon. Speaker on the 18th October , 2017 at 2 :30p.m. during the 16th Sitting. The Speaker then 
committed the  notification from His Excellency the Governor to the Committee on 
Appointments for approval hearing in accordance with section 7(1) of the Public Appointm ents 
(County Assemblies Approval) Act 2017 and Standing Orders 42 (2).  
Mr. Speaker Sir, in accordance with section 7(2) of the Public Appointments (County 
Assemblies Approval) Act , 2017 and Standing Order 42(3), the Committee through a press 
advertisement  appearing on Thursday 25th October , 2017 in the Sta r and Standard Newspapers, 
the N ominee and the public were informed of the approval hearing and the public was invited to 
send written memoranda to the Clerk on the suitability of the nominee.  
Mr. Speake r Sir, the vetting  exercise was conducted by the C ommittee on Thursday 2nd 
November , 2017 from 10: 00a.m at Royal Court Hotel.  
Mr. Speaker Sir, let me now present the Committee on Appointment report for 
consideration by the House.  
2.0 Observations and Find ings 
Mr. Speaker sir, the observations and the findings are as follows:  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 8 2.5 The advertisement which appeared in the aforementioned print media required that any 
member of the public to submit memoranda on the s uitability or otherwise of the N ominee 
for positio n of CEC Youth, Sports, Gender and Cultural Affairs. No memoranda were 
received by the Clerk for submission to the Committee.  
2.6 The N ominee Mr. Kevin Munyoki Kyalo, has exemplary educat ional achievements. He holds 
a Bachelor of Arts Degree (Economics) from Kenyatta University, a Master’s degree in 
Economics (Finance) from Kenyatta University and is currently pursuing PHD in Economics 
at the Kenyatta University. He thus meets the educational threshold which as provided in 
section 35(3) b of the County Governm ents Act. He presented the following 
certificates/testimonials to the Committee:  
2.0 Observations and Findings  
Mr. Speaker sir, the observations and the findings are as follows:  
2.1 The advertisement which appeared in the aforementioned print media require d that any 
member of the public to submit memoranda on the s uitability or otherwise of the N ominee for 
position of CEC Youth, Sports, Gender and Cultural Affairs. No memoranda were received by 
the Clerk for submission to the Committee.  
2.2 The N ominee Mr.  Kevin Munyoki Kyalo, has exemplary educat ional achievements. He holds 
a Bachelor of Arts Degree (Economics) from Kenyatta University, a Masters degree in 
Economics  (Finance) from Kenyatta University , and is currently pursuing PHD in Economics at 
the Kenya tta University. He thus meets the educational threshold which as provided in section 
35(3) b of the County Governments Act. He presented the following certificates/testimonials to 
the Committee;  
2.3 The nominee has knowledge of Youth, Gender and Sports as Economics crosscuts all fields. 
His focus is on human development which involves empowering people. He has been a 
Researcher, Lecturer and Chief of Staff at the Office of the Governor, Mombasa County 
Government where he has exhibited exemplary performan ce and was able to sharpen his 
interpersonal Skills. He is committed to ensure that the Youth, Women and Persons with 
Disability access 30 percent of all procurements as required by law and where possible, link 
them to institutions which can provide them with  capital. He will achieve this by creating a data 
base o f the groups to as to be able to timely identify opportunities as they arise and link this 
category of persons. If successful, he assured the Committee that he will ensure that revolving 
Fund for the youth is realized.  
2.4 The N ominee confirmed that he has not been adversely mentioned in matters of corruption 
and henc e he meets the requirements of C hapter six of the Constitution. He presented a 
certificate from the Ethics and Anticorruption Commission.  Other relevant documents submitted 
are; 
 Identity Card  
 Curriculum Vitae/ Personal credentials/ academic certificates  
 Compliance Certificate from Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA)  
 Clearance Certificate from the Higher Education Loans Board (HELB)  
 Certificate of  Good Conduct from Criminal Investigation Department (CID)  
   3.0  Conclusion  
The Committee conducted the vetting exercise and was satisfied with the knowledge, 
experience and capacity of Mr. Kevin Munyoki to handle the position of County Executive 
Member for Youth, Sports, Gender and Cultural Affairs in the County government of Mombasa .  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 9 He is  therefore suitable for appointment to the position. The Committee held a meeting 
on the 8th November , 2017 and adopted this report.  
4.0 Recommendations  
That this rep ort containing the Committee’s observations, findings, conclusions and 
recommendations on the vetting of Kevin Munyoki Kyalo , Nominee for the position of County 
Executive Member for Youth, Sports, Gender and Cultural Affairs in the County government of 
Mom basa be adopted  by this Honorable  Assembly.  
Mr. Speak er Sir, I beg to move that the H onorable Members of this Assembly do adopt 
this report.  
 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Murfad I now propose the question that the 
Motion on adoption of report  on the vetting of CEC Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs 
nominee Mr. Kelvin Munyoki Kyalo be debated?  
(Que stion proposed and agreed t o) 
....Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker I think we all know Mr. 
Kyalo, he is a person who I am sure that he will not let down our Government or people of 
Mombasa. So I do hereby support and I request Members or all Members to support Mr. Kyalo  
so that we can give him a chance to serve this County a second time. Thank you Mr. Sp eaker . 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Kitula . 
Chief Whip  (Hon. Kitula ): Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika kwanza ningependa kuweza 
kuweka sauti yangu katika Bunge hili iweze kunukuliwa kwamba Kelvin Munyoki Kyalo 
kusema kweli ameweza kuhudumu k atika ofisi ya Gavana kuhudumu kwa wafanyi  kazi na vile 
vile mimi nikihudumu katika idara ya mawasiliano katika afisi ya Gavana niliweza kumjua Mr. 
Kelvin Munyoki Kyalo akiwa ni mkakamavu na kusema kweli ni kijana kwa hio katika kitengo 
hichi cha masuala y a vijana, michezo, jinsia na masuala ya utamaduni kusema kweli Bwana 
Kelvin Munyoki Kyalo imeweza kumfaa katika kazi hii . Na vile vile katika ofisi ya Gavana  
alikuwa anaweza kuhudumia watu pasi kuwabagua umri wao, pasi kuwabagua kama ni 
walemavu au unyonge  au wasiojiweza.  
Kwa hio kulingana na mimi na ninavyomjua Bwana Kelvin Munyoki Kyalo kusema 
kweli idara hii imemfaa kabisa na ni wajibu wetu kuweza kumpatia fursa hii ili tuweze kuangalia 
kama kweli ataweza kutimiza kuling ana na ruwaza ya 2035. Ahsante s ana Mheshimiwa Spika 
naunga mkono kuteuliwa kwake.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you , yes Hon. Ramla . 
Hon. Ramla  Said : Mheshimiwa Spika mimi naunga mkono kuhusu Bwana Kelvin 
Kyalo, binafsi nishafanya kazi naye kwa mambo ya walemavu na ni mtu ambaye anah amu na 
kazi yake, ana bidii na natumai akipewa nafasi atafanya kazi nzuri. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Aran . 
Hon. Oindo : Mr. Speaker Sir as a y outh Representative of Mombasa County al so the 
Chairman Youth, Gender, S port and cult ural affairs, I have worked with one Mr. Kelvin and I 
want to thank the Committee and also I want to thank our Excellency Hon. Hassan Ali Joho for 
nominating Mr. Kelvin. I know with the zeal Kelvin has he is going to move mountains and I 
promise you Member s especially the Committee of Youth, Gender, Sports and Cultural Affairs 
we are going to enjoy working with Mr. Kelvin because is one person who is ready to listen. So I 
urge this Hon. House please  let's support Kelvin so that we can move much higher. Than k you 
Mr. Speaker Sir.  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
10 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Mwaka.  
Hon. (Ms.) Mwaka Bakari:  Ahsante Bwana Spika mimi kama Mheshimiwa mama 
Mwaka napenda kumpongeza Mheshimiwa Gavana wetu Hassan Ali Joho kumpa nafasi hii 
Kelvin Kyalo kuendesha huu wadhifa wa vijana, jinsia na michezo , ni kijana yeye na mimi kama 
Mheshimiwa mama Mwaka ni mama. Naomba nafasi hii tumpatie aweze kutusaidia vijana na 
kina mama. Ahsante.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, Yes Hon. Fatma .  
Hon. (Ms.) Fatuma Swaleh:  Ahsa nte sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwanza nashukuru kwa kuweza kunipa fursa hii. Mimi pia vile vile naunga mkono kwa kuweza 
kuteuliwa Bwana Kyalo. Mheshimiwa Spika ningeomba kuzun gumza mambo mawili tu kwa 
ufupi; k wanza kabisa Mheshimiwa Spika tuna muangalia huyu Kyalo ni mtu wa aina gani? 
Mheshimiwa Spika kama sijak osea Kyalo ni mkaazi wa Mombasa, l a pili Mheshimiwa Spika 
kwa wale ambao wanafikira zao potofu na chafu; kwanza ningependa kumpongeza Mheshimiwa 
Gavana kuweza kumchagua Kyalo kwa sababu k una tetesi kwamba kulitokezea maneno kwamba 
watu wengine wanasema kwamba kama aliyezungumza juzi kama sijakosea Mwashetani yeye 
atabakia kuwa Mwashetani tu kwamba Gavana alisema kwamba watu wanataka Jimbo lao. Kwa 
hio nataka kusema kwamba Kyalo ni mkaazi w a Mombasa na vile vile pia Gavana ameona 
kwamba Mombasa si ya wale ambao wanavaa mabuibui pekee yake, mtu yeyote hata kama ni 
mbara, yeye bora awe yuwaishi Mombasa ni mtu wa Mombasa.  
Kwa hio Kyalo ni kijana mdogo na hii idara Mheshimiwa Spika inamfaa sana , mimi nina 
hakika mia fil mia Bwana Kyalo ataweza kuhudumia vijana vizuri na vile vile ataweza 
kuhudumia na kina mama vizuri. Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri Kyalo ameweza kufanya kazi 
katika Jimbo letu la Mombasa na akiwa na heshima ya hali ya juu. Kando ya ha yo Mheshimiwa 
Spika Bwana Kyalo alikuwa ni mtu wa tajriba ya hali ya juu vile vile ni mtu ambaye hana 
dharau. Kwa hio Mheshimiwa Spika mimi sina tashwishi ndani ya moyo wangu kwamba 
Mheshimiwa Kyalo hii idara inamfaa sana. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Thank you, Yes Hon. Hatimy . 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika ahsante  nasimama chini ya Kanuni za 
Bunge  nambari 78 (2a) ... 
(Interruption ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Sorry S tanding order number 78?  
Hon.  Mohamed  Hatimy:  2(a), k wa sababu tayari Mheshimiwa Spika nilikuwa 
nishazungumza kwa hio nilikuwa naomba ruhusa yako uniruhusu nizungumze mara ya pili ili 
kuna taarifa moja tu nataka kupeana kwenye Nyumba hii ili sote tupate kujua juu ya huyu 
Mheshimiwa tunayemuongelea.  
Mr. Spea ker (Hon. Khatri) : Yes. 
Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka kusema huyu amepatiwa idara ya 
vijana na pia tulipokuwa tunam kagua  tuliona katika stakabadhi zake kuwa yeye Kyalo alikuwa 
amezaliwa 1987 tarehe yake ya kuzaliwa. Kwa hi o yuko mahali sawa kabisa, Mheshimiwa Spika 
yuko pahala ambapo panamfaa kabisa, y eye kuwa ni kijana na hii idara ya vijana amepatiwa, 
nina imani kuwa ataweza kuipeleka hii Wizara kwa  njia ile inayotakikana. Kwa hi o Mheshimiwa 
Spika naomba tena waheshimiwa tukubaliane kupitis ha Kyalo ili apate kuhudumia Kaunti yetu 
ya Mombasa. Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members I now call upon the mover of the 
Motion Hon . Amur to reply.  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
11  Hon. Amur:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker the mood from t he floor you have 
seen this Assembly has got many youth s and the y are in support of Mr. Kyalo. Mr. Speaker not 
only that I want to emphasise the issue of that His Excellency the Governor of Mombasa and His 
Excellency of Kilifi these two Governors bear in m ind that in the c onstitution of their Executive 
Members they included young people of age within the bracket of youth s. Mr. Speaker It is only 
Mombasa and Kilifi so far that has accommodate d according to the constitution, s o I want to 
thank the Hon. Member s for seeing that His Excellency the Governor has given the docket to the 
proper person who is within the bracket of youth and the youth now it is upon them to go and 
meet him and make him work as a youth. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Amur, I now put the question that this 
House adopt the report on vetting of CEC youth, Gende r, Sports and Cultural Affairs N ominee 
Mr. Kelvin Munyoki Kyalo . 
(Question p ut and agreed to) 
...Yes Clerk?  
MOTION  
Yes Hon. Amur again it's you?  
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir again, Mr. Speaker Sir I want to thank my 
Committee for having given me a good opportunity to present the report to the House. Mr. 
Speaker Sir, again I want to move the Motion in regards to this County Assembly to adopt th e 
report on the vetting of Mr. Geoffrey Nyongesa  Nato , Nominee for County Executive Member of 
Environment, Waste Management and Energy Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker sir I call upon my 
colleague Hon. Amriya to second Mr. Speaker. Thank you.  
Hon. (Ms.) Amriya  Jum a: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I second it.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Amriya. Hon. Members, yes Hon. Amur?  
Hon. Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker again, Mr. Speaker Sir I want to start by saying the 
Committee has given me the privilege of tabling these three reports, I want to thank them for the 
confidence they have for me. 
Mr. Speaker sir the mandates of the Committee on Appointment, Rules and Procedures 
was appointed by the County Assembly to handle and oversee matters of appointment of the 
County Ex ecutive Committee Members and the House rules and procedures.  
Mr. Speaker Sir I want to go through the Members of the Committee again for the purpose of 
record ing by the Hansard Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker Sir the Chair is Hon. Aharub Ebrahim Khatri, Vice Ch air Hon. Hamisi Musa 
Mwidani, Hon. Amriya Boy Member, Hon. Fadhili Mwalimu Member, Hon. Kibwana Swaleh 
Member, Hon, Mohamed Hatimy Memb er and Hon. Amur that is myself, those are the Members 
of the C ommittee.  
Mr. Speaker Sir the C ommitt ee staff  also were l ed by Mr. Salim Juma , County A ssembly 
Clerk, Dorothy Auma Director Legislative, Procedure and Committee Services, Salma Maro 
Principal Hansard Editor, Kassim Umeya Principal Sergeant -At-Arms, Abdallah Khamis Senior 
Clerk Assistant Mr. Speaker Sir.   
 
Mr. S peaker Sir the report has three contents: - First is introduction, two observation and 
findings recommendation and lastly Mr. Speaker the minutes of the proceedings of the 
Committee meeting that was held on 8th November , 2017. Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon. Membe rs of 
the County Assembly it is with great pleasure again to table the report on vetting of Mr. Geoffrey 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
12 Nyongesa Na to, His Excellency the Governor’s Nominee for the position of the County 
Executive Member for Environment, Waste Management and Energy in ou r County Government 
of Mombasa. Mr. Speaker Sir the N ominee was nominated by His Excellency the Governor 
writing his letter to the Hon. Speaker dated 22nd September , 2017; write with Ref. Mombasa 
CG/APP/CECM/1/117…    
1. Introduction  
Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon . Members of the County Assembly, it is with great pleasure to 
table the report on the vetting of Mr. Godfrey Nyongesa Nato, the His Excellency the Governor’s 
Nominee for the position of County Executive Member for Environment,  Waste Management 
and Energy in  our County Government of Mombasa.  
The Nominee was nominated by His Excellency, the Governor vide his letter to Hon . Mr. 
Speaker dated 22nd September 2017 vide Ref.  Msa CG/APP/CECM/1/117.      
Pursuant to section 7(1) of the Public Appointments (County Asse mblies Approval)Act,  
2017,  section 42 (2) of the County Governments Act,  2012(Revised 2016) and Standing Orders 
42 and 185(4), the nomination stood committed to the Committee on Appointments/Rules and 
Procedures of this Honorable  County a ssembly.  
Through a  press advertisement appearing in The Standard  and The Star  Newspaper on 
Wednesday,  25th October 2017  and the County A ssembly website, the N ominee and the public 
were informed of the vetting and the public was invited to send written memoranda on the 
suitability or otherwise of the N ominee. The Nominee had already been informed of the matter a 
few days earlier.  
The vetting exercise  was conducted by the C ommittee on Thursday,  2nd November , 2017  from 
11:00 a.m at the Royal Court Hotel, Mombasa.  
This report pr ovides the findings and recommendations on the suitability for appo intment 
to the position of the N ominee for consideration by this August H ouse and approval of the same.  
Mr. Speaker Sir and Hon . Members of the County Assembly  let me now present the Commit tee 
on Appointment’s report for consideration by the house.       
2. Observations and Findings  
2.1 The Committee on Appointments is mandated under Standing orders 42(2) and 185(4) to 
hold approval hearings a nd make recommendations to the C ounty Assembly for 
appoi ntment of Members to the County Executive C ommittee.  
2.2 The Committee did not receive any adverse reports, presentations or complaints for or 
against the appointment of Mr. Godfrey Nyongesa Nato for the position of County 
Executive Member for Environment, Was te Management and Energy in the County 
Government of Mombasa.  
2.3 The Nominee being vetted answered all written and oral questions that were asked by the 
Committee satisfactorily. These questions include those provide for in the First Schedule of 
the Public Ap pointments (County Assemblies) Approval Act,  2017.  
2.4 The Committee asked the N ominee on meaning and his understanding of integrity  and was 
able to satisfactorily expound on the same and that he had never been adversely mentioned 
in matters of corruption.  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
13 2.5 The Committee was impressed by the  Nominee’s educational achievements and wide 
experience serving in various senior positions in the public and private sector.  
2.6 Mr. Godfrey Nyongesa Nato  (Born on 13th November , 1975),  the N ominee for the position 
presented the  following certificates/testimonials to the Committee:  
 
Educational Background:  
7. Bsc (Natural Resource Management)
 Egerton University  2000  
8. MSc (Natural Resource 
Management)  Egerton University  2002  
9. PhD in Sociology  Pwani 
University  2017  
 
Other Courses/Certif icates:  
 
4. Training of Trainers in Competency Based Education and Training (WOGECT,  2016)  
5. Community Based Adaptation to Climate Change  (KWSTI,  Naivasha 2010)  
6. Project and Financial Management  (TITC,  Japan,  2009)  
7. Participatory Rural Appraisal  (Egerton Universi ty, 2001)  
8. Gender Analysis , Planning and Development,1999  
 
Public Offices Held:  
9. April , 2016 to date – Ag. Dean, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Technical 
University of Mombasa.  
10. August , 2012 to May , 2015 – Chairman, Department of Social Sciences, T echnical 
University of Mombasa.  
11. January , 2012 to date – Assistant Lecturer, Technical University of Mombasa.  
12. November , 2003 to September , 2004 – Research Assistant, Kenya Anti -Corruption 
Commission  
2.7 That having considered the credentials, suitability,  capac ity and integrity of the N ominee, 
and pursuant to section 9 of the Public Appointments (County Assemblies Approval)  Act, 
2017, section 35(2) and (3) of the County Governments Act,  2012 and Standing Orders 42 
and 185(4),  the Committee at its meeting held on  8th November , 2017 at the Mombasa 
County Assembly Buildings at 10 :00 a.m resolved to recommend that the County Assembly 
approves the appointment by His Excellency the Governor of Mr. Godfrey Nyongesa Nato, 
to the position of County Executive Member for En vironment, Waste Management and 
Energy in the County Government of Mombasa.  
3. Conclusions  
3.1 The Committee conducted the vetting exercise as per the law and was satisfied with the 
credentials, experience and capacity of Godfrey Nyongesa Nato , Nominee for the po sition 
of County Executive Member for Environment, Waste Management and Energy in the 
County Government of Mombasa and therefore recommended him for appointment to the 
position.  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
14 4. Recommendations  
4.1 Mr. Speaker Sir, I beg to move that the Hon. Members of this A ssembly do adopt this 
report.  
Signed:  
 
Hon.  Aharub Ebrahim Khatri  
Chairman – Committee on Appointments/Rules and Procedures  
Dated this Wednesday, 8th of November , 2017  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Hon. Members I now propose the question that the M otion on 
adoption of the report for the CEC Environment , Waste Management,  Energy N ominee Dr. 
Geoffrey Nyongesa Nato to be debated .  
(Question proposed and agreed to ) 
Yes Hon . Amriya , anything to contribute.  
Hon. (Ms.) Amriya Juma : Thank you Mr. Speaker , I wish to ma ke my contribution on 
the approval of Mr. Geoffrey Nato to the department of Environment , Waste Management,  
Energy . Mr. Speaker it is common knowledge that Mr.  Nato is relatively new to most of the 
Members in this A ssembly however having said that I happen  to be privile ged to be one of the 
Members of the Appointments C ommittee and I would like to submit to this floor that I was very 
impressed by the educational background of Mr. Nato . As you have heard Hon . Amur mention ed 
that he has a Bachelor’s degree in Natural R esources M anagement and a Masters degree on the 
same fro m Egerton and further a PHD in S ociology ; that is in tandem with section 35 of the 
County Government  Act. Apart from that Mr. Speaker I am happy to report that Mr. Nato has 
excellent interper sonal skills , I think it is based on the fact that he has done a PHD in Sociology,  
just f rom the first meeting with the N ominee I could tell that he is a very ambitio us man and we 
realize from the G overnor ’s speech that environment and energy was one of th e agenda for 
transformative agenda that  will be undertaken so that we realize the Mombasa vision 2035 . So it 
is my humble opinion that Mr. Nato is fit for the posi tion and I wish to applaud the G overnor for 
the selection of Mr. Nato.  Thank you so much Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . Amriya.  
            Hon. (Ms.) Amriya Juma : And sorry Mr.  Speaker I would like to appreciate that the 
right to environment is on e of the fundamental rights in A rticle 43 in the Bill of R ights. Thank 
you. 
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank y ou. Yes Hon . Junior.  
            Hon. Kyaka : Ahsante Bwana S pika mimi ningependa kuunga mkono Bwana Nyongesa,  
atatatua matatizo mengi ya takataka na jamaa tumesikia  elimu yake inaonyesha anaweza 
kutusaidia katik a mambo ya mazingira , hilo ni jambo ambalo  linatufurahisha sana na K amati 
iliomhoji ilisema ni mtu ambaye anaweza kufanya hii kazi , mimi n aomba kuunga mkono. 
Ahsante.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank y ou. Yes  Hon. Mwamwiri?  
            Hon. Mwa mwiri:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa fursa hii  binafsi ningependa 
kumpongeza Bwana N ato kwa kukubali wadhifa huu tukizingatia kwenye K aunti ya Mombasa 
kama kuna kitengo chenye changamoto zaidi ni kitengo  ambacho Bwana N ato binafsi ameitikia 
kuchukua dhamana ; usimamizi wa maswala ya taka,  mazingira na maswala ya nguvu za umeme . 
Kwa hi o tuna imani kwa ku kubali kwake ya kwamba yuko tayari kukabiliana  na changamoto 
hizo kwa sababu ninavyo amini  mimi binafsi nilivyo shughuli isiyo na changamoto  siwezi 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
15 isongea , kwa hio yeye kuchukua dhamana na kukubali changamoto ni kwamba anaweza pasi 
kuzingatia na tajriba yake na masomo kukubali tu kuchukua nafasi hiyo  ni swala muhimu na 
binafsi na W aheshimiwa wengine  naomba tumuunge mkono . Ahsant e Mheshimiwa S pika.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Honorable.  Hon.  Mary?  
            Hon. (Ms.) Wafula : Nikiweza kuongezea sauti yangu,  mwanzo ningependa kumshukuru 
Gavana  wetu mpendwa A li Hassan Joho kwa kuweza kuzingatia lile swala la utangamano wa 
kitaifa maana amewe za kuchagua katika uchaguzi wake kuhusisha makabila yote ambayo yako 
katika taifa letu la Kenya , kwa hilo ninampongeza . La pili tayari B wana Nato  ni mazuri matamu 
yameon gelewa kumhusu ; kama vile masomo yake na hata pia umri wake maana jambo la taka 
linatak a mtu umri wake umesonga kidogo kama huu wa Bwana Nato licha ya taj riba yake kwa 
hio mimi ninaridhika ya kwamba ataifanya hii kazi kwa uadilifu.  Kwa  hayo machache , ahsante.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon . yes Shebe?  
            Hon. S hebe Salim : Ahsante sana Bwana S pika naona maumbile yangu ya twiga 
yananisaliti k uweza kujipinda hapa . Mheshimiwa S pika kwanza nichukue fursa hii kumshukuru 
Mungu , pili napenda kusema undugu ni wa kufaana sio wa kufanana . Napenda kuwashukuru 
Waheshi miwa wenzangu  wote waliosimama na mimi kwa msiba ulionipata takriban juma moja 
lililopita,  ahsante ni mumenitia imani na nawaombea Mungu  In shaa Allah. Mheshimiwa  Spika 
sina budi kuunga  mkono kuteuliwa kwa B wana Nyongesa  kama W aziri wa mazingira ; hivi viatu 
kwa ha kika n i vikubwa mithili ya viatu vya M aswahaba , vile kwa saba bu jukumu la taka na 
mazingira K aunti ya Mombasa ni nyeti sana . Mimi nikizungumza kama M wenyekiti wa Kamati  
ya mazingira,  swala z a stakabadhi za masomo tunaona Bwana N yongesa yuko sawa , kwa hio 
mimi sina budi kumpatia fursa na nina imani kuwa nitafanya na yeye kazi tuweze kushirikiana 
kuweza kusafisha mji wetu kwa sababu changamoto za mazingira ni nyingi . Kwa hio mimi 
naunga mkono kuchaguliwa kwake na nina imani itakuwa si ofisini peke yake itakuw a awe 
tayari kuvaa gumboots  na gloves  kuingia mashinani kuweza kusafisha mji wetu . Ahsante sana 
Mheshimiwa S pika naunga mkono kuteuliwa kwake.  
            Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes thank y ou. Yes Oyugi Omondi.  
            Hon. Omondi : Thank you Mr.  Speaker . I am very pleased that you have used that name 
for the first time , I would also lik e to contribute as far as this M otion is concerned and I have 
been  listening keenly to my fellow M embers as they contribute towards this M otion and I want 
to give my full support for the appointment of Mr. Geoffrey Nyongesa Nato in that particular 
position of Environment,  waste management and energy . I want to rely on the following 
indicators ; one I want to rely on education , you know very well that in our country educ ation is 
one of the indicators which tests the ability , the knowledge , skills and even the knowhow of an 
individual and once the education body is satisfied with Mr.  Nato then who are we to oppose that 
he is qualified for that position .  
           Number two, I want also to ratify his appointment by his Excellency the Governor based 
on the Governor himself. The Governor himself having now taken through this County for the 
second time we saw him the first term the way he did the contribution he made and the  way he 
moved this County a great deal, he is the same Governor who has appointed this individual to 
that position, so we don't have doubt about that. Number three i want to also applaud to have 
appointed the same individual this position, being a represen tative of Airport Ward Changamwe 
sub County that is where all waste is dumped in the County and i know very well this individual 
will do us best to remove the wastes that are scattered all over in our Wards, my Ward 
particularly. Otherwise finally it is th e constitutional mandate and even the obligation of this 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
16 House to ensure that we debate and we pass or we refuse the appointment from executive. As an 
individual, as my constitutional mandate i do ratify and agree that those individuals can do us 
good in t hat particular sector, thank you very much.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Omondi, the famous Bomoa , yes Hon. 
Murfad.  
 
 Hon.  Amur : Thank you Mr. Speaker i  want to confirm to this House that with a 
background of Mr. Nyongesa of Bachelors of Scie nce, Masters in Science, PHD in Sociology we 
are blessed with a person who knows waste management issues and we hope that if appointed 
today and sworn in by his Excellency the Governor then the issue of waste problem will be 
something of hearsay in Mombasa . I want to confirm to this House His Excellency the Governor 
this time in choosing all the nominees of departmental heads he considered people with vast 
experience and education background, for that I want to ask the Hon. Members to adopt this 
Report so t hat we can send back a Report with his Excellency the Governor so that they can be 
sworn in as quickly as possible so that they can take offices and Mombasa can move forward, 
thank you .  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Than you Hon. Amur. Hon. Members anyone w ho wants to 
contribute on this? Hon. Members I now call upon the mover Hon. Amur to reply.  
 Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker all the papers have been laid in the Assembly.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Now i put the question that this House adopts the Report on 
vetting of CEC Environment, waste management and energy nominee Dr. Geoffrey Nyongesa 
Natto...  
(Question put and agreed to)  
 Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Thank you Mr. Speaker, for the convenience of this House, i 
stand here to seek leave under Stand ing order 37(2) to change the sequence of the proceedings to 
move to the following Motion that this House adopts the Report of Appointments Committee on 
vetting laid on the table of the House on 9th October, 2017, vetting of Edward Nzila Nyale, Hazel 
Koita ba, Fatma Awale, Mariam Abdillahi and Mtalaki Mwashimba. Thank you , Mr. Speaker.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Amur are you seconding?   
 Hon. Amur : I second Hon. Hatimy since each and every Member has the Report with 
him they have gone through so fo r us to go through again from a to z, so I second it.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Hatimy you can go ahead.  
 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy:  Mheshimiwa Spika nafikiri sheria inaturuhusu kwa sababu 
Ripoti kila mtu yuko nazo na kama tunavyojua kuwa s asa imefika saa kumi na robo naomba 
Nyumba hii na Wanachama wakubaliane na mimi sheria inaturuhusu kubadilisha sequence  ya 
mfumo tunaenda nao tupitishe hawa waliobaki wote kwa mara moja, ahsante sana Mheshimiwa 
Spika.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Members i now propose a question that the 
Motion by Hon. Mohamed Hatimy to debate and adopt the vetting of Reports of nominees of the 
County Executive Committees tabled in this House today 9th November, 2017 be debated in the 
same term as moved.  
(Que stion proposed and agreed to)  
 Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
17 Hon.  Mohamed Hatimy: Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika kwa kunipatia nafasi hii na 
kukubali ni iweke hoja  hii, naomba Wanachama  waniunge mkono kupitisha hii hoja ili tuweze 
kwenda kuangalia mambo mengine . Kama unavyo jua wale wanaotoka Changamwe wana  shida 
kubwa sana ya kufika Changamwe na pia Mheshimiwa Spika ilikuwa Wanachama  wame pitia 
hizi Ripoti  na wanazo vile  vile na sidhani kama kuna mtu yoyote amepinga kwenye wale 
tulioweza kuwasoma na kwa hio kwa hawa wengine w aliobaki itaenda vile  vile kwa hi o naomba 
turuhusu tupitishe haya majina na tuendelee mbele, a hsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, y es Hon.  Oyugi . 
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr.  Speaker i stand firmly to support the Motion  by Hon. 
Hatimy, this House has been privileged to have almost all the Members  who are academic guru s 
and th ese R eports that you have been given we have gone through extensively and we have 
understood what is in, it will be a waste of time for us to be repeatin g again since we already 
know what is in the R eport so ... 
(Interruption)  
 Hon.  Amur : (Off Mic).   
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Oyugi you can withdraw that 
statement saying wasting of time.  
 Hon.  Omondi:  Okay i withdraw, that is not what i  meant actually i just wanted to 
emphasize  on the issue of trying to shorten, what i was saying is that we need to take the shortest 
time to be able to deliver the best thing you can take a very long time but at the end of it all you 
deliver, actually it i s not the best so i want to say that am supporting the Motion that we do agree 
at once that this particular Motion is good for us so that we can move ahead, thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Faith.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Boniface :  Thank you Mr. Speaker for this opportunity, i beg to support the 
Motion except the one for Edward Nyale because according to his education background and the 
experience I have not seen anywhere concerning the docket which he has been appointed for; 
that is Lands, Pl anning and Housing. In his education he has Bachelor of Education, CPA that is 
accounts, and according to the work experience there is nowhere talking about anything about 
lands and housing so i support the remaining there but i oppose the one for Edward N zila Nyale.  
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) :  Hon. Faith I think the Motion is very clear saying to pass all of 
them, so you cannot support the other three; its either you support all of them or you don't 
support because the Motion is very clear and if you look at Standing order 103 the Speaker or 
Chairperson of Committees after having called attention to the conduct of a Member who persist 
in irrelevance or tedious reputation of either the Members on argument or the argument used by 
other Members in debate after  having first warned him or had directed the Members discontinue 
his or her speech so it's either you support this debate all of it or you don't.   
 Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker with all due respect my Hon. colleague if she had an issue she 
could have brought it to the Committee when the vetting was taking place but at this stage it is 
not acceptable because ample time was given to Members and public to raise queries and issues 
of nominees not at this juncture, if there was any then she could have submitted in wri tten or oral 
document to the Committee subjecting the nominee but not at this stage. Thank you Mr. Speaker, 
even if we go at voting then the best way will be voting, thank you Mr. Speaker . Hon. Speaker:  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Nyir o. 
 Hon.  Mwaega : Thank you Mr. Speaker i just want to bring to attention to the Hon. 
Member of the just discussed and approved appointment of the Members of Transport if you go 
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
18 through his educational background he is a business administrator, a sales and a marketer he is 
not an engineer and he is heading the infrastructure and public works so you are biased. I think 
she is being biased, am sorry to use that word because we have just vetted and approved a 
Member who is going to head infrastructure and publi c works and is not an engineer he is just a 
business administrator and a sales and marketing so i think we should be realistic in discussing 
such issue.   
 Hon.  Amur : Mr. Speaker we cannot discuss what has already been passed in this House . 
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : But he is not discussing Hon. Amur he is just referring to 
that, there is no discussion he is just referring to that.  
 Hon.  Amur : Iam only informing this House that we have already passed the Nominees 
and we cannot discuss them.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon. Amriya.  
 Hon.  (Ms.) Amriya  Juma : I wish to rise first on a point of order, on 104 that a conduct 
will be grossly disorder if a Member concerned deliberately gives false information to the 
County Assembly. Why am I saying th is is that pursuant to section 35 of the County Government 
Act the qualifications of a County Executive Officer are in black and white so Members let us be 
conversant with our laws because i can really tell that we have not looked into our law as 
particula rly this one about the appointment of County Executive Members...  
 (Question proposed and agreed to ) 
Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you, yes Hon Amriya?  
Hon. (Ms.) Amriya Juma : ....Members please let us be conversant with our laws 
because I can really te ll we have not looked at our laws; particularly this one that deals with the 
appointment of County Executive Members. It's clear that in section 35 (b) that a person may be 
appointed as a Member of the County Executive Committee if that person has knowledg e one, 
experience and distinguished career in the field relevant to the portfolio of the department to 
which the position is appointed. So on a point that has been raised by Hon. Faith I think she's in 
order because she only concentrated on education but t he law is clear that you don't only look at 
the education but there are matters that are important for the Committee on this appointment, you 
look at the experience portfolio, career development all these matters have a role that they have 
played on consid eration of this above matter.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Hatimy.  
 Hon. Mohamed Hatimy:  I think Mr. Speaker the Motion is very clear we either support 
the Motion or reject it. We are not here to discuss about anybody, it's either the Motion goes 
through or we forget about it, we go one by one so I think everybody has a right to ask anything 
but I have tabled the Motion and I request again; I request the Members to go ahead and pass this 
Motion because it is already 4:20p.m. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon. Members. Yes Hon. Naliaka, Milka 
sorry.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Thank you Mr. Speaker I think I will need to come to your office 
more often and keep greeting you so that you get used to my name, this is the second time you 
are referring to me as Hon. Naliaka and am not amused..  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Milka Moree Ngare.  
 Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Moraa.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Moraa, okay thank you.  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
19  Hon. (Ms.) Ngare : Yes thank you so much I stand here to support the Motion raised by 
our able Chairman Hon. Hatimy that due to time constraints and also because we have all the 
literature and the Members have also gone through the vetting and the vetting Committee which 
took these nominees through, it is a Committee th at we believe in, it is a Committee that has the 
mandate because they are able to carry out the vetting exercise we know that they did their work 
thoroughly and we know that the nominees which were brought before us are people of the task 
for all the field s that they have nominated for. And we know that the Governor also goes through 
a stringent process in nominating persons for various dockets so we do not want to continue 
going back on issues that have already been decided. So I am here to support the Mot ion that we 
pass all the four that are remaining and we allow the lady MCAs who have a match at Tononoka 
today netball as we are headed to Machakos and compete and bring a trophy. Thank you Mr. 
Speaker Sir.  
(Applause)  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. A li Shomari.  
 Hon. Shomari: Assalam Aleikum  mimi ningependa kumpongeza Mwenyekiti wetu 
Mheshimiwa Hatimy kutokana na hawa Mawaziri wote ni watu ambao walikuwa wakifanya kazi 
sio wapya ati wanaingia sasa ni Mawaziri ambao walikuwa katika nyanja zao na waliku wa 
wanaziendeleza vizuri. Kwa hio mimi namuunga mkono Bwana Hatimy. Shukran.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Yes Hon. Mwamwiri , yes Hon. Bwire.  
 Hon. Bwire:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I agree with Hon. Hatimy that just 
because of time we just have this  Motion discussed and we engage in some other business but 
Mr. Speaker I want some clarification from your Chair that in the process you want to approve 
all the Motion at once because of time and somewhere along the line you come across something 
that is n ot adding up how do you go about it? Like what Hon. Member has just raised and it has 
been confirmed by Hon. Amriya that in terms of the education, the experiences and all that and I 
think that is what Hon. Member is raising. Mr. Speaker we just have to be  informed that in the 
process how do you go about it? But today I just want to agree with Hon. Hatimy that because of 
time we have the Motion be approved. Thank you just give us some clarification so that next 
time we don't collide. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Bwire the clarification is very clear is you 
Hon. Members either you pass this Motion or you don't pass it and we go one by one so I don't 
know which clarification you want. So it's either you want to pass it all of them, if you don't want 
to pass it all of them we go one by one then when it reaches whereby you don't feel that person 
then we can go voting. Yes Hon. Thoya?  
 Hon. Thoya:  Thank you Mr. Speaker I think I need to appreciate the Chairman Hon. 
Hatimy who we have obser ved time and as much as we are observing the same time we are 
eating the same time this is very (??). I would advise the Speaker it is high time you put the 
question the majority will support it and the nays will attain because I don't think that when he 
discussed about time then we take the same time that the able Hon. Ladies are going for netball, 
the other footballers are going there so Hon. Speaker put the question we support or we don't 
support it simple as that. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you so we continue with the debate, yes Hon. 
Prischillah?  
 Hon. (Ms.) Mumba : Thank you Mr. Speaker I think I had stood up more than six times 
then I started questioning myself is it because of the outfit that am not seen or what?  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
20 (Laughter)  
 ...but I thank God finally Mr. Speaker has noticed that am in. Thank you Mr. Speaker 
again I stand here to strongly support this Motion for the position of the remaining of the County 
Executive Committee Members (CECs) and I would like also to tell my fellow Hon.  Members 
that this should not be an issue going front and backward. I think we should know that we have 
by now to understand the procedure of the House, when something has been passed to be in 
discussion then we need to discuss so that we can pass the Moti on all together and Hon. Hatimy 
clearly sought leave for the four nominees who are the remaining that we discuss them and the 
Motion passed that we discuss them at once. I stand here to discuss the remaining CECs 
especially I would like to put my most inpu t in the CEC of Water, Sanitation and Natural 
Resources as a Chair of the Committee of Water and Sanitation I also strongly support and 
believe that Hon. Fatma Awale is  a well known lady who has worked in that docket also clearly 
and she is not new in tha t docket. We also know how she has been tirelessly performed her 
duties for Water, Sanitation and Natural Resources and also Hon. Hazel Koitaba has been our 
Finance Minister here, another CEC who has performed so well in that docket of Finance. So I 
think it is just a switch of the docket but she is a performer so all the remaining of the CECs are 
people that we know very well who have worked in this County, who are performers. The only 
thing we need to do is to pass the Motion so that they continue with th eir mandate and complete 
these, all scenario we should not go forward and backward and yet the Motion is already passed 
that we discuss the remaining CECs, so I strongly support and Mr. Speaker I think due to time 
constraints I think we need to pass this M otion then we move to the next agenda. Thank you.  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you yes Hon. Nzai.  
 Hon. Nzai:  Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this chance also to air my views, I 
stand to support the Motion brought by Hon. Hatimy and I would also w ish to add value to the 
appointment of Mr. Nzila. The Governor was so brave and wise to have chosen Mr. Nzila to 
head the Lands docket.  
(Applause)  
 ...this is because Mr. Nzila is an indigenous CEC and stands to better know the 
boundaries of this County a nd he will be in the position to solve all lands problems. So I do 
support the Governor's appointment and the same time I support Hon. Hatimy so that we can 
pass this Motion as quick as possible.  
(Applause)  
 Mr. Speaker  (Hon. Khatri) : Thank you Hon. Membe rs I now put the question that the 
Motion by Hon. Mohamed Hatimy to debate and adopt the vetting report of nominees of the 
County Executive Committee dockets tabled in this House today 9th November, 2017 be 
approved.  
(Question put and agreed to)  
(Applause)  
 ...so then, Members pursuant to Standing Order 37 (2) I now put the question that this 
House adopt all the reports for vetting of the various County Executive Committee Members as 
tabled in this House today 9th November, 2017 as appearing in the Order pa per. 
(Question put and agreed to)  
 ...Yes Clerk?  
ADJOURNMENT  
November, 9 , 201 7    MOMBASA COUNTY ASSEMBLY DEBATES         SPECIAL SITTING                                
DISCLAIMER: The electronic version of the Official Hansard Report is for information 
purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Hansard Editor  Page 
21  Hon. Members this House stands adjourned until Tuesday 14th November, 2017 at 
2:30p.m. Thank you.  
The House rose at 4.33p.m.  