May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 1  
 
 
    COUNTY ASSEMBLY OF MOMBASA  
THE HANSARD  
 
Monday , 29th May, 202 3 
Third Assemb ly – Special  Sitting  
 
[The County Assembly  met at  11:47a.m. at the Cou nty Asse mbly Buildin gs] 
[The Deputy Speaker (Hon.  Fadhili Mwalimu Makarani ) in the C hair] 
 
PRAYERS 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Members , you may have your 
seats . Yes Clerk ? 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
SPECIAL SITTING  
 
Honourable  Members , I take th is opportunity to welcome you to this Special Sitting  of the  
County Assembly . Hon ourable Members , in accordance to Standing Order 26(3) of the 
Mombasa County Assembly Standing order today ’s special sitting is du ly conve ned as it was 
published in Kenya Gazette noti ce number 6962 dated 26th May, 2023,  I hereby proceed to read 
the Gazette notice. Honourable  Members , Standing  order 26(4) specifies that on the day of the 
special sitti ng the business specified on the notice shall be the only business before the County 
Assembly . We will therefore transact the business in accordance to the notice.  Honourable  
Members , as early as I said I will read the notice as published pursuant to Standing order 26(3) 
of the County Assembly of Mombasa ; 
 
It is notified for the information of Members of the County Assembly and the general public 
that there will be a special sitting in County Assembly which shall be held at the  County 
Assembly chambers on Monday 29th May, 2023 at 11 :00a.m. for the  purposes of 
consideration a nd adoption  of the Mombasa C ounty  Education Fund B ill, 2023 . 
 
Honourable  Aharub  Khatri Speaker  of the Mombasa C ounty . 
  
Thank you. Yes Clerk?  
 
PAPER  
REPORT OF THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATION FUND BILL , 2023  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 2 Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana, Chairperson  Committee on Education,  please lay the 
Paper.  
 
[Paper Laid ] 
 
 Yes Clerk?  
 
NOTICE OF MOTION  
ADOPTION OF T HE REPORT ON THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATION FUND BILL , 2023  
 
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana, Chairperson  Committee on Education and Digital 
Transforma tion please give the Notice of M otion.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speaker Sir . I beg t o give notice of the fo llowing M otion;  
 
THAT, this County Assembly adopts the Report on the Mombasa County Education Fun d 
Bill, 2023  as laid on the Table on Monday, 29th May,  2023.   
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes Clerk?  
 
MOTION  
ADO PTION OF THE REPORT ON THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATION FUND  
BILL, 2023  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana, please 
move the Motion.  
 
 Hon. Katana : Mr. Speaker S ir, I beg to  move the following Motion : 
 
 THAT, this County A ssembly adopts the Report  on the Mombasa County Education Fund 
Bill, 2023 as laid on the Table on Monday 29th May, 20 23. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker Sir. 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Who is your seconder?  
 
 Hon. Katana:  I would kindly wish to  ask the Hon ourable  Vice Hon ourable  Ibrahim 
Omondi to second.  I thank you.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ):  Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi?  
 
Hon.  Omondi : Yes Mr. Sp eaker Sir, I do second.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you. Honourable  Members , I now 
propose a question  that the Motion by Honourable  Allen Katana Chairperson  Committee on 
Education and Digital Transformation be  debated in this House  as moved . 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 3 [Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Yes, Honourable Allen Katana ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa  Spika kwa kunipa nafa si hii, sitaita ad imu 
maana mara nyingi hii nafasi huipata pata na nafikiri kama kuna sheria  yenye itach ukua m uda 
mfupi sana ni hii , kwa  sababu ni sheria  ya maana…  
 
[Interruption]  
 
  The Deputy Speaker  (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): It is a Motion.  
 
 Hon. Katana:  Suala hili Mheshimiwa, kwa sababu ni suala la maana sana na ningependa 
kuwarai Waheshimiwa wenzangu baada ya mchakato wa Wanakamati ya  Elimu wakiongozwa 
pia na Wizara ya Elimu tuling’ang’ana  na tukafa nya yale mabadiliko yaliku wa ni muhimu 
yafanywe katika Mswada huu  ili ukaweze kufanya  kazi. Kama tujuavyo Mheshimiwa Sp ika ni 
kwamba tuligawa tayari fo mu za watu kupata basari , lakini ikawa haiw ezekani kwa  sababu 
kuliku wa na marekebisho fulani am bayo tulik ua tuyafanye na kwa  kuwa kuna baad hi ya 
stakaba dhi ambazo zinaonyesha dhahiri ya mabadiliko tuliyo yafanya ambapo wakiendea hoja 
baada ya nyengine wataona ni kweli . Kuna umuh imu ba ada ya kufanya mabadiliko yale na 
nataka k uliweka wazi kwa Jumba hili si kwa mba tu ni Nyumba h ii ya 13                                                                                                                                                                                                 
tu ndio ilipewa kikwazo  hichi cha kufanya mabadiliko haya mabad iliko na matangazo yake 
yalipean wa. Hapo nyuma awali lakini imekua haitekel ezwi lakini Controller of Budget  
walipoona k wamba mchezo huo unaendelea ndipo tukapew a nafasi kufanya mabad iliko haya na 
nashukuru Mheshimiwa Spika kwa mda tulioka a tulirekebisha na vipengele amba vyo 
vimeorodheshwa hapo  vitakua ni dhahiri ya kwamba mchakato huu wote ulika milika. Hivyo basi 
niwarai Wahesh imiwa  wote wa Nyumba hii wakaweze ku liunga mkono ili mara moja tukaweze 
kupea na basari na hawa watoto wetu wote walio majumbani na hili kero la wazazi kupiga simu 
ya kwamba watoto wao wako nyumbani liweze kuisha . Mheshimiwa Spika  sitaki  kuongea mengi 
maana i liyo tele haichu kuliwi . Mheshimiwa  Spika A hsante.   
 
The Deputy  Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Honourable  Milka Mora a. 
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you  Mr. Speaker . I stand on a  point on support  to this M otion ; 
needless to emulate the importance of education in o ur society because this has been long  
overdue, our children nee ded to go  back to school fully equipped with bursaries so that they 
carry on wit h their education. We know that an educated child or an educated society is a better 
society we will be able to diff erentiate good from bad  and also contribute in the development of 
our society , I think this is a Motion that is fully supported by everybody bec ause of the 
importance it carries within our society and I want to thank the Chairman  of Education for 
bringing such a Motion which we  have been w aiting for with b ated breath . Thank  you so much 
Mr. Speaker , I support.  
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you . Yes, Honourable  Ibrahim 
Omondi.  
 
  Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Speaker S ir, thank you for the opportunity th at you  have given me .  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 4 Mr. Speaker , I would regard this as a preci ous opportunity  because b eing one of the 
Member s and the Assistant Chair of the Education C ommittee in this Hon ourable`  House , we 
have been through a lot of questions from Member s of this Hon ourable  House and even t he 
public who are questioning ab out the w hereabouts of the fo rms that we gave out this year around 
February ; what happened , why has it taken too long that we have not released the funds to the 
parents . Mr. Speake r, where we all know the economy at this par ticular time is real ly not good 
for our p eople. todays ’ the day that we want to define and we want , be able to communicate 
strongly to the public that we want to pro vide this fund for them . As the C hair has said  that we 
had a query from the Controller of Budgets about the  County Education Develop ment A ct Mr. 
Speaker which was then by 2014 which came to the H ouse by 2014 and it was passed but at the 
same time there was an amendme nt that took place to the same A ct in 201 7. That is the Act we  
have always  been using when we borrow money from the exchequer when we wan t this bursary 
Mr. Speaker , but unfortunately this particular time we were relying on this A ct, when we were  
only caught unaware s after we had actually give n out the forms to the parents that we need  to 
again amend this particular A ct furth er and that is why we’re here today.  
Mr. Speaker , I jus t want to highlight briefly  that M embers can  understand some of the 
things that have made us stay to o long be fore we release or some of the things,  we want to 
amend from the original principal  Act tha t we had on 2014, one of them is we are actually 
amending  to increase the mandate  of the funds to  include scholarships . Mr. Speaker , when  you 
look at the previou s Acts, 2014  you find that the scholarships were indic ated but again there was 
no regulations h ow we are going to provide that scholarship  and that is the reason why even this 
House we  have been havin g problems on providing this particular scholarship to our peop le. We 
are one of them who have stood firm aski ng for  this scholarship and they  have nev er been 
provided, we are happy after amending this par ticular Act Mr. Speaker now this will become an 
eye o pener and we shall be able now to provide the scholarships to o ur children.  
Mr. Speaker another thing is ab out separ ation of the administration ; that is another thing 
that brought issues from the Audito r General which stopped us from getting the funds . In this 
Act that we are having or amending its going to be clear that it  is going to pro vide for the 
separatio n of the A dministration  of management and  finance of the corporation  from the funds 
and also this  Act will remove the Chief Executives Officer of Edu cation Development 
Cooperation as a Board Member of  the fund so the CEO will not become ..., I want Members to 
hear me very clear, the CEO Education Development Cooperation will no longer be a Boa rd 
Member of the fund . Now the CEO will become the o verall manager of the whole system Mr. 
Speaker that is why we n eed to name him from the Board.   
Another is sue here is that in 2014 the principal  Act we are talking about which we are 
amending today , the E ducation Development Corporation  was the mo ther e ntity, the Board of 
Trustees will now manage the fund un like the way it used to be  and that  is why we will give a 
clear mandate  of the Elimu Development Corporation  operation whereby they  will have the CEO 
who will now become th e fund Manager . Those are som e of the issues that have really made this 
not to be clear Mr. Speaker . Today I’m happy that we are making it clear ; also, we amend this 
particular Act that w e can  now source  for funds outside . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi , I think w e 
are going to talk about the a mendments w hen we reach to the Committee of the whole House  
and…  
 
  Hon. Omondi:  Yes, and I was just trying  to give reasons Mr. S peaker and as I finish 
briefly...  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 5 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani): Just a reminder that  your time  is up?  
 
 Hon. Omondi: Thank you Mr. Speaker , I am finishing up . Let us just wind up  because 
this is v ery important to the Members . Here Mr. Speaker a let me wind up by saying in the 
previous principle Act we did not have the Sub-County administration and you  will find that 
Sub-County Administrators mandate was not clear how the Sub-County mandatory could be 
included in the Comm ittee and even the MCAs in the other Act , which we are amending today 
did not give the MCA the power to nominate a Member to that par ticular Board but now as your 
amending today it  will give the Member of County Ass embl y power to nominate a Member to 
that particular Board . Therefore, Mr. Speaker be cause you  have cautioned  me on the time, I 
respect Mr. Speaker but I still had more  to inform  the Members, otherwise today it is going to be 
historic and a turning stone to wards the p eople of Mombasa . Thank you, M r. Speaker . 
 
 The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Thank you Hon ourable  Ibrahim . Yes, 
Honourable  Allen Katana please to your Motion.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika . 
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadh ili M akarani ): And Honourable  Members bef ore 
Honourable  Katana continues,  I would  like to caution the House that t he reason as to why you 
are sitting here today it  is because of this  Bill and the Bill will  need a quoru m for it to be passed 
so put in mind t hat vot ing w ill not go on if there is no quorum in this House . Yes proceed ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Ahsante sana Mheshimiwa Spika  kwa hekma yako ny ingi na naf ikiri 
Waheshimiwa  wamelielewa hilo, kwa  sababu naona mmoj a mmoja akija kuomba ruhusa . 
Mheshimiwa Spika kata a na ruhusa  na Mpambe wa Bunge  ikiwa ni uw ezo unaweza kumpa 
akafunga mlango sasa . Mheshimiwa Spika nataka niwash ukuru Waheshimiwa  kwa changizo zao  
za maana walizo toa na imetokea kama nilivyo tarajia kwa sabab u madhila yote kuhusiana  na 
swala hili wanalip ata moja kwa moja . Kwa hivyo sikutarajia ha ta mmoja at alipinga ijapo kua 
Mheshimiwa Spika  tutakapo ingia katika Kamati ya Nyumba n zima kunavyo vipeng ele fulani 
fulani ambavyo tutazidi kuvi weka sawa kulinga na na mwele kezo tuliopata kwa Controlle r of 
Budget  ili mwisho wa kwisha  hili suala tuwe tumeliz ika katika kaburi l a sahau ndio watu wetu 
waendelee kusaidika sana . Nawash ukuru sana Waheshimi wa wenza kwa c hangizo zenu za 
maana kwa  hiyo mimi s itaki ku wa na la ziada, labda  nikush ukuru pia Bwana Spika kwa nafasi 
hii. Ahsante.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani): Thank yo u Hon ourable  Katana . 
Honourable  Members , I now stand to put a question that the Motion b y Hon ourable  Allen Ka tana 
on Adoption of the Report be considered in this Hon ourable  House . 
 
[Questio n put and agreed to] 
 
The Motion by Hon ourable Allen Katana on Report of the Mombasa Education Bi ll, 2023 
has been adopted by the House. Yes Clerk?  
 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATIONAL FUND BILL , 2023  
SECOND  READING  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 6 Yes, Clerk please read  the Bill for the seco nd time . Sorry, Honourable  Allen Katana pl ease 
move the Motion before the  Clerk reads the Bill . 
 
Hon.  Katana:  Mr. Speaker , 
 
THAT, the Mombasa County Educational Fun d Bill, 2023 be now read for the second time.  
 
     Thank you, Mr. Sp eaker.  
 
The Deputy Speaker (Hon. Fadhili M akarani ): Yes, Clerk please read  the Bill for the 
second ti me. 
 
[The Bill was rea d for the Second Reading]  
 
Thank you, Clerk . Honourable  Memb ers, the Bill having been read a second time stands 
committed to the committee, please  stand  Honorable members  and convert  to committee  of the 
whole House . 
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE  
[The Mace was lowered] 
 
ORDER OF COMMITTEE IS READ  
[The House dissolve d into Committee of the Whole House ] 
IN THE COMMITTEE  
 
[The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir ) in the Chair ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadi r): Members , there are several  
amendments  to this Bill so I demand your utmost attention , it will be very thorough  so let us be 
patient please. Yes Clerk ? 
 
[Clause 3 ] 
 
Yes Chairman ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  THAT  clause  3(b) of the Bill be deleted  and the follow ing words be 
inserted to read  - 3(b) provide for the establishm ent, administration and Management o f the 
Mombasa County Elimu Scheme . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Members , is that clear? Yes , please 
explain.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Okay maybe an explanation  to it, it used to be Elimu Fund but there are 
some guidelines  that we were given by the C ontroller of Budget (COB)  that we should not use 
the word ‘Fund’ but instead we use the word ‘Scheme ’. So, the amendment  is to remove the 
word ‘fund’ and replace  it with ‘scheme ’. Thank you  so much.  
 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 7 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): So, we are deleting clause 3 (b) of 
the Bill and w e are in serting the words ; 
 
Provide for the establishment, administration and management  of the Momba sa County 
Elimu Scheme .  
 
Okay Members , that said I propos e that the clause 3 (b) as amended be part of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Katan a: I second . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): You can not second yours elf. Any 
other Member?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I second . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Now I put the question that the clause  
3 (b) as amended be part of the Bill? 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
Next amen dment? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Clause 3 (c)I do not want t o give guidance to yo u Mr. Speaker but I would 
suggest at least  because we have a number of amendments here if we do not want t o stay here the 
whole day at least  we speed up.  
 
THAT  a new clause 3(c) be inserted to read - 
 
3(c) provide for the granting of bursaries, sc holarship,  revolving loan scheme, vocational 
training  support and grant disburs ement to students from the County.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you Members  that is a new 
addition . now I propo se the question that clause  3(c) as propo sed be part of th e Bill?  
 
Hon. Omondi: I second . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I put the question that cause 3(c) be 
part of the Bill. 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
It has been proposed. Yes Clerk. 
 
Clause 4. 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 8 The Chair person  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes Chairman.  
 
Hon. Katana:  THAT the word , “FUND” be deleted in P ART II of the Bill and the wo rd 
“SCHEME”  be inserted to read  - PART II -THE SCHEME . 
  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay  Members, here we are deleting 
the word , ‘Fund’ and replacing  it wit h the word , ‘Scheme ’. I now propose that amendment ? 
 
Hon. Omondi:  I second . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I now put the question ? 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
Yes Clerk. 
 
Clause 5 . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Chairman . 
 
Hon. Katana:  THAT clause  5 of the Bill be amended by d eleting the word “ Fund”  in the  
marginal note to read ––The Scheme . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay Members , here we are  
expunging  the word , ‘Fund’ and replacing  it with the word , ‘Scheme ’. 
 
Hon. Omondi : I second.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Okay. How comes am having only 
one person to second this. N ow I put the question that the word , ‘Fund’ be replaced by the word 
‘Scheme ’. 
 
[Question put and agreed  to] 
 
Yes Clerk . 
 
Clerk: Clause  6(1)(b)? 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes Chairman ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  THAT clause 6(1)(b)  of the Bill be d eleted and the follow ing new clause 
be inserted to read - 
 
6(1) ( b) monies from the repayments of loans granted to a student thr ough the partnership 
betw een the Higher Education Loans Board and the County ; 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor   Page 9 I would like Hon ourable  Mbaya to  second. 
 
Hon. Salim Mbaya : I second.  
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Mbaya , what  exactly are 
you seconding?  
 
Hon. Salim Mbaya:  [Off microphone] … [Inaudible ]. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir ): Okay , we are introduci ng a new 
clause here. Right? You are proposing that we introduce  a new clause  and deleting the pre vious  
one for the Bill. That is 6( 1) (b), please read the claus e that you want us to introduce?  
 
Hon. Katana:  That is 6(1)b  monies from the repayments of loan s granted to a student  
through the partnership between the Higher Educat ion Loans Board and the County ; Maybe if 
you need some more explanation  to this, I can do Mr. Speaker.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I think that is self-explanatory  
Members, anyone wh o needs explanation  to that? Yes?  
 
Hon. Maka nga:  Maybe can we ge t clarity because this is pa rt of the sources  of funds , how 
is the par tnership or at what p oint will the County government come with partnership  with 
HEL B because  it is a sou rce of the funds here . So, at what point does the County government 
come in partner ship with the HELB so that w e are able to have it enshrined  with this act.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Vice Chair would you like to 
respond to that?  Yes Chair. 
 
Hon. Katana: Becau se my vice has not gotten the questi on, I beg to answer . What we 
learnt is that  the County government has no mandate to give out loans to stud ents simply because 
that is a function of the nationa l government and for us to hav e this you asked about the source 
of funds , these will be monies f rom the County government in  this scheme . Now the staff from  
the HE LB wil l be the ones helping  us in dis bursing these what we ca ll educational loans to 
members  since it is a funct ion of the national government,  I do not know whether I have 
answered your que stion  but these are monies  that are coming from the same scheme … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Ab dulrahm an Abdulkadir ): Take your se at you will be given time . 
 
Hon. Katana:  It is only the process of giving out that will be done b y the HELB staff. 
Thank you, Speaker . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Ab dulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Frankl ine 
Makanga.  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 10 Hon. Mak anga:   I am sorry  I am yet to understand  exactly  if these ones belong to the  
County government  and we are giving out these funds to our residents of Momb asa County  and 
again  we come . I wish the  Chair wil l give attention because he has to respond to this quest ion. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir): Please Hon ourable  Mbelle, if you 
have  any question, you will be given the chance to ask here.  You are a Member of the 
Committee ? Okay please respond . 
 
Hon. Makanga : Mr. Speaker , from the expl anation  of the  Chair is that these funds are 
from the County government  which we as the County Assembly has appr opriated  to be given out 
to the needy studen ts from within our County . But again,  here c omes a s cenario that we are told 
we are u nable to administer  the loans and therefore  HELB officers come and administer  on our 
behalf so am n ot yet clear because these are some of the questions that we will be asked by ou r 
people ; how will HELB come in here to admin ister funds  of the County government  and if these 
funds are fro m the HELB,  then what  is the point of indulgence  from  the County government and 
what is the working relationship between us and HELB in administering  these f unds? 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I think I get you very clear 
Honourable  Frankl ine; other Members just for the sak e of this arg ument I just want t o clarify one 
thing  we are talking about the sources of fund for this scheme. The first so urce we said is money 
appropriated by the Count y Assembly , the other one as suggested by the Chair is saying another 
source is monies from the repaym ent of l oans granted to students  by the County in partnership  
with HELB. So , I understand  where he is coming fr om because at what point we made any 
arrang ement with HELB where does it come , do we hav e an existing arrangement  with them? 
Please clarify on t hat. Yes, Honourab le Mbelle you want to clarify on that?  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Mr. Speaker Sir , I rise with the permissi on of the Chair, I am a Member of 
the Educa tion Committee  and the Higher Education Loans Board (HELB) for some ti me since 
independence  are the first people to  start offering loans and administering  the loans . So, what we 
are doing with HELB is for t hem to come  in to help us in administration  issues of the  funds. 
They are not giving us any monies;  it is just because th ey are experienced and they know how to 
administ er those funds but the sources are from the County  we are the ones who will be giving 
the money and be  held accountable  for them. Now  when it co mes with how we are in 
collaboration with them is through  an MO U that according to the department when we met, they 
said they had t he M OU already. At some point we have the MOU, and according to the COB 
they are t elling us that HELB has the expe rience so i t will not be right for us  without experience  
to continue or st art administeri ng the funds. So, it is a matter of intergovernment al relations to 
help us on issue that they are already ahead of us when it comes to administration  but they are 
not t aking any f unds from us neither are we giving them any funds in their coffers. They come 
from  our coffers  and will  be giv en from coffers return  to our coffers and again be taken back to 
the people  as revolving  fund. I hope y ou have been answered.  
 
The Chairper son (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Makanga , are you 
satisfied ?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  [Inaudible ]. 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 11 Hon. Omo ndi: Just to add on what Membe rs has said  is that also the revolving it is called 
a revolving  loan schem e, that is how we call it, i t is revol ving mean ing that you know in 2014  
Act there was  no regulation. It exist ed there was t his particular provision but there was no 
regulation  meaning t hat one that is the reason why we could not have done we were not able to 
provide  the loans. We have never done that a ctuall y so we want to sta rt doing it that is why we 
are amen ding this clause. That is why whatever of the  Audit or General actually que stioned on it, 
it is there but it is silent . We are not giving  loans so how ar e we going to give loans without 
regulation s. Now when you look at t his new Act, we are provided  regulatio ns; regulations  are 
who qualifies for  it; is number one, two and how much need s to be  given, how the man agement 
is going  to be managed. That is now wh at we are providing  in this particular  Act so that it is clear  
to them . Thank you.   
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Minority Lead er. 
 
The Leader  of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki ): [Inaudible ] …Meaning you ne ed the education 
loans board to  come in so that they can show you th e meth od; in short because the County does 
not know how to g ive loans ? So, you want the loans board to chip in so tha t you can be able t o 
method. Isn’t it? That is what is meant , right?  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): They will respond to it.  
 
The Leader  of Minority  (Hon.  Matsaki ): Ndio naelewa hivyo , wach a nizungumze kwa 
Kiswahili  sanifu , kwa ufupi HELB w anakuja kwa ajili ya  kuon yesha njia mwafaka kutoa hizo 
mikopo. Ndi vyo nimeelewa.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon.  Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): It is okay , he wil l respond  to that.  
 
The Leader  of Minority  (Hon. Matsak i): Kwa sababu Kaunti haina usaidiz i ndio ikawa 
ije HELB. Hivyo ndio nimeel ewa. A hsante.  
 
The Chairperso n (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Minority Leader yo u are asking 
rhetorical  questions . I want y ou to ask direct  questions. Are you seeking engagement of that 
question ?  
 
The Leader  of Minority  (Hon. Mats aki): [Off microphone] . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ):  And the rules a re very relaxed by 
the way so  let us not be very rig id in our eng agement s, proceed please ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker , I can s ee Members  are lining up outside I do not know  why, 
but okay let me start by answering  him the  HELB is n ot coming in to show us how to do it,  they 
are coming to do it because of t wo rea sons; one there is already a scheme, there is already a way 
on wh ich the  national government is giving out loans to st udents and that structure is meant to 
work to all students who want loa ns and let us not forget our mand ate as C ounty g overnment, 
because most ly we  were meant constitutionally  to be dealing with what w e can E CDEs. So, these 
HELB staff are coming  to do it be cause staff have the know -how and the experience . Second , if 
we are to do it then at the first place,  we will  be increasing the wage bill at Mombasa County  and 
yet it has been fighting  this menace of wage bill.  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 12 The HELB is  comin g for free; we are  not even paying a single cent for their service . 
Another thing Chair, I want it t o be understood  that these amen dments are direct 
recommendations  from the COB  and these are the very people  who stopped us f rom misusing 
our bursaries , for us to amend t his thing  now we are still working on ame ndments that were 
given to us  by the very b ody that denied us the process to  continue with the process  of issuing  
our b ursaries. Thank you. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir ): Chair I want to caution you 
somethi ng he re you are telling these amendments are imposed on us , you are saying  its eit her 
this way or we wi ll be denie d scholarships . So please I am cauti oning you to stop misleading the 
Members  they have the rig ht to make amendments , they have the righ t to engage e ach 
amendme nt you are talking about.     
 
Hon. Katana:  But Speaker in what ever we do as an Assembly we have to go exactly 
according to the laws t hat are put by the national Assembly , so if we do not base our a rgument on 
the laws that were set by the nationa l assembly definitely  and that is the reason as to why 
everythi ng was sto pped  but I stand guided Chair. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ):  Chai r, we shall use the fo rmat 
proposed, howeve r we can tail or make it  here in th is House and Members h ave the liberty to 
make their amendments and to question  each amendment . Yes Fran kline. 
 
Hon. Mak anga: Mr. Speaker , I would request that for record purposes the statement that 
these amendments have  been m ade to this House by the COB , it must be withdrawn . We are not 
an extension  of the COB;  we are her e to pass law s that when we stand before the people in 
Mombas a County,  we can remain accountabl e of whatever  law we passed . So, whatever we are 
doing her e inclu ding all the amendments there is no single amendmen t here from the COB  these 
are amendments proposed by the people of Momba sa and stakeholders in educ ation  so let it not 
be in record that this House was helped by COB to make this Bill . Thank you.  
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank you be fore you respond let 
me give Hon ourable  Mwaura . Yes, Honourable  Mwaura.   
 
Hon. Katana: I do not understand  what t he problem is.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir ):  You will be given a chance to 
respond . Honourable  Mwau ra? 
 
Hon. Mwaura:  Thank y ou Chair for protectin g me. I think the problem  is just the 
terminology that has been impos ed on us but the C OB has the  mandate t o give advisory on any 
legal matt er concerning this particular  matter . But Mr. Speaker , I rise t o just ask because we are 
now d oing it in conjunction  with HELB  then do we  have regulations on how the money gets into 
the HELB  and how the money is g iven back  to the County ! Where are the regu lations on how 
they are managing the money on behalf  of the Cou nty? That is the question I wanted to ask. 
 
The Chairperso n (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ):  Okay I think the point made by 
Honourable  Frank lyn was well underst ood if you want to resp ond to it let me give y ou the 
opportunity to respond.  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 13 Hon. Katana:  Chair , I do not know what is the p roblem with the Hon ourable  Member 
not unles s he comes out clear ! Yes, because  I do not know what his problem is and why should 
HELB come in, or  I do not understand  it let him explain.  Does he have a problem  with HELB 
coming in to do that process with out payme nts and all that.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkadir ): He does not have a problem  surely;  
he is just question ing it and he has the righ t to question it  and you cannot take that a way from 
him, Yes Hon ourable  Florence.  
 
Hon. Kachumbo: Thank you Mr . Spea ker. I think  my colleague  was very clear because I 
also do not understand based on what Chairman …, your resp onse was not clear based on what  
Honourable  Frankl ine Makanga said , because  am a beneficiar y of HELB and I do not understand 
how it connects w ith the County Assembly on  giving of bursaries , so pleas e explain thoroug hly 
be specific , clarify  on that.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkadir ): Ques tion well understood . Chairman 
I would like you to respond to these questions without getting  personal, without unnecessary  
agitation , just respond  to the ques tions.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Okay Chair. I think when  am u p you will understand  me, and I will speak 
things as they  are; whether you will  feel things are imposed or not , we all gave out bursary  
forms, then ask yourself why have we not given out the cheques yet  we gave out the bursary  
forms. With the previous A ct why ha ve we not ! To mea n there is a body th at stopped the whole 
process, whether you w ill call it be ing imposed or what I cannot give a best explanation to that, 
but all what am saying is these are guidelines  that the County government  through  this very 
Honourable  House was given by a  number of b odies, even some individuals  gave out ideas  on 
how they feel things should  be conducted towa rds whateve r things we  are doing pertaining  these 
funds  and some of these a dvices, like chan ging the name from a fund to a scheme … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Chair person  (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkadir ): Yes?  Honourable  Chair just take 
your Chair pl ease?  
 
Hon. Makanga : Mheshi miwa Spika hii i eleweke kwamba katik a Bunge hili hakuna mtu 
anapinga sheria hii, hii ni vizuri ieleweke kwa sababu naona Mwenyekiti bada la atueleze  sisi 
tunachotaka kujua hatuna shi da HELB kusa idia serikali  kupeana fedha hizi ili watu  wetu 
wasaidike  na ifa nyike kwa n jia ya sawa, kusiwe na m isukosuko  mpaka hapo t unakubalian a, 
lakini tunachotaka kuelewa ni kwamba hii HELB ambayo inafanya kazi ikishirikiana ama ikiwa 
chini ya serik ali kuu ndio ijipate pia i nashirikiana na serikali ya  Mombas a katika kuweza 
kusaidia pesa hizi zipeanwe kwa nj ia ya sawa, yaingia v ipi twataka kuele wa inaingia kwa 
mpangilio upi? Na wanapoingia katika huu mpangilio majukumu yao yatakuwa ni yapi?  Na je 
serikal i ya Mombasa  nao majukumu yao  yatakuwa yapi ili lile  kusudi ama lengo kuu liw eze 
kuafikiwa? ! Hiyo tu ndiyo Mheshi miwa Spika ndiyo tunataka kuelewa . Kwa hivyo mtu  
asituambie kwamba tulipeana fomu za basari  hilo tunalijua na waliopewa ni watu wetu l akini 
twataka tujue wanapok uja katika huu m pangilio kisheria wameingia vipi ili baada e tusije 
tukajipata kama Bunge tulipiti sha kitu ambacho hatukukielewa Mhe shimiwa Spika.  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 14 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, well understood Chairman . I 
think ?? this House that you ex plain to us wit hout a necessary detail  we are talking abo ut 
Mom basa County Eli mu Scheme that wil l provide bursaries, that will prov ide scholarships, we 
are talking about the revolving loans, subsidize tuition students of the County, right ? At what 
point ar e we going to e ngage HELB  and to what exten t? Are we goin g to engage them at t he 
disbursement le vel or when are we going to collect  this revolving fund, just be clear please ! 
 
Hon. Katana:  Ahsante Mheshimiwa Spika . Pale ulip okuwa unapakataa Mheshimiwa 
Spika amepaleta  sasa ana uliza swali la maana , la kueleweka ! Sitaki kusema yale alisema  
yalikuwa hayana  maana lakini hili linaeleweka  hapa jambo  si basari , si vitu vyengine jambo  ni 
ule mkopo kwa ajili ya karo za shule na mah usiano ya ule mkopo na hichi kitengo cha HE LB 
hilo nd ilo swali . Sasa hilo swali kukujibu kwa urahisi kwa s ababu hiyo function  ni ya serikali 
ama hiyo shughuli hiyo ni serikali ya kitaifa na kuna kitengo kizima cha kushughul ikia hayo  na 
kukaandikwa  mkataba ya kwamba endapo serikali ya K aunti ya Mombasa  itataka  kupeana 
mikopo kwa wanafunzi basi itap ata mwongozo wa kutoka hicho kitengo ch a HELB.  Hiyo 
process  yote application and all that  zikiletwa kuanzia hapo kuendelea watakuwa wana  
muongozo muafaka utak aotoka kw a hili shirika la HELB na hi i inafanyika bi la malipo  yoyote na 
nilikuwa naona tashwishi k ubwa s ana Mheshim iwa Mwenyekiti najua u kikaa hapo h atufai 
kukuita Spika  lakini t ashwishi kubwa nili okuwa naiona pengine ilikuwa inajitokeza kwamba 
hawa watu wa HELB pe ngine sisi kama serikali ya Kaunti tu nataka t uwalipe  hawa watu kwa 
sababu ni kazi yao tay ari wanaotoa hapa n i muelekezo ili serika li ya Kaunti ya Mombasa kwanza 
isiingie kwa gharama ya kuandika watu zaidi kazi kwa sababu tuna  uzito wa wafanya kazi. P ili 
kuwe kuna  mueleweko wa kueleweka kutokana na watu ambao wana  desturi ya kuifanya hii 
shughu li. Ahsante . 
 
The Cha irperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): I think we hav e exhausted that 
point.  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Omondi:  I would like to add something . 
 
The Ch airperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): I think before you add something  
Honourable  from Junda  has a  conce rn? 
 
Hon. Kai:  Ahsante Mhe shimiwa Spika kwa kunipa fursa japo niseme machache 
kuhusiana na Mswada ama nini Bwana Mwenyekiti.  Ni Mswada  nimesikia ukiitwa sheria  
kitambo  lakini ni marekebisho, mimi  kidogo mtanisamehe  najua nimetoka Junda ma mbo ni 
mengi si  kuwa niko maa kini sana lakini nimes ikia kuk itajwa ma neno ya mkopo, mkopo bila 
shaka ni mkopo hii imenilazimisha nisimame…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Chairperso n (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Revolving l oan, okay proceed?  
 
Hon. Kai:   Revolving lo an na loan ni vitu  viwili tofauti? Ukisimama Mwenyekiti  
utanifahamish a tofauti  ya hilo, lakini swali langu kuu ambalo limenifanaya nisimame ni kwamba 
kidogo nimeshtuka kwamba hizi fomu tulipean a ni basari ama ? 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 15 Sasa pengine ni wanafunzi tuna wapatia mikopo  kisha iwe b aadae mpangilio wa kulipa . 
Naomba kufahamishw a tu kwa kifupi. Ahsante.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes Chair , just respond  to this 
matter once and for all so that we can proceed  as we have a long wa y to go. 
 
Hon. Katan a: Ahsant e. Nataka nimshukuru Mheshimiwa wa Ju nda ameu liza swali la 
maana . Tulichopeana  ni bursary  na jina la fomu za basari  na Kiswahili  jina la basari nimesahau 
kamusi nyumbani lakini ile ni  pesa inatolewa kusaidia mwanafunzi  kulip a karo na hairudi lakini 
huu mkopo  ambao imebeba jina la revolving  ni kw amba wewe  kama mwanafunzi ni  lazima 
urudishe ili mwenzako na e iweze kumsaidia  na kuendelea hiv yo hivyo . Si ni sawa sawa na mara 
nyingi watu wa kuanzia  kidato cha kwanza  mpaka  kidato cha n ne sijawahi kusikia mahali popote 
waki pewa h uu mkopo. K wa sababu ya wa kati niruhusu ni seme maneno hayo machache tu.  
Ahsante Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Chairp erson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): You are  not satisfied?  
 
[Honourable  Kai off microphone ] 
 
Proceed?  
 
Hon. Kai: Kulingana na Mheshimiwa Katana kama  nimemuele wa vizuri ni kwamba hii 
ni marekebi sho ya Elimu Fund na imebeba mambo mengi kwa hivyo kando na bas ari ambazo 
tunapeana ni kwamba pia mbeleni tutakuwa na mipangilio ya kupeana revolving fund . Kwa 
hivyo tuna weka ile mikakati yake kwa ajili ya mikakati  ya mbele,  sio? Lakini yenye  tulipeana ni 
bursary, sio?  Basi mimi nimeridhika.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Sawa . Just to  put this matter at rest , 
there is bursaries , there  is scholar ships and r evolving loans sanasana  revolvin g loans wil l go to 
students and tertiary level universi ties and TVETS … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Omondi : Chair! 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes? 
 
Hon. Omo ndi: Through you please! I just wanted to a dd more soup on it so as to be well 
underst ood. The  Honourable  Member wanted to know the relation between the C ounty 
government and HELB ; what happen s the HELB h as got expert s of running the HELB and othe r 
loans and it is the only Board that has got expert s to run that a nd there i s no other board again 
from the government which has got experts an d the County government now will have an 
arrangement with the HELB on how  they are going to run this revolving loan.   
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 16 All the conditions will come from the County governme nt, will instruct t he HELB what 
they want , how much  they need , who to give, t he period and everything . All the regulations , 
everything will come from County go vernment  and their work is just to manage becau se again it 
will take long ti me for County t raining those peopl e who are going actually to run this parti cular 
loan scheme, it is costly and that it why we seen better just the way the Auditor General has 
advised t o use the HELB to run this particular schem e, okay the loan was th ere but there was no  
regulation,  now we a re putti ng up regulations so that we can  be able to a ctually give  out that 
particular loan.  I think that is well understood.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): I think now you are  leaving t he 
House not really  understood now I want to put or before I put the question…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Mak anga : …[Inaudible ] The funds will be administered by HELB ; he has brought 
that again and what we had  understood from the Chair is pesa tunapean a sis i wenyewe wale  
watakuja kupeana muele keo. Sasa kama hii pesa inaenda kwa  HELB, HELB wa administer  hiyo 
fund then hakuna kitu hapa ambayo iko  wazi kwa hivyo kama n i pesa yetu tuwape  HELB wa-
administer  on our beha lf, that will come up clear.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Sawa Daktari, I think at this po int 
you will  be given the chance to whether say yes o r nay at this point.  So Hon ourable  Members , I 
put the question that clause 6  (1)(b) be amended as propos ed and be part of the Bill . 
 
I have not heard you.   
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Off microphone ] 
 
Abstaining is par t of saying nay so the ayes have it! 
 
[Applause ] 
 
 We will move to the next. Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 6  (1) (c)] 
 
Hon. Katana:  Clause 6  (1)c of the Bill be amended by deleting the word, ‘Fund’ and 
insert ing the word , ‘Scheme’ to read a gift, donations , grants and endowments from leg al 
sources made to the Scheme  and… 
 
The Chairperso n (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, I prop ose that we made that 
amendment, okay Members that is a straight f orward amendment so I now put  the question that 
claus e 6 (1)c) be ame nded as suggested and be part of  that Bill. 
 
[Interruption ] 
[Off microphone ] 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 17 I have already done that , just take your seat ! Because what e xactly are you goin g to raise 
now,  we are just chan ging the word , ‘fund’ to ‘scheme ’, that all what we ar e doi ng. 
 
Hon. Kai:  [Off Microphone] . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir) : We were pas t that already!  
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
Yes Clerk ? 
 
[Clause 6  (1)(d)] 
 
Hon. Katana : Clause 6 (1) d). 
  
The Chairp erson (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Chair. That Clause 6  (1)d) of the Bill be amended by deleting 
the word , ‘fund’ and insert the word , ‘scheme ’ to read , such funds as may vest  in or accrue to the 
Scheme in the performan ce of its functions  under  this Act or any other written l aw. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, again we are deleting the word , 
‘fund’ and replacing with the wor d, ‘scheme ’. I now propose that amendment . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
 Okay, now I put the question tha t the Clause 6(1)d as amended be  part of that Bill. 
 
[Question  put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 6(2) ] 
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana : The scheme shall be in separate bank ac count which sh all be open and 
maintained in consultation  with Executive Committee Member . 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Chair , read the enti re sentence 
please?  
 
 Hon. Katana : 6(2), I will read , the scheme shall … 
 
[Interruption]  
 
 The Chai rperson (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): No! No! Before  that. 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 18  Hon. Katana : Pardon! 
 
  The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): There is above that  sentence?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Okay above that . Okay! That clause 6 (2) be de leted and a new clause be 
inserte d to read, the scheme shall have a sep arate bank account of which shal l be open and 
maintained in consultation with Executive Committee Member . Thank you.  
 
 The Ch airperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Initially it was the Board and now it 
is the scheme , I hope that is clear so now I propose…  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Katana : I kindly ask Hon ourable  Shuhudia to second.  
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): I am yet to propose.  I am proposing 
that Clause 6 (2) be amended as sug gested by the Chair . 
 
[Question proposed and Agreed To ] 
 
You second?  
 
Hon. Shuh udia Abdalla h: Yes. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members , I put the 
question that Clause 6(2) be amended as part of the Bill. 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
Clause 7 
 
The Chairp erson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadi r): Yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana : That Clause 7 , be deleted . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): What is clause 7 saying? Please read 
for the Members? 
 
Hon. Katana :  Whom to read , Clerk or the Ch air? 
 
The Chairpe rson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Your Vice Chair?  
 
Hon. Omondi : Administ ration cost, expenses incurred in the admin istration o f the Fund 
which amount shall be not more than 3  per cent  of the total monies in the Fund as provided for in 
the Public Finance M anagement Act. 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 19 [Loud consultation s] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Members , just have a look at it , I am 
encourag ing you by the way before you make any contribution . I am encou raging you to use 
your microphones for purpo ses of Hansard. Just look  at that clau se talking about cl ause 7 , that is 
under administration cost suggeste d that we removed it. Yes, please have a lo ok at it.  
 
[Silence ] 
[Consultations ] 
 
 Members , any contribution s? Yes, Honourable  Mwaura?  
 
Hon. Mwaura : Just asking. Th ank you for givi ng me this opportu nity. How we a re 
deleting that Clause  of Administration cost, y ou know there are administration cost s, where  are 
the co st now being taken to or how will the scheme run wit hout administration cost ! Now that 
one mayb e we need to get answers . How are we running  it without th e cost?  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulka dir): Yes?  
 
 Hon. Makanga : Ahsante  Mwenyekiti . Wajua maybe we need to understand th e spirit of 
that deletion it is either to sav e cost or ope ning a window for misappro priation  so can the chair 
educat ion committee tell us the reason behind or the sp irit behind its deletion and the Chair is 
moving out .  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Proceed? It is okay , the Chair.  
 
Hon. Kai: So, my question that I feel pressed we cannot administe r that Fund without the 
administration cost  na ik iwa hapa ilikuwa ime wekwa kisheria pia iliku wa inamaanisha kw a kiasi 
kikubwa itaweza kukabiliana na matumiz i mabaya japo Mombasa huwa hawatumii vibaya , huwa 
wanatumia vizuri.  Sasa kwa hili ikiondolewa tutaweza  vipi ku weka mikakati ya kuhakikisha 
kwamba pesa h izi hazifujwi na  zinaenda kulingana na vile  zimepangiliwa . 
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, as we wait for the Chair . Yes, I 
am informed that he is out to co nsult . Yes, Honourable  Milka I am sure y ou want to make your 
contribution, yes?  
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you Hon ourable  Speaker. Sorry Chai r… 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Speaker , fine. 
 
Hon. Ngare : Chair, Speaker cum Chai r I was just  clarifying some thing to Hon ourable  
Leila but I think it is good we get clarity from the  Chair if he ha s gone to consult probably,  they 
want to de lete this because the  officers working in that Fund are salarie d and they will be doing 
their daily jobs so they may  not need any ot her monies to run the Fund but let the Chair seek 
clarity and come and give us cl ear information . Thank you.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Are you a Member of the Educatio n 
Committee?  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 20 Hon. Ngare:  No, I am not.  
 
The Chai rperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): ooh b ut yo u are privileged with 
some information?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Yes. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay . 
 
Hon. Ngare:  And probably being a professional teacher,  I will understand  one or two 
things, thank you.  
 
 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahma n Abdulkadir ): We are talking about the scheme 
and here.  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Yes, the scheme i s run under education which d ocket … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Not run by teachers .  
  
Hon. Ngare : Which docket  do I happen to f all? 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Okay well understood. I think the 
existin g claus e was meant to curb, it was meant to give a ceiling on t he level of expenditure 
incurred in the c ourse of adm inistering this Fund, so when we delete the entire clause are we 
going to give an open cheque that is the question Chair . Proceed?  
 
Hon. Katana:  I proceed with wh at Chair? I was out a little bit.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): So, the question was why a re we 
deleting that clause?  
 
Hon.  Katana:  Okay , now the Hon ourable  Member ameuliza  hili swali , lina maana na  
sometimes it is a lways good if he a sks something we get to know behind it . Scheme  haina hizi  
limitations but a ny fu nd any where in Keny a wamekewa hii ya  3 per cent  na hii scheme  hakuna 
vile itatumia pesa yoyote bila  approval zetu hapa . Sasa this House becomes the controls of the 
much that watakuwa wak itumi a kwa sababu kisheria  scheme hii ni  sheria yenye dak tari hap endi 
kuisik ia lakini ni sheria but Fund ndio ina wekewa hii  asilimia tatu lakini scheme ilivyoi ngia 
neno scheme automatically imeuwa  this 3  per cent . Sasa sisi ndio wakileta bajeti zao  and all th at 
wakileta tuta amua tutap itisha ama tukat ae na mimi hii naipe nda zaidi h ata kuliko ile ya  asilimia 
tatu ambayo haiko  visible in  the House. Hii lazima walete tu pitishe  sisi, tunawapitishia  na hii 
amount ama tunawakatalia la kini hakuna mahali popote ndani ya Kenya yet u kwa mujibu wa 
sheria kw amba i napewa hii ceiling 3  per cent hakuna. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Thank you  Chair. I think t hat has 
come out very clear.  Yes, Honourable  Makanga and Mwaura , that is very clear?  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 21 [The Honourable  Members nodded in approval ] 
 
Yes, you have an opinion? Plea se proceed . 
 
The Minority  Leader (Hon. Matsaki ): Through  this I think the Chair of Education has  
explained it  … Executive Member be fully mandated t o conduct this. Isn’t it? According to what  
you have said in short kutakuwa na uamuzi wa m waka , si ndio ?! Ndio sababu hi ki kipengee 
chatoka kwa sababu  ya Scheme, si ndio  hivyo? Halafu pili kulingana na vile ume zungumza pia 
hapa kulingana na uelewa  wang u mimi ni kwamba pia the bank account under scheme  mtakuwa 
pia nyinyi mnai -control . 
 
Hon. Katana:  [Off mi crophone ] 
 
The Chai rperson (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): I think that is well und erstood , the 
Coun ty Assembly has the right to all the mandate s to appropriate the budget so let us proceed , 
we are going to as we suggested , we have to delete clause seven so I am pr oposing we delete that 
clause seven ? 
 
[Question  proposed and agreed to] 
 
Now , I put the question that clause seven be deleted?  
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause eight ] 
 
Yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana : Mr. Speaker , Clause 8 of the Bill be amend ed by deleting  the w ord, 
‘Fund’ to read , ‘a board of the schem e’. 
 
[Silence ] 
 
Are you there Chair?  
 
The C hairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Just read the entire sentence. Yes , 
soma yote mpa ka hapo.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Nimesoma yote . Chair , are you there?  
 
The Chairperso n (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Clause?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Clause eight of the Bill be amended by deleting the word , ‘Fund of the 
marginal  note to read , ‘Scheme ’. That clause 8(1) ?  
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): 8 (1) . 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 22 Hon. Katana : I go to 8 (1). 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes. 
 
Hon. Katan a: Okay, the Bill be amended by deleting the word , ‘Education fund ’ and 
inserting the word , ‘Elimu Scheme ’ to read there h ereby establish a board be known as the 
Elimu Scheme board compris ed of… 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): I think I have understood that. 
Members have  also seen that , so should I pro pose?  
 
Hon. Katana : Do I still proceed bec ause 8(e) also speaks about...  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir): Yes, please do that. 
 
Hon. Katana : That cla use 8 (1) (e) of the Bill be amended by de leting the wo rd, ‘fund’ 
and inserting the word , ‘scheme ’ to read the Chief Executive who shall b e the Administra tor of 
the Scheme and  the Secretary to the Board . Tha nk you.  
 
The Chai rperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulka dir): I think here we are no t interfering 
with the  content of the Bill w e are just replacing the word , ‘fund’ to ‘scheme ’. That is well 
understoo d. Yes, Chair do  you want to react?  
 
[Honourable  Member Spoke  out of microphone] 
 
 Hon. Makanga : [Inaudible ] Na unajua kuna viongozi hapa amb ao walikuja kuwakilisha 
vijana japo hawako Bunge kwa sasa lakini n imeangalia hiyo 8(1) Mheshimiwa na ningeomba 
Mwe nyekiti 8(1 )a) …A Chairperson appointed by the Governor …. who shall have a  minimum 
qualification of a degree and ten (10) years’ experience  and knowledge and matters relating to 
financial management, economic, education law or  business admini stration.’  Mheshimiwa  
Mwenyekiti naon gea kwa niaba y a vijana mimi nikiwa mmoj a wao ya kw amba, hii moja kwa 
moja  imetoa vijana , kwa sababu  kufikia muda  umemaliza shule, umefan ya degree averagely  uko 
miaka 25 ukiwa utoke hapa nj e u hustle  miaka mi wili, ndio upate kibarua na ujuzi wa miaka 10   
you are no longer a youth . Kwa hivyo  hii naona itaku wa imem limit ama imemzui lia 
Mheshimiwa Gavana kuweka kijana kuwa Mweny ekiti hii Scheme , labda  Mwenyekiti wa Elimu 
kwa sababu  ni mzuri kwa  kujibu maswali,  atueleze labda kulingana na yey e kijana hana  haki ya 
kuwa Mwenyekiti wa scheme  hii, lakini  kwa niaba ya vijana nikiwa mmoja wao, mimi naona hii 
miaka kumi ni mingi kama ujuzi wa  ku manage this Fund and the youths of this Country 
especi ally Mombasa , have a right to Chair  such a schem e. Thank you. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable Milka? 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Cha ir for giving me this to briefly respond to Hon ourable  
Makanga. There are some situ ations where  experience is a  matter of impor tance ; age is one 
factor to cons ider when certain  areas call  for youth who are  below 35 years , definitely those 
people who are above 35 years c annot fit there . There  are areas where a bove 35 years the people 
below  35 years cannot f it there , experience  is a very important point to  consider w hen giving a 
job to some people to manage others.  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 23 I think this is a clause that  we cannot argue about considering age of youth representation 
and so  on and so forth . We have seen many youths  I am not saying that a youth cannot Chair … 
 
[Interrupt ion] 
 
Hon.  Makanga : But that  is the law. Ten years is a law.  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Speak  through the Chair, let  us have order.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Ab dulkadir ): Yes, let us maintain order please.  
 
Hon. Ngare: So, I think this is a clause that we cannot  really a rgue about or interfere 
with, because experience has shown , that their areas where certain people do well better than 
others , Honourable  Frankline M akanga please re spect age thank you so much.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay t hank you wi thout going  
much into that matter , I think before  such… 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon:  …[Inaudible ], [Off microphone ]. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ):  No, we are just going to put that 
matter at rest . I think some of these issues are gui ded by the P ublic Service Commission , so what 
they say things like , ten years’ experience  and all that , they consider the job description ,  
 
Hon.:  [Inaudible ], [Off microphone] . 
 
The Chairperso n (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): So, it is not imposing  so desist from 
that, so let us proce ed Members. Now I propose that the amendment clause 8 as amended 
adopted be part  of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Omondi:  I second.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadi r): We can not be having one Membe r 
seconding  all the amendments . 
 
Hon. Omondi:  I will second the n Mr. Speaker . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): It is not right .  
 
Hon. Omondi: When other s are quiet am t here to respond . 
 
Hon. Ngar e: No Mr. Speaker , let other Members  second . 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 24 The Chairp erson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Let other Members to second please 
or we will turn of f your microphone . So, Members , anyone seconding?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  I second.  
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ):  You second it ? 
 
[Applause ] 
 
So, now I put the  question that clause 8 has amended be part of the Bill? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Cler k? 
 
[Clause 9 ] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ):  Yes Cha ir? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Mr. Speake r. 
. 
1. THAT  clause 9(3)(a) of the Bill be amended by deleting the word “ Fund” and inserting 
the word “ Scheme” to read –– 
9(3) (a) supervise and control the day -to-day administration of the Scheme;  
 
2. THAT  clause 9(3) (c) of the Bill be amended by deleting the word , “Fund” and inserting 
the word , “Scheme” to read - 
 
     9(3) (c)  consult with Executive Committee Member and the Board on matters relating to  
the administration of the Scheme;  
 
3. THAT  clause 9(3)(d) of  the Bill be  amended by dele ting the word , “Fund” and inserti ng 
the word , “Scheme” to read – 
 
       9(3)( d) be responsible for keeping proper books and records of account of income, 
expenditure, asset s and liabilities of the Scheme; and , 
  
4. THAT clause 9(4) of  the Bill be  amended by dele ting the word , “Fund” and inserti ng the 
word , “Scheme” to read - 
 
9(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Committee Member 
as the Scheme Administ rator and will be the Accounting Officer of the Scheme.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Members , now I 
propose tha t Clauses 9 (3) (a), 9(3)  (c), 9(3)(d), and 9(4) be amended  as read by the Chair . I 
propose that question ? 
 
Hon. Nyache : [Inaudible ]. 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 25 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ):  Please use the mic rophone . 
 
Hon.  Nyache : I seco nd. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Thank  you so much Honourable 
Members . I now put a question  that clauses  9(3)(a), 9(3)(c), 9(3)(d), and 9( 4) be amended and be 
part of the Bill as proposed ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes C lerk?  
 
[Clause 10 ] 
 
There is no amendme nt on claus e 10, but I proposed to be part of the Bill? 
 
Hon. Katana:  I humbly a sk Honourable  Nusura ? 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): I am proposin g it, anyone seconding 
it? Clauses 10 just have  a look at it please , before anyone seconds it . 
 
Hon. Katana: May I read it?  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I think they can read it for 
themselves. Clauses 10, are we there? You  have read it.  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Honourable  Memb ers, now I put the question that clause 10 be part of the Bill? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 11 ] 
 
Clause 1 1 does  not have any amendment . So, I propose that it be part of the Bill, we can 
have 30  seconds to look at it  maybe , clause 11 it talks about the powers of the board. Now you 
second, now I put the questi on that clause 11 be part of the Bill without any amend ment ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 12 ] 
 
Yes Chair?  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 26 Hon. Katana:  Mr. Speaker . 
 
1. THAT clause 12(a) of the Bill be amended by deleting the word “fund” and inserting the 
word “scheme”  to read- 
 
12 (a) to formulate policies for the management of the Scheme;  
 
2. THAT clause 12 (c) of the Bill be deleted and the foll owing new clause be inserted to 
read- 
 
            12(c)  to solicit for funds, donations, scholarships and other financ ial support  for the 
Scheme;  
 
3. THAT clause 12 (d) of the Bill be amended by  deleting the wor d, “Fund” and ins erting 
the word , “Scheme” to read –– 
 
12(d)  to determine the  amount payable for the purpose  of the Scheme and formulate the 
conditions for disbursemen t; 
 
4. THAT a new clause be inserted a fter clause 12(e) to read –– 
12(f) partner with other specia lized agencies f or purposes of performing its fu nctions 
under this Act ; 
 
5. THAT clause 12(h) be deleted . 
 
6. THAT clause 12 (j) of the Bill be amended by  deleting the word , “Fund” and inserting 
the word . “Scheme” to read –– 
 
           12 (j) to receive any gifts, do nations, grants or endowments made to the Scheme ; and  
 
Thank you Chair.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): And what?  
 
Hon. Katana : It is a conti nuity . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay well understood. Hon ourable  
Members , now I propose th at clause 12(b) as amended be part … okay before I  finish it, 
Honourable  Makanga you want to be given a moment?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Yes, Chair I woul d ask this Honourable House to consider a mendin g 
Article 12(I) which reads , “to grant loans out of the funds …  
 
[Inter ruption ] 
 
The Chairp erson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadi r): Honourable  Makanga , it’s clause 
not article . 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 27 Hon. Makanga:  Okay clause 12(I) to  grant loans  out of it is now a scheme,  that had  not 
been  considered , the amended  with security. I would suggest  that the i ssue of security  maybe  the 
Chair can clarify , because granting a loan to a student who is asking for help and there are many 
people we are consid ering to support out of these loans  they are low income  people at the Ward 
that we are helping and today we ar e giving  them loa ns for school with securi ty. So maybe the 
Chair can clarify what type of security is this ? As far as these loans are c oncern ed.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Chair that is very specific , so your 
answer should be very specific . 
 
Hon. Katana:  You know me for answers which a re not specific Chair . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): You are good  story tell er, that is 
what I wanted to say . 
 
Hon. Katana:  Maybe since we have somebody who has HELB  maybe Honourable  
Florence, she  is gon e? It is a good q uestion Chair that it  is not bein g bright if you do  not have 
answers to some question s but I believe  since there  are some credentials that somebody is given 
after completion  of his studies , then those credentials turn to be security I suppose . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): If that is the case , anyone who is a 
beneficiary of HELB  here?  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Chair, I have had my children benefit from  HELB  and usually what 
happens is the security is usually pegged on  a salary when the student  complete s. I know one of 
my employees here at t he County who  benefited from HELB  the minute the name  appeared  on 
the emp loyment  list and they start deducting the money immediately . So, I think the security is 
pegged on salary no t anything else and that is wh y they ta ke details as the Chairman has said . 
Details of a parent and yourself, ID n umber , pin number a nd so on. I do  not think that you have 
to give  security  like a logbook or something l ike that for you to bene fit on HELB that  is how I  
understand  it, thank you. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Anyone?  Yes  Ogutu ? You want to 
have a say on this as a benefi ciary of HELB?  Please  use the microphone.  
 
Hon. Ogutu:  Thank you Mr. Sp eaker . I just wanted to echo what Hon ourable  Milka has 
said. Thank you.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulkadir ): I think t he elem ent of security is not 
pegged,  usuall y the certi ficates are not withheld fr om those who don’t pay  and your issue is the 
certificate.  So, when we talk about security what exactly are we talking about her e, it’s very 
vague, is it the title deed ? We can ’t be given ti me we are making amendment .  
  
The Leade r of Minority (Hon. Matsak i): Through Chair I think first and foremost as per 
my kn owledge , you  should be a Kenyan citizen as  Honourable  Milka has said , I thi nk once you 
are done with your course after you have managed to get the job automatical ly, then th ey are 
trying to … 
   
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 28 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): That is what we said volunta ry, that 
one is usually voluntary, it i s not  pegged  on salary again , the issue of sal ary is voluntary and am  
a benefi ciary of HELB . 
 
The Leader of Mi nority  (Hon. Matsaki ): It is voluntary?  
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes, it’s voluntary , it accrues 
interest failure to pay .  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Yes, but if you h ave not been pai d and you get on a payslip it’s 
automatically start deducting it , it is aut omatic. Oh, my goodness if you have not  have  been 
paying and you get on into a payslip and your name happens to shows that you are earning , it is  
automa tically deduc ted that I will tell you for sure because , I hav e had three students who have 
gone through HELB and I know that has happened .  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): They have a paysli p? 
 
Hon. Ngare:  Yes. 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Chair?  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman  Abdulkadir ): Yes. 
 
Hon. Makanga:  [Off mic rophone]  ... is that it is no t automatic , that is why we have so 
many c ases Chair,  of lawyers being taken to court because of fa iling to pay . It’s not automatic 
unless someone declares that I am a beneficiary of H ELB and therefore the deductions  start from 
there. On this is sue of secu rity Chair, it is my humble submission , because I see a situation where 
the board  has been given ma ndate as its stated in that article , as the board may deem it fit to any 
eligible pe rson. When this decision will be  made Hon. Members , you as a re presentativ e of 
people you will not be in that  sitting or meeting and you really don’t know who they will 
conclude at that point. So let us not pass laws that are vague  but let us be specific a nd a law that 
is progressive . Thank you Chair.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay in as much I agree wi th you 
Hon. Frankline however , when issuing issues to do with revolving it’s a loan , we are issuing a 
loan to a person. Defini tely the aspects  of security have to be there to  avoid misuse of these 
funds , so to  what extent or rather to as in what is going t o be, it will be the mandate of this board 
to determine t he type of secu rity; I think I will ask the Chair maybe if he will cl arify in a few 
minutes , yes Hon ourable  Ogutu?   
 
Hon.  Ogutu : Mheshimiwa  Spika hii si o basari  ya kwanza ambayo inataka kutok a… 
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Si basari  tuko kwa loa ns tafadhali . 
  
Hon. Ogutu:  Kwa loans ? 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Tuko kwa mkopo . 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 29 Hon. Ogutu:  Oh, lakini mtu yuk o needy  hana any form of security , unataka kum uwekea 
securi ty hata HELB haiendi namna hio , sisi tu weke na hii kitu ni  ya serikali , iwekwe free siku ile 
mtu anaweza kulipa alipe …  
 
[Applau se] 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): So how are we goi ng to safeg uard 
this revolving fund Hon ourable  Members? Let  us be logical,  how do you want to  safeguard this 
revolving fund? It sh ould not be a revolving fund but a grant. It should be a gran t?  
 
[Loud consul tations ] 
 
I think , so yeah,  I do not think that  will be po ssible Honourable  Members , it is not 
logical, how are we going  to safeguard that revolving fund , we want it to continue for  years to 
come. If we do  not put the element of security, yes ? 
 
[Loud c onsultations ] 
 
I think we are having a very healt hy dialogue . 
 
Hon. Mak anga: Chair , maybe because you can see we are almost  hitting a snag in 
relation to the issue of security , we would suggest you see one of the  good  practises is  before a 
Bill com es to the House there is a policy that guides us , as it stands there  is no poli cy behind this 
act. So maybe as the policy is being  prepared it needs to take care of the issue of security so that , 
it becomes very specific , so one of the un doing that we are having right now  and the committee 
will confirm , there is no educati on policy i n relation to this. So, by the time that Committee will 
be preparing that policy they must check the gaps to  identi fy in this act to be included in  the 
policy for easy implement ation and execut ion of this Act, otherwise we are  opening a Pandora 
box that anyb ody can wake up any day and decide that this fund is secured with a title deed or a  
car loan. The people we  are representing are poor , I repre sent the poorest  that’s why I  came  here 
so that I  speak for them thank you.  
 
The Chairp erson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abd ulkadir ): Yes, Honourable  Milka.  
 
Hon. Ngare:  Thank you Ch airman . On the issue of policy I really want to support Ho n. 
Makanga that while the policy is being made , let it look into the gaps that we are  identifying and 
let us have time as Hon. Mem bers of thi s House , to be taken through the policy so tha t we get 
through to assist the executive  plus us the Hon. Members on the gaps that we have  identify , so 
that we can avoid a scenario where by  we are going  to create probably  a burden on parent s or a 
gap that cr eates on  whatever reasons , but again I will go  back to the  issue of security that in 
every penny that is being spen t there has to be a measure on security purposes  and I will repeat 
what I said that , on students once you get on pay slip payment you will au tomatically be 
identified and those who are sk ipping payme nt of HELB, you know we live in a country where 
there is a lot of corruption and trickiness. There are some people who manage to slip through 
because , probably they know some body there an d they go a nd have their names deleted … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 30 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable Makanga just have a 
seat, it’s very important that you sit . 
 
Hon. Ngare:  So, I do support the policy and t he security clause should remain  there th at 
is the measu re for future thank you.  
 
The Chair person  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdu lkadir ): Maybe to add on that maybe , there  
is th e issue o f bursaries, we have sch olarships. Scholarships I do  not think they re quire any 
securi ty, however when it comes to rev olving loans that is when  the element of security has been 
introduced . You wanted t o answer that, I have already answered it for you or you want to add? 
Okay so I will ask the Chair maybe to reinforce that .  
 
Hon. Katana:  Okay Chair  nataka nimshukuru Mh eshim iwa Milka kale  ka ujuzi  
ametuchangia nako  ni ka ukweli in the sense that and I would like to remind my very,  that and 
this is the reason as to why HELB , CO B advisors go the HELB way because of some of these  
challenges ya k wamba  wana  mechanism  ya kwamba hu yu mtu amesom eshwa amema liza wao 
wana  m track akiajiriwa tu ! HELB wana  mechanism  wana jua na akishaanza kuajiriwa tayari 
anaanza ku katwa ile pes a that is the report am getting .  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkad ir): I think you  are misleading the 
House. 
 
Hon. Katana:  But that  is the report am getting . 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdul kadir ): You are misleading the House . 
 
The Leader of Minority  (Hon. Matsaki ): Mr. Chair , let me just add something to 
support Hon. Milka about  this matter . First and foremost , the securit y for the s tudent stands first 
and foremost we should a pin number. E bu wacha nieleze Kiswahili sawa? kwa sababu sisi 
tumesome sha. Pin number huwa inasimama ile ni ya serikali unapokuwa umesaidiw a na HELB 
umemal iza. First and foremost,  wanakup atia mda wa one-year ukitafuta kibarua na unapoingia tu 
kazi automatically they ha ve got your pin number , so all the time wakati ukiajiriwa  tayari kitu ya 
kwanza una present pin number , it goes to the system o f the government . Kwa hivyo 
automatically wanaanz a kufanya fol low up.  Kwa  hivyo security ya kwanza ya yule student ni pin 
number un aona? Ya pili after one-year huwa wanafanya follow up  kupitia hizo  system  kuangalia 
wewe umeajiriwa upande gani na pale pale huwa wana ku consu lt na hawawezi kukulazimisha ni 
kiwango gani unalipa wak ati ukiajiriwa huwa mna  negotiate  ya kwamba mimi mshahara w angu 
ni huu , payslip yangu ni hii kupitia kwa employer . Kwa hivyo contribution yan gu itakuwa ni hii 
na mna  agree  na unaanza kuk atwa. Kwa hivyo security kubwa zaidi ni hapo kwa nzo before yo u 
are given  any HELB huwa ni pin number .  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members , let us come 
to an agreement t hat… 
 
Hon. Katana : The House because this is information that  I have gathered  I have  taken 
my time to gather that informat ion yes how  am I… 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 31 The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I am a be neficiary of HELB by the 
way, so payment of HELB loan on my part was voluntary maybe it’s because I didn’t have a 
payslip , but it was voluntar y, the re was  no way they could t rack the private company  that I was 
working with and deduct my  loan.  
 
Hon. Katana : So, I need to be employed by the government for them  to track? 
  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Maybe that part , maybe unless y ou 
are an employ of the governme nt that  is the only way t hey can track. 
 
Hon. Katana : So, you want to say Chair  that the safest way when you have a HELB is to 
be emp loyed by a private organisation?  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I am not advo cating that you don’t 
pay HELB i f that what y ou are elud ing. But the point is this; anyways I think we should not … 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Mwenyekiti niruhusu niseme hivi .  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): But be very … 
 
Hon ??: Yes, Mwenyekit i naomba niseme hivi kwa heshima na taadh ima...  
 
[Inter ruption ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): You are already up  so there is no 
way I could...  
 
Hon. Makanga:  ...licha ya kwamba wanasema security  ni mshahara. Mwenyekiti ni watu 
wengi ambao  wameso meshwa na HELB  ama wamepata mkop o hawana kazi  Mwenyekiti  na 
wengine wameamua kwenda kwa biashara zao ambazo hakuna  mtu anajua wanapata nini hata 
kuna watu, kwani ni wangap i wako na Pin Number  Mheshimiwa na wanaapply waivers  na 
wanapata so kile tunas ema ni kwamba hili suala la security  japo hatupingi sisi tungeo mba tu 
wakati tunatengeneza ile policy  tuwe very specific  ili tusiwafungie nje watu wetu ambao hawana 
uwezo jamani … 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Sawa . 
  
Hon. Maka nga: ...eeh namna hiyo . 
   
The Chairpers on (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdu lkadir) : Sawa.  Ahsante sana na vile 
nimesema kuna the aspe ct of the scholarship, scholars hips they are meant for th e... 
 
[Consultations ] 
 
Definitely there is no way, we have to safegu ard the Revolvin g Fund and I think it is 
better we keep it as  it is. 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 32 So, Honourable  Members now,  I propose those amendments on Clause 12 a s amended be 
part of the Bill . So, any Seconder?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
You are becoming another Hon ourable  Ibrahim Omondi (Bomoa ) now. Is the re anyon e 
else? Use the microphone please, we ar e having prof essional se conders. Please use the 
microphone?  
  
Hon. Mwaka Bakari : I second .  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you . So, Honourable  
Members , I now put the q uestion that Cla use 12 as amended be part of the  Bill? 
 
[Quest ion put and  agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 14 ] 
[Clause 13 ] 
 
Yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana : Thank you  Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair am sorry to say  this but loo king at the  
time is close to 2 :00p.m... 
 
[Interru ption ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Do not worry about the time, I ha ve 
all the time . 
  
Hon. Katana:  Thank you  Mr. Speaker , God bless y ou.  
 
That Clause  13 (1) of the Bill be amended b y deleting th e words of the County which shall 
be the Manager of the Bursary Progr am to read that 13(1) There is established a Sub -
County F inancial Aid Committee in every Sub -County of  the County . 
  
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir ): Are we together M embers ? Yes? I 
am proposing  that amendment on Clau se 13 (1) as amended be part of the  Bill...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Katana:  I ask Hon ourable  Maryam Baimu to second . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Clau se 13 (1) as ame nded be part of 
the Bill.  Yes, a nyone to seco nd it, yes Honourable  Baimu? 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 33 Hon. Baimu: Thank you Chairman I second .  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
[Interrupti on] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Ab dulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi , 
(Bomoa) what is the issue?  
 
Hon. Omo ndi: Mr. Chair , we are wasting ti me with this issue of se conding;  we are 
taking almost 10 minutes for somebody to s econd we are not going to sit here up to 7: 00p.m ! 
Seconding takes 10 minutes , if there i s somebody ready to second let the m second and we move 
on Mr. Chair . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkad ir): That is very unnecessary of you 
Honourable  Ibrahim Omondi ( Bomoa) , this is a Special sitting we will be here until we  are done 
with this okay and if you  are hungry you might decide to go  out and...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Omondi:  Mr. Chairman  there is t his issu e of quorum . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkad ir): The more you indulge with me, the 
more you are wa sting time I suggest we move on and  let go of that …  
  
Hon. Omondi:  Let me hav e my seat . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdul kadir ): Pardon? Okay so Hon ourable  
Members , I now put the question that Clau se 13 (1) as amended be part of the Bill. 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Next?  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Clerk? Hon ourable  Makanga please take your seat, just take your seat however you have 
heard relax, it does not  mean that you will be walking up and down just take your seats we 
proceed with this thing I will give you the chan ce to talk. Okay next?  
 
[Clause 13 (2, 3 and 4) ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman A bdulkadir ): So, there are no ame ndments on 
Clause 13(2, 3 and 4). I propose the question that Clause 13 (2, 3 and 4) be part of the Bill. Yes 
Hon. Makanga do you have an i ssue? Yes?   
 
Hon. Makanga:  Ahsante Mwenyekiti hii Sub-County  Financial Aid C ommittee  
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti n a Kamati tuku fu ya Elimu  na Masuala ya...  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 34 [Interruption ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Wait ! 
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Nilikuwa naul iza Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti labda tungeongezea h ili 
neno educati on katikati ya Sub-County  na Financial  so tha t isionekan e kama ni ya matanga 
Mheshimiwa Mwenyekiti.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Mheshimiwa Makanga tushato ka 
huko, you walked out  in the middle of the nini, we have limitation s here as well b y the way. So 
yes, please procee d you second?  So now I put the question on Clause 13 (2, 3 and 4) be part of 
the Bill? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 14 ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana: Than k you I suggest that whatever is  best practic e but whate ver is not in 
the amendment list I suggest that we just fo rget about it because of time ; 
 
THAT  Clause 14 (e) of the Bill be a mended by inserting the word , revolving  after the 
word and to  read as follows - 
 
14 (e) receive applications fo r bursary, sc holarships  and revolving loans and forward to 
the Board; and … 
  
I am done  Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): So, I now propos e the question that 
I propose a question...  
 
[Silence ] 
[Appla use] 
 
So, Honourable  Members , now I put the question t hat Cl ause 14  (e) as ame nded be part 
of the Bill?  
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
Clerk?  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 35 [Clause 15 ] 
 
Clause 15 does not have any amendment so am proposing that it be part of the Bill. Do 
you want  to second it ? Use the m icrophone  please ?  
 
Hon. Arwa:  I second.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay now I put a question that 
Clause 15 be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk?  
 
[Clause 16 ] 
 
Chair? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Chair . 
  
THAT Clause 16 (6a) of the Bill be amended b y deleting the word , ‘fund’ and inserting 
the word , ‘scheme ’ and to read - 
 
16 (6a) refund /forfeit the money awarded to the scheme and, 
  
THAT Clause 16 (6b) of the Bi ll by amendin g by deleti ng the word , fund and insert the 
word , scheme  to read , 
 
16 (6b ) not be eligible for any further funding from the scheme . 
 
 Chair?  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Now I propose tha t Clause 16 as 
amended be part of the Bill ? 
  
Hon. Ngare : I second.  
 
Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Now I put a question  that Clause 16 as 
amended be part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
[Applause ] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 17 ] 
 
Chair?  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 36 Hon. Katana: Chair .  
 
THAT Clause 17 (2) of the Bill be amended by deleting t he word , in the Second 
Schedule  to read - 
 
17(2) all appli cations for scholarships shall be made to the Board in a prescribed fo rm,  
 
THAT Clause  17 (6) of the Bill be amended b y inserting t he words and other designated 
public places to read - 
 
17(6) the list of successful applicants shall be posted on County webs ite and other 
designated public places . 
 
 Chair.     
  
The Chairperson (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulk adir): Yes, now propose a questi on that 
Claus e 17 as ame nded be part of the Bill. Who is seconding?  
 
Hon. Shuhudia Abdallah:  I second.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay now  Honourable  Members I 
put a  question that C lause 17 as amended be part of t he Bill?  
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 18 ] 
 
Clause 18 is not up for any  amendment so am proposi ng that it be part of the Bill. Yes 
Hon. Ibra him Omondi (Bomo a)? 
 
Hon. Omondi: I secon d. 
 
[Question Proposed an d Agreed To ] 
[Applause ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdul kadir ): Okay now I put the question that 
Clause 18 be par t of the Bill . 
 
[Questio n put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk?  
 
[Clause 1 9] 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 37 The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Chair? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Chairman . 
  
THAT  Clause 19 to be amended by inserti ng a new clause 19 (e ) to read - 
 
19(e)  the beneficiary cha nges the course of study o r differs his or her studies without 
cleara nce from the Board . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir ): Clause wh at? 19?  
 
Hon. Katana: Clause 19.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Ab dulrahman Abdulkadir ): You are inserting a new clause ?  
 
Hon. Katana: Yes.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay  read it . 
 
Hon. Katana: That the beneficiary  changes the course of s tudy or differs his or her 
studies without clearance from the Board . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Membe rs, please pay a ttention; we 
are introducing a new clause here that i t is touching on  discontinuation from the schola rship 
program s, these are  grounds provided. Hon ourable  Chair  Katana is suggesting that a beneficiar y 
discontinuing from the scholarship program if  the bene ficiary changes the course of study or 
differs his or her st udies without cl earance from the Board  are we cl ear on that … 
 
Hon.  Makanga : [Not audible ]. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadi r): That is why am suggesting you be 
very att entive...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
Hon. Makanga:  We are very atten tive. 
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): You are not  attentive that is why am 
insisting you be attentive. Okay, Proceed . 
 
Hon. Makanga:  Am now very attentive.  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulka dir): Okay . 
 
Hon. Makanga: The is sue of differing  or changing a course ; Chair thing  does happen 
because you  are out of control and changing a course , let us say you are going to do law and 
once you report to the university or realize your mind ama uwezo wako  wa kut athmini sheria 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 38 umekuwa mgu mu ubadilishe uf anye  Bachelor of Commerce (BCOMM ) that one sh ould not 
become a disqualification Chair . So, we stand guided and of course this Act will pass...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): We? You?  
 
Hon. Makanga: Yes, I support it.  
 
The Chair person (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkad ir): That is the reason why I told you to 
be attentive is because you fail to loo k at the word’s  clearance from the Board  so the point here 
is that you need a clearance f rom the Board before you change your co urse or you diff er and I 
do not think it is harm ful so am pro posing that  the new Clause be part of the Bill, any Seconder? 
Member s let us be organized, who is seconding? You cannot be all  seconding . 
 
Hon. Nyache:  Than k you Chair , I second .  
 
The Chairperson  (Hon. Abd ulrahma n Abdulkadir ): Okay I now put th e question th at 
Clause 1 9 (e) be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk?  
 
[Clause 20 ] 
 
Yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana: Thank you Mr. Chair that Cl ause 20...  
 
[Interruption ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulk adir): Memb ers! Members!  the House is 
in session, Hon. Ogutu I can se e you from some kamukunji there, so yes Chair?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you.  
  
THAT  Clause 20 of the Bill be amended by inserti ng the wor d establishment of County 
Revolving in  the marginal  not to rea d the establishment of County Educational Revolving Loan ; 
 
THAT  Clause 20 of the Bill is deleted and a new Clause in serted to read -there is 
established a Revolving Loan Scheme to be ma naged by t he Boa rd and the Higher Education 
Loan  Board (HELB)  through a service contract agreement jointly signed by the County 
Government and the Higher Education Loan Board (HELB) ’ 
 
THAT  Clause 20 (e)  The Fund committed to the Revolving Loan Scheme shall be 
manage d, disb ursed and paid back by the benef iciary in acc ordance wit h the signed serviced 
contract and the criteria set by the  Board and the Higher Education Loan Board ’, 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 39  THAT 20(3) Applications for the Revolving Scheme shall be submitted and processed  in 
accordance w ith the service contract.   
 
Thank you Chair.  
 
[Silence ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Let me take a secon d to digest that 
please...  
 
[Silence ] 
 
I think here we a re talking about there will be a service contract agreement between t he 
County Govern ment and Higher Education Loan B oard (HELB), there is es tablished Revolving 
Loan Scheme to be managed by the Board  and Higher Education Loan Board (HELB) this will 
be done  through a service contract I think that is well understood. I now pr opose that Claus e 20 
as amended be part of the B ill. 
 
Hon. Ngare : I second Chair . 
  
[Question proposed and agreed to ] 
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you I now put the  question 
that Clause 20 as amended be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question  put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
[Clause 21 ] 
 
Clause 21 talks about the qualification  for a Loan it says an applicant shall qualify for an 
award of a loan if the applicant is a local resident of the County and m eets the criteri a set jointly 
by the Board  there is no amendm ent on th at, that is  inversely  accepted by the Members  so I 
propose t hat Clause 21 be part of the Bill ?  
 
[Question proposed an d agreed to] 
 
Who is seconding please?  
 
The Leader of the Minority  (Hon.  Matsaki ): I second.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahm an Abdulkad ir): Oh, Minority Leader. I now put the 
question that Claus e 21 be part of the Bill?  
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk?  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 40   
[Clause 22 ] 
 
Again Clause 22 is going to be reta ined and there will be no further ame ndment on that. 
Now , I propose that Clause 22 be part of th e Bill . 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
The Leader of M inority (Hon. Matsaki ): I second.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadi r): Okay now I put the quest ion that 
Clause 2 2 be part o f the Bill without amendment . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk?  
 
[Clause 23 ] 
 
Yes Chair?  
  
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Chair, that Cl ause 23 of the B ill be deleted.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Clause 23 is on Early Childhood 
Development Capitation P rogram ; the Chair is saying that we delete it from this B ill, he does not 
want it to be part of this Bill. Chair , why do you wa nt us to delete this Clause on Earl y 
Childho od D evelopment Ca pitation Pr ogram?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Respon se?  
 
[Silence]  
 
Let us give him time please?  
 
[Consultation s] 
 
I think this Bill is majorly on bursaries, scholars hips and revolving funds and it does not 
touch anything on Early Chil dhood Program so  it is only fit tha t we do not h ave it as par t of this 
Bill and the mandate of this scheme should not extend to Ea rly Childhood Development 
Educations (ECDEs) I think that  is my understanding. Yes?  
 
Hon. Makanga:  Chair , we get clari ty before the Co mmittee on Educatio n becaus e tha t is 
your pos ition as th e Chair . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): That is  my reasoning.  
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 41 Hon. Makanga: And you see by virtue of you sitting on that seat you are shaping 
opinions in this H ouse, so maybe yo u allow the Committ ee to gi ve th eir position so that we may 
understand . You see there has been no such a Bill touch ing on Early Childhood Development 
Educations (ECDEs) whi le when you go to Schedule 4 of the Constitution of 2010 the main 
aspect of Education  was devolved to th e Counti es is primarily on  Early Chil dhood Development 
Educations and Vocational Training Cente rs. So, in fact even the words that we are doing for the 
secondary schools it is because we care for our people but the main asp ect of education  was 
devolved is on  ECDEs a nd Vo cational Trai nings . So, unless the Committee commits that there is 
another Bill for the Early Childhood Development Educations (ECDEs) then w e may need to 
have that information and be on record. Thank you.  
 
The Chai rperson (Hon. Ab dulrahman Abdulkadir ): Okay.  Yes Chairman?  
 
Hon. Katana: Thank you . Mr. Chair of late am convinced that you ar e a wise man . 
  
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Of late, please withdraw the word of 
late. 
 
Hon. Katana: I will w ithdraw after th is. Now this has no thing to  do w ith this Bill  since it 
is under the Department and the Department has done all the  allocations to do with Early 
Childhood Development Educa tion and all that , so you are right Chair. Thank you for your 
guidanc e, we can procee d. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir ): Are you sat isfied Hon ourable  
Makanga that we are already have policies and plans that touches on Early Childhood 
Developments Educat ions (ECDEs) and the Chair does not want this to appear on this or be  part 
of this Bi ll? So, am proposing that we delet e Clause 23.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Use your microphone?  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I second Chair . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdu lkadir ): Thank you. Hon ourable  Members , I 
now put the question that Clause 2 3 be deleted fro m this Bill . 
 
[Quest ion put and agreed to] 
 
Next Clerk?  
 
[Clause 24 ] 
 
Clause 24 , we are not having any amendments the Chair w ants it to be part of the Bill as 
it is before I propose I will give you 10 seconds t o have a look at it... 
 
[Silence ] 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 42    Ten Seconds are up.  
 
Hon. Nyache : I second.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I now propose. You cannot  second 
before I propose. Am now proposin g that, we have clause 24 as part o f the Bill.  
 
Hon. Nyache: I seco nd, Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you. Hon ourable  Members.  
 
Hon. Matsaki:  Through Chair, th ere is something I wanted to  ask. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulk adir) : Yes, pleas e proceed.  
 
Hon. Matsaki:  I think the B ill has bee n changed, instead of using the word , ‘Fund’ is 
supposed to b e ‘scheme ’. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Which  clause?  
 
Hon. Matsaki:  Clause 24 here as you can read it.  Award of bursary ma y appeal in 
writing  to the board  of the fund or to the b oard of the scheme through the fund scheme 
administrators,  is this supposed to change or to remain the way it is?  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you for being so keen . So, 
Members when I give you ten seco nds, am expec ting you rais e such issu es, you should not just 
take it for granted. Twende mos  mos sio. Thank you so much Minority Leader so we are 
proposi ng that or rather am proposing that the word , ‘Fund ’ be replaced by  the word , ‘scheme ’.  
 
[Question proposed an d agreed to] 
 
Who is second ing? 
 
Hon. Moraa:  I second Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman A bdulkadir) : Thank you. I now put the question 
that Clause  24 as amended be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Clerk?  
 
Clause 25.  
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulk adir) : Clau se 25 no amendments proposed 
by the Chair. I think we are all okay with it. Am proposing we have Clause 25 as part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 43 Hon:  [inaudible ] …. I second.  
 
  The Chairp erson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadi r): Thank you  I now put the Question 
that Clause 25 be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question  put and agreed to] 
Yes Clerk?  
 
Clause 26.  
 
The Chairp erson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Again Clause  26 has I think 5 sub -
Clauses so I wi ll give you 5 secon ds to just ha ve a look at it before I  propose.  Okay I think we 
are all satisfied with it I now proposed that we have Clause 26 as part of the Bill.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Hon. Arwa:  I second.  
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I now put the question that  Clause 
26 be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question  put and agreed to] 
 
Next C lerk?  
 
[Clause 27 ] 
 
Again Clause 27 does not have any amendments, it talking abo ut removal of of fice, I 
think it is  reasonable e nough we shou ld have it as part of the Bill, am proposing that we have 
Clause 27 a s part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Hon. Shuhudia Abdalla:  I second Chai r. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abd ulkadir ): Thank you Hon ourable  Shuhudia. I 
now put a question that Clause 27 b e part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Yes Cler k? 
 
Clause 28  
 
Chair.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Chair. Clause 28 of the Bil l be amended by deleting the word 
fund and inser ting the word  scheme jus t like Clause 27.  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 44 The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Straight forward. I now propose that 
Clause 28 be amend ed as proposed ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Chair if you allow me to continue. .. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abd ulkadir ): I am looking for  a seconder  here. 
 
Hon. Makanga : I second … [Off mic rophone ]. 
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : You second, I now put t he question, 
Makanga seconded this. Hon ourable  Makanga I  am advising you t o use the microp hone, you will 
have  to wait for it the procee ding of the se sittings is supposed to be captured by the Hansard, it’ s 
very important, proceed.  
 
Hon. Makanga:  I seco nd Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you for bei ng very loud. I 
now put the questio n Members tha t Clause 28 a s amended b e part of the Bill . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk.  
 
Clause 29  
 
No amendment on Clause 29, its repealing the Act of 2014 and 2017 also it’s repeal ing 
the Mombasa Cou nty Education  Development Act of 2014 , its repealing the Mombasa County 
Education Development  (Amendment ) Act of 2 017 so am proposing we have it as part of the 
Bill? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Hon. Nyache:  I second Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdul kadir ): Now I  put the Qu estion that Clause 
29 be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  [Inaudible ]. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : It is okay but the ayes have it again, 
it doe s not matter. Clerk?  
 
[Claus e 30] 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 45 Clause 30. Chair?  
 
Hon. Katan a: Chair, am s orry but I demanding the Hon ourable  Member who ha s said 
that A yes to withdraw.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadi r): We are past that clause 30, ple ase 
proceed. Chairman.  
 
Hon. Katana: Thank you Chairman for this d ictatorship of ways of d oing things . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Chair ! Chair!  
 
Hon. Katana:  Then Clause 30 a,  b, c, d, e we have pass ed that ... 
 
The Chair person (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkad ir): You will  not be goi ng away with 
that. 
 
Hon. Katana:  We have passed that.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : You will not g et away with that.  
 
Hon. Katana:  We have passed that.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman  Abdulkadir) : I… withdraw that st atement ? 
 
Hon.  Kata na: I withdraw Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulka dir): Apologize.  
 
Hon. Katana:  I apologize, am sorry . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Fully apologize ? 
 
Hon. Katana:  100 per cent . 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahman Ab dulkadir) : Thank you, pr oceed. 
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you. Tha t Clause 30 a, b, c, d, e, g. of the Bill be amended to read ; 
 
THAT 30 (a) A sset and liabilities – on the appointed day, all the funds, assets an d other 
property , both movable and immovable whi ch immediatel y before su ch date were vested in 
the Elimu Fund sh all be virtue of t his paragraph, vest in the Elimu scheme and , 
 
THAT 30 (b) O n the appointed day, all right, powers and liabilities which immediat ely 
before such day were vested in,  imposed on o r enforceable  against th e Fund shall by 
virtues of this subsection, be vested in, imposed on or enforceable against the Elimu 
scheme , 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 46 THAT  30(c) Any reference in any written law or in any document or instrume nt to the 
Fund s hall, on and after the appointed  day, be cons trued to be  a reference to the Elimu 
Scheme , 
 
THAT  30 (d) The annual e stimates of the Elimu Fund for the financial year in whic h the 
appointed day occurs shall be deemed to be the annual estimate of the Elimu Sch eme for 
the remaind er of that fi nancial year,  provided t hat such estimates may be varied by the 
Elimu scheme in su ch a manner as the County Assembly may approve , 
 
THAT  30(e) The administrative directions made by the Fund which are in the for ce 
immediately b efore coming in to force of this  Act shall ha ve effect a s if they were directions 
made by the Elimu Scheme under t his Act , 
 
THAT 30 (g) Staff - a person who is an officer of  Elimu Fund immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be an officer of the Elim u Scheme unde r this 
Act, t hat Clause…  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : I think you are  done.  
 
Hon. Katana:  30 I wanted to combine them bec ause of time.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : No, you canno t combine, you 
cannot combine ! 
 
Hon.  Katana : Thank you, thank you, I stand guided, I stand guided.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkadir ): Thank you. Members are we good, 
are we okay? 
 
Hon. Katana:  Yes. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Madam Pamella, are you okay. You 
have digested the points; y ou have dig ested all the amendments  basically here we are changing 
from Funds to Elimu Scheme so am proposing that Clause 30  be amended ? 
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Hon. Ngare : I do second Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdul kadir) : Thank  you. Now I  put the question 
that Clause 30 as amended be part of the  Bill. 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Clerk?  
 
[Clause  31] 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 47 Chair?  
 
Hon. Kata na: Thank you Mr . Chair that Clause  31(a) (b) am ended by dele ting the wo rd 
Fund and inserting the word scheme to read; - 
 
THAT 31- The Executive Committee Member may wind up the Elimu Schem e with the 
approval of the County Assembly and upon winding up;  
 
a) Th e administrator of the Elimu Scheme  shall pay an y amount rema ining in th e Elimu 
Scheme in to the County Exchequer account.  
 
The Chair person (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Okay, I think this is the last 
amendment you are making?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Yes Mr. Chair.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulk adir) : Okay.  
 
Hon. Katana:  I am glad. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : We are al so glad. I am now 
proposing that Clause 31 be amended.  
 
[Question proposed and agreed to] 
 
Hon. Nyache:  I second.  
 
The Chairper son (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Microphone on please, you w ill be 
given a microphone.  
 
Hon. Nyache:  Thank you Chair, I seco nd. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Thank you , now I put the question 
that Clause 31 as amended be part of the Bill ? 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
Hon. Ngare : Chair I have a  concerned.  All this time I thought the Hon ourable  Member 
taking us through  was the Chairperson of Education.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Yes. 
 
Hon. Moraa:  I now see Chairperson Comm ittee on Health.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abdulrahman Abdulkadir) : Chairperson C ommittee on Health.  
 
Hon. Ngare : Yes. 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 48 The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Allen Katana , are you 
the Chairperson of Committee on Health?  
 
Hon. Katana:  Maybe you find  that it could h ave been a very nec essary questi on. 
 
The Chairpers on (Hon. Ab dulrahman Abdulkadir) : It is necessary.  
 
Hon. Ngare : It is necessary at the end of the Motion . 
 
Hon. Katan a: [Inaudible ]. 
 
Hon. Matsaki : Through Chair, there  are some clarifications  about the Bill. 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahm an Abdulkadir ): On what exactly again, on the title?  
 
Hon.  Matsaki : Yes, there  are some errors.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Honourable  Members, those are 
clerical error, clerical er ror.   
 
Hon. Ngare : Thank you. 
 
[Applause ] 
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Katana ! Honourable  
Katana ! Okay Members , I think we are …, Clerk,  yes? 
 
[Long title ] 
 
Long title . 
 
[Interruption ] 
[Loud consult ation ] 
 
Hon.  Omo ndi: Don’t go before you see me.  
 
The Chairperson (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Members , please the House is in 
session. Minority Leader , please just take your seat, please all of  us have other c ommitments. 
Can we give…, let me give Hon ourable  Katana a secon d to consult on an issue…  
 
[Silence ] 
 
Yes, I will read it as it is, am guided by the Clerk.  
 
[The Clerk read the long title]  
[Applause ] 
 
The Committee of the full House, resolve to the County Assembly.  
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 49 [Applause ] 
  
PLENARY RESUMED  
[The Mace was raised on the upper deck]  
[The Temporary Speaker (Honourable Abdulkadir Abdulrahman) in the Chair]  
 
[Applause ] 
 
Members , take your seats. Yes , Honourable  Allen Kat ana please report what transpired 
during the Committee of  the Whole House on the Mombasa County Education Fund Bill , 2023 
and m ove a Motion tha t the House agrees with the Comm ittee in the said report . 
 
Hon. Katana:  Mheshimiwa Spika nataka niwashukuru Waheshimiwa wenza kwa kazi 
waliofanya, siwezi kusema ni k azi rahisi, ilikuwa ni kazi ngumu lakini kwa sababu ya u ongozi 
mzuri  na hek ima muli o nayo na matatizo mu lio nayo mash inani, kwa ku kosa hizi b asari  na vitu 
vingin e, sitaki kuwa mwingi wa maneno nata ka kuwashukuru na zaidi ya vyote ninaamini kwa 
wakati ut akao fika hivi punde Mheshimiwa Spika, tutakuwa na wakati mzuri wa  kulipitisha hili 
ili Wizara  inayohusika  ikaweze kufa nya mambo kwa  haraka ili  watu wetu waweze kupa ta basari  
na mengi mengineyo kwa h ivyo nawarai tuweze  kupitisha swala hili ili  kwa faida ya wa tu wetu, 
nakushukuru Mheshimiwa Spika. Ahsante.  
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abdirahman Ab dulkadir ): Can we h ave someone e lse 
seconding  it? Please  I want you to appoint someone else to second your Motion.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Thank you Speaker, I would humbly ask  my good friend Hon. Patrick 
Mbele to second. Thank you.  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Mr. Spe aker Sir. I st and t o second.  
 
The Tem porary Speake r (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Were  you present during 
what transpir ed in the whole House Hon ourable  Patrick?  
 
Hon. Mbe lle: Mr. Speaker Sir, am fully informed from my Chair and we were followin g 
the proceeding s based on wha t was  transpiring and the House  am sure ha s made an informed 
decision to give the people of Mombasa the right to have the bursaries so again I second.  
 
[Appla use] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): Thank  you. Hon ourable  
Members , I now put the question th at the House adopts the re port by the  Chairman Hon ourable  
Allen Katana on what transpired during the Committee of the whole House of the Mombasa 
County, on th e Mombasa County Education Fund Bill, will as many as of … okay let m e repeat 
again p lease for the purpo se of the cla rity. Hon ourable  Shuhudia plea se concentrates. 
Honourable  Members , I now put the question that the House adopts the report by Hon ourable  
Allen Katana on what transpired during the committee of the whole House on the Mo mbasa 
County Education Fu nd Bill , 2023 be ado pted? 
 
[Quest ion put and agreed to] 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 50 Yes Clerk?  
 
THE MOMBASA COUNTY EDUCATI ON FUND BILL 2023  
THIRD READING  
 
Yes, Honourable  Allen Katana , please move the Motion for the Bill to be read a third 
time.  
 
Hon. Katana:  Than k Hon ourable  Speaker. That the Mombasa County  Education Fund 
Bill 2023, be now read for a third time. Thank you, Speaker . 
 
The Temporary  Speaker (Hon. A bdulrahman Abdulkadi r): Who is go ing to second  
you, my fr iend? 
 
Hon. Katana:  I humbly ask vi ce Chair to Educat ion Hon ourable  Ibrahim to second. 
Thank you.  
 
Hon Omond i: I second right away.  
 
[Laughter ] 
 
The Temporary Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadi r): Honourable  Ibrahim, t here 
are mann ers and proce dures in th is House.  
 
Hon. Omondi:  I second right away.  
 
The Temporar y Speaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir ): I repeat again t hat there are 
manners and procedure in t his House, please stand.  
 
Hon. Omondi : ok, I second ri ght away than k you.  
 
The Temporary Sp eaker (Hon. Abd ulrahman Abdulkadir) : Honourable  Members , I 
now pr opose the question that the Motion by Hon ourable  Allen Katana o n the Mombasa County 
Education Fund , 2023 to be read a third time be c onsidered by thi s Hon ourable  House in the  
same term as  moved . 
 
[Question propo sed and agreed to] 
 
I now put the question . Yes Clerk?  
 
[The Bill was read for the Third time]  
 
I said  yes Clerk , please read the  Bill for t he third time, you  have read it. Okay the Clerk 
having rea d the Bill , I now put the question that the Bill as read by the Clerk be adopted by this 
House . 
 
[Question put and agreed to] 
 
May 29, 202 3             COU NTY ASSEMBLY  DEBATES                                       Special Sitti ng 
DISCL AIMER : The e lectronic version of the Official Han sard Report  is for  information 
purpo ses only. A cer tified version of this Repor t can be obtained from th e Hans ard Editor  Page 51 Yes Clerk?  
 
ADJOURNMENT  
 
Honourable  Members , it has been  my pleasur e interacting with you . This House stands 
adjourn ed until Tuesday 6th June, 2023 at 10:00a.m.  
 
The House rose at 2: 45p.m . 
  
                    